FORAS FEASA AR EIRINN Le SEATHRUN CEITINN

[The History of Ireland by Geoffrey Keating]

Translated by Edward Comyn and Patrick S. Dineen



EDITOR'S PREFACE.

GEOFFREY KEATING stands alone among Gaelic writers: he has had neither
precursor nor successor, nor, in his own domain, either equal or
second. His works show the fullest development of the language, and
his historical treatise, with which we are here concerned, marks an
epoch in our literature, a complete departure from the conventional
usage of the annalists. From the last and greatest of these, even from
his illustrious contemporaries, the Four Masters, he is, in his style
and mode of using his materials, as far removed as is Gibbon from
earlier English writers on European affairs. The period, however, with
which the English author deals is one for the history of which ample
authentic materials existed, and nothing remained for the writer but
to select and present the facts in his own style to the reader. But
our author has to give an account of a country apart from the general
development of European civilization, and to treat chiefly of remote
ages without the support of contemporary documents or monuments. In
this respect his field of inquiry resembles somewhat that of the
portion of Dr. Liddell's work relating to the Kings and early Consuls
of Rome, where the author, in a pleasing style, does his best with
scanty and unsatisfactory materials, not altogether throwing aside,
like the German critics, all data which cannot be confirmed by
inscriptions or authentic records, yet skilfully exercising his
discretion in the use of legend and tradition which had by earlier
writers been received as trustworthy evidence. It will be seen, in the
course of this work, that Keating, though often accused of being
weakly credulous, and though he was perhaps inclined to attach undue
importance to records which he believed to be of extreme antiquity,
while carrying on his narrative by their help (he had no other), yet
shows as much discrimination as writers on the history of other
countries in his time. He recounts the story, in his own happy manner,
as it was handed down in annals and poems, leaving selection and
criticism to come after, when they have a 'basis of knowledge' to work
upon. By this term he accurately indicates the contents of his
principal work, in which not merely history, but mythology,
archæology, geography, statistics, genealogy, bardic chronicles,
ancient poetry, romance, and tradition are all made to subserve the
purpose of his account of Ireland, and to increase the reader's
interest in the subject. From his style and method, his freedom from
artificial restraint and his extensive reading, it may well be
conjectured that, but for the unhappy circumstances of our country, he
might have been the founder of a modern native historical school in
the Irish language, the medium employed by him in all his works. We
may well be glad of his choice, and much is due to him for this good
service. He might have written in Latin like his friend Dr. John
Lynch, or Rev. Stephen White, or Philip O'Sullivan, his
contemporaries, or like O'Flaherty in the next generation; or in
French, like the later Abbé Mac Geoghagan; or in English, like Charles
O'Conor, and so many other vindicators of their country and her
history. He was shut out from any opportunity of printing or
publishing his work; but his own industry, and the devoted zeal of his
literary friends and admirers who undertook the duty, secured its
preservation. Printing in Gaelic was then rare and difficult,
especially in Ireland, but the reproduction of manuscripts was an
honourable calling actively pursued, and the copies were so clearly
and beautifully executed by professional scribes that the native
reader was never so bereft of literature as the absence of printed
books might suggest.

Keating's works are "veritably Irish uncontaminated by English
phrases, and written by a master of the language while it was yet a
power," as Dr. Atkinson puts it. His vocabulary is so full and varied
that one of a translator's difficulties must be to find equivalents
for what appear on the surface to be synonymous terms or merely
redundant phrases: and though we may admit an occasional lapse into
verbiage unpleasing to critics, yet his style has a charm of its own
which quite escapes in any translation, and can only be fully
appreciated by native readers, among whom his works have always
enjoyed an unrivalled popularity; and, in a less degree, by
sympathetic students of Gaelic. His wealth of reference and
illustration too, the result of much wider reading than might be
thought possible under his circumstances, gives zest to the perusal of
his books, and enhances their interest for people accustomed to a
fuller and more extended range of inquiry than our ancient annals
afford. The general neglect of the Gaelic language and of Irish
history for more than two centuries has hindered that careful and
critical study of Dr. Keating's narrative, to which the works of
writers of his period and standing have, in other countries, been 
subjected, whereby difficulties have been cleared up, errors corrected
and hasty conclusions modified; while the books themselves, where they
are not absolutely superseded as texts, have been revised and in parts
rewritten, and furnished with accessories to enable students of other
generations to use and value them. All this has yet to be done for
Keating.

"To live is to change," and the Irish language, like everything
living, has changed, passing from what scholars know as 'old' Irish to
'middle' and 'modern' Irish. Modern Irish begins with Keating, and his
model has been followed by the good writers of the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries, including O'Nachtan and O'Donlevy; and it still
guides us, allowance being made for inevitable change, not more
noticeable in Irish than in any other language cultivated during the
same period. Save where ancient documents are cited, there is in
Keating's writings, to quote Dr. Atkinson again, scarcely a line
which, at this day, "an Irish-speaking native will not at once get a
grip of."

The language used by our author is described by O'Curry as "the
modified Gaedhlic of Keating's own time": which merely means that
Keating elected to write in the living language, not (like the
O'Clerys and Mac Firbis) continuing to employ forms long obsolete, and
to copy strictly ancient models. O'Curry says further of Keating, whom
he elsewhere calls "a most learned Gaedhlic scholar ":-- "Although he
has used but little discrimination in his selections from old records,
and has almost entirely neglected any critical examination of his
authorities, still, his book is a valuable one, and not at all, in my
opinion, the despicable production that it is often ignorantly said to
be." In another passage, however, O'Curry rather tones down this
censure, and thus appreciates Keating:-- "It is greatly to be
regretted that a man so learned as Keating (one who had access, too,
at some period of his life, to some valuable and ancient MSS. since
lost) should not have had time to apply to his materials the rigid
test of that criticism so necessary to the examination of ancient
tales and traditions -- criticism which his learning and ability so
well qualified him to undertake. As it is, however, Keating's book is
of great value to the student, so far as it contains at least a fair
outline of our ancient history, and so far as regards the language in
which it is written, which is regarded as a good specimen of the
Gaedhlic of his time." From O'Curry's standpoint, and taking into
account the purpose of his work, we cannot expect a more favourable
estimate.

But O'Donovan himself says of Keating's History of Ireland:-- "This
work, though much abused by modern writers, on account of some fables
which the author has inserted, is, nevertheless, of great authority,
and has been drawn from the most genuine sources of Irish history,
some of which have been since lost... The most valuable copy of it...
is now preserved in the Library of Trinity College, Dublin (H. 5.
26.). It is in the handwriting of John, son of Torna O'Mulconry, of
the Ardchoill family, in the county of Clare, a most profound Irish
scholar, and a contemporary of Keating."

In his 'Literary History of Ireland,' Dr. Douglas Hyde thus contrasts
the O'Clerys and Keating:-- "As if to emphasise the truth that they
were only redacting the Annals of Ireland from the most ancient
sources at their command, the Masters wrote in an ancient bardic
dialect, full at once of such idioms and words as were unintelligible,
even to the men of their own day, unless they had received a bardic
training. In fact, they were learned men writing for the learned, and
this work was one of the last efforts of the esprit de corps of the
school-bred shanachy which always prompted him to keep bardic and
historical learning a close monopoly amongst his own class. Keating
was Michael O'Clery's contemporary, but he wrote -- and I consider him
the first Irish historian and trained scholar who did so -- for the
masses, not the classes, and he had his reward in the thousands of
copies of his popular History made and read throughout all Ireland,
while the copies made of the Annals were quite few in comparison, and
after the end of the seventeenth century little read."

Dr. Hyde further says:-- "What Keating found in the old vellums of the
monasteries and the brehons, as they existed about the year 1630 --
they have, many of them, perished since -- he rewrote and redacted in
his own language, like another Herodotus. He invents nothing,
embroiders little. What he does not find before him, he does not
relate.... though he wrote currente calamo, and is in matters of fact
less accurate than they [the Four Masters] are, yet his history is an
independent compilation made from the same class of ancient vellums,
often from the very same books from which they also derived their
information, and it must ever remain a co-ordinate authority to be
consulted by historians along with them and the other annalists." The
lists of ancient books, given by Keating himself in the course of his
work, afford ample evidence of this.

The great annalists mentioned were more rigid in their conception of
their duty, and more stiff in composition than some earlier Gaelic
writers; the compilers of the Annals of Loch Cé, for instance, display
a much freer treatment of their materials and an easier style. Indeed,
the gradual modification of the language, and the development of good
prose narrative form, to which in early times not much attention was
given, may be traced from the 'Irish Nennius,' in the twelfth century,
through the 'Passions and Homilies' of the Leabhar Breac, some of the
'Lives' of the Book of Lismore and the Loch Cé Annals, to the
translators of the Bible, to Carsuel, and to Keating when the
evolution was complete. The various publications, chiefly religious,
issued at Louvain, Rome, and Paris, during the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries by O'Molloy, O'Donlevy, and others, afford good
examples of a similar style: and at home the sermons of Dr.
O'Gallagher, and the writings of the O'Nachtans, and others, show that
the language, while undergoing some inevitable modification, had still
the same literary standard. To their influence, and to the efforts of
humble scribes and teachers in Ireland it is due that, through the
darkest period of our history, the native language, at least, was
preserved uncontaminated and undegraded till the approach of better
days; a marvellous fact when we consider the persecution, misery, and
hardship the Irish-speaking people, for the most part, had then to
endure.

The present will be the first complete edition of Keating's History. 
Outside the restricted circle of Irish scholars, nothing was known of
the work, save through Dermod O'Connor's unsatisfactory translation,
published in 1723, and often reprinted, until, in 1811, William
Haliday published a good text of the Dionbhrollach, or vindicatory
Introduction, and about one-fourth of the Foras feasa, the body of the
historical work, with a readable translation, fairly conveying the
author's meaning, but vague, and in parts too wide of the original to
be useful. This book was never reprinted, and has become very rare. In
1857, John O'Mahony, a competent Irish scholar and native speaker of
the language, published, in New York, a faithful translation of the
entire work with copious and valuable notes, in a large volume, now
also rare. Dr. P. W. Joyce, in 1881, edited, for the use of students,
the first part of the Foras feasa, with a close, almost word-for-word,
translation, and a vocabulary; and I have recently edited the
Dionbhrollach for the same purpose. Both these texts, and the first
volume of the present edition, fall within the limits of Haliday's
publication. I shall not, therefore, until my work is considerably
advanced, have actually to break new ground; and, as I do not hesitate
to make use of the work of my predecessors, it would be unfair not to
admit this, and ungrateful not to acknowledge their assistance. More
especially I have to thank Dr. Joyce for the use of his accurate
transcript (made some years ago with a view to publication) of part of
O'Mulconry's great manuscript of Keating, so highly prized by
O'Donovan, Todd, and others, which has greatly helped the present
volume. An unpublished Latin translation of Keating exists, by Dr.
John Lynch: there is also an English translation much abridged, and
rather vague and inaccurate, in manuscript (date about 1700); to this,
perhaps, it is that Harris refers in his edition of Ware, and Haliday
seems to allude to more than one. These and other very interesting
points, on which I have a good deal of information most kindly
furnished by friends, I shall refer to more fully in the concluding
volume, to which I must also defer my own notes and comment on the
text, my historical doubts and inquiries, and my further
acknowledgments.

Dr. Joyce says:-- "To publish text, translation, and annotations of
old Keating -- whom I revere and love -- would be a great work, enough
to place all Irishmen, present and future, under deep obligations to
you. A grand ambition, enough to make a man's whole life pleasant and
healthy." I too can claim that I have always had a like deep
veneration and affection for our good old author, and to do this work
has been with me the desire and dream of half a lifetime: in fact,
since I was first able to read the Irish language, and took part, now
more than a quarter of a century ago, in the movement for its
preservation. I even then hoped to have commenced this undertaking,
but other matters, in themselves of minor interest, were more pressing
needs for the time: now, however, the Irish Texts Society gives me the
opportunity so long wished for; and from Dr. Hyde, the President, Miss
Eleanor Hull, the Hon. Sec., my colleagues on the Committee, and other
members and friends, I have received such encouragement and
assistance, as give me hope that I may be able, under their auspices,
to complete so great and useful a work.

As to Dr. Keating's other works, Dr. Atkinson's splendid edition,
published by the Royal Irish Academy, in 189o, of the text of the
'Three Shafts of Death,' a moral and philosophic treatise, with an
exhaustive vocabulary, has been of great service in the preparation of
the present volumes: and the text of 'An Explanatory Defence of the
Mass' has been issued by Mr. Patrick O'Brien, and is important and
useful. It was Keating's earliest work, and the language is simpler
than in the other text named. These two texts, together with the
present edition of the History, furnish an ample store of classical
Gaelic prose, and to these works, since their first production, so far
as they were known, everyone has been satisfied to appeal as to
authoritative standards. A valuable edition of Keating's poems has
been lately issued by Rev. J. C. Mac Erlean, S.J., for the Gaelic
League.

A sketch of the life of the author prefixed to Haliday's edition of
Keating, has been in part reprinted by Mr. O'Brien: O'Mahony also
wrote a life for his translation; and other brief narratives have been
published, though authentic materials are scanty. A full biography of
Keating, however, with an account of the time in which he lived and
the conditions under which he worked, is still a desideratum for the
numerous and increasing class who now feel interest in him, his work,
and his language.

I must content myself with a few approximate dates. Neither the year
of his birth nor of his death is exactly known; but between 1570 and
1650 may be assumed as his period. He was born at Burges, and is
buried at Tubrid, both in Co. Tipperary, and distant only a few miles.
He was educated at Bordeaux, and returned to Ireland about 1610. His
first known work, the treatise on the Mass, was written about 1615;
though there is in the Franciscan MSS. a small religious tract,
attributed to him, which may be of earlier date, as also some of his
poems. The 'Three Shafts of Death' was written about 1625, and the
History was completed about 1634, certainly before 1640. In 1644 he
built the little church of Tubrid in which he is interred, though the
exact spot is not known.

From D'Arcy McGee's position in literature, an opinion from him on
Keating's History of Ireland is of some interest. He writes:-- "It is
a semi-bardic and semi-historic work. It is full of faith in legends
and trust in traditions. But its author has invented nothing. If it
contain improbabilities or absurdities, they are not of his creation.
He had gathered from manuscripts, now dispersed or almost unknown,
strange facts wildly put, which jar upon our sense as downright
fictions. They are not such. Ignorance has criticised what it knew not
of, and condemned accounts which it had never examined. Hence
Keating's name has grown to be almost synonymous with credulity. He
may have been to blame for giving us the statements and traditions
which he found in their old age dwelling in the hearts of the people,
but we must remember that the philosophic or sceptic era in history
had not then set in. The school of Machiavelli had not yet superseded
that of Herodotus."

Hardiman, who was a first-rate Irish scholar, and familiar with the
original, writes thus of Keating's work:-- "Our Irish Herodotus was
both a poet and an historian. Indeed the flowery style of his Foras
Feasa ar Éirinn, or 'History of Ireland,' shows that he must have paid
early and sedulous court to the muses; and, that he was rewarded for
his attentions, appears from the pleasing poems which he has left
behind.... As an historian and antiquary, he has acquired much
celebrity for profound knowledge of the antiquities of his country,
'vir multiplicis lectionis in patriis antiquitatibus.'... It is an
irreparable loss to Irish history that he did not continue his
work.... Of all men, he was best qualified to give a true domestic
picture of this country, from a knowledge of its civil affairs,
manners, customs, poetry, music, architecture, &c., seldom equalled
and never surpassed; besides his intimate acquaintance with many
ancient MSS. extant in his time, but since dispersed or destroyed. The
English edition by which his history, so far as it extends, is known
to the world, is a burlesque on translation. In innumerable passages
it is as much a version of Geoffrey of Monmouth as of Geoffrey
Keating."

Dr. Todd says:-- "O'Mahony's translation," before referred to, "is a
great improvement upon the ignorant and dishonest one published by Mr.
Dermod O'Connor... which has so unjustly lowered in public estimation
the character of Keating as a historian; but O'Mahony's translation
has been taken from a very imperfect text, and has evidently been
executed, as he himself confesses, in great haste; it has, therefore,
by no means superseded a new and scholarlike translation of Keating,
which is greatly wanted. Keating's authorities are still almost all
accessible to us, and should be collated for the correction of his
text; and two excellent MS. copies of the original Irish, by John
Torna O'Mulconry, a contemporary of Keating, are now in the Library of
Trinity College, Dublin." Though I may not hope to do all that the
learned writer here quoted lays down, or to rival his own scholarlike
edition of the 'War of the Gael with the Gall', from which this
passage is cited, I shall be well pleased if I do not fall greatly
short of O'Mahony's mark, whose work has done so much to rehabilitate
our author in the opinion of those who have to depend on a
translation. His best vindication, however, will be the publication of
an authoritative text of his complete work, based on the MSS. named by
Dr. Todd, and others at least equally authentic, carefully edited and
revised, and printed with the accuracy and style which have
characterised the Press of his University since Dr. O'Donovan's 'Four
Masters' was produced there, fifty years ago.
A few words will be in place here concerning the authorities for the
text of the present volume. The chief are:--

I. -- A MS., believed to be in the handwriting of the author, most
accurate and valuable, now in the Franciscan Convent Library, Dublin.
This volume is stated to have been written in the convent of Kildare,
and is shown by another entry to have belonged to the famous convent
of Donegal, whence it was transferred to Louvain, where it was
included among Colgan's collection, thence conveyed to Rome, and
ultimately restored to Ireland some twenty-eight years ago. Its date
unfortunately is not traceable, but in all probability it is the
oldest existing transcript of Keating's History, and written before
1640. This manuscript will be cited in this edition as F. There is
another important Keating MS. in the same collection, a copy made, as
appears from entries, before 1652, which I have consulted 
occasionally. These manuscripts were not known to Dr. O'Donovan. The
first is referred to in Sir John T. Gilbert's catalogue, on the
authority of a list made in 1732, as an autograph: but I see no
evidence of the date 1636, which some scholars have assigned for one
of these manuscripts. I have to return thanks to the learned
librarian, Rev. Father O'Reilly, and the Franciscan Fathers for access
to their unique collection, and for much information given me and
trouble taken on my behalf.

II. -- Ms. H. 5, 26, by O'Mulconry, referred to in this edition as C,
with the aid of Dr. Joyce's transcript, and printed edition of part of
same, compared, in doubtful and difficult passages, and to supply
omissions, with Ms. H. 5, 32 both in Trinity College, Dublin, being
Nos. 1397 and 1403 in the printed catalogue. I have to express my
thanks to the authorities of Trinity College for permission to use the
University Library, and to the Library officers for their courtesy and
kindness.

III. -- Haliday's text, stated to have been printed from a MS. also by
O'Mulconry, dated 1657, but differing considerably in places from
those named.

IV. -- The next is an older MS., dated 1643, in my own possession,
unfortunately in bad preservation, but still legible for the body of
the work, written by James O'Mulconry, of Ballymecuda, in the county
of Clare. These two authorities will be referred to in this edition as
H, and M, respectively.

By the letter N, I shall indicate a MS., also my own, written in
Dublin by Teig O'Nachtan, and dated 1704, with which has been
carefully compared a copy made in 1708 by Hugh Mac Curtin, and various
readings noted. This I have occasionally consulted, and found to be a
very useful text. All the writers named were well-known Irish
scholars. I have, besides, a transcript made by Peter O'Dornin, the
Gaelic Poet, in 1750; another, dated 1744, and written in a very good
hand; and others: but of these I have made no special use.

I shall note at the foot of each page, for the present, only such
'various readings' as appear to me to be important. Space, after all,
is an object, and the whole volume might easily be filled with matter
which would be little help, but rather a distraction, to the reader.
The author himself is believed to have made several transcripts of his
work; and to have inserted from time to time, passages or quotations
relating to the events recorded. In this way there is some inevitable
discrepancy between the best manuscripts. I have followed, in the
main, the recension of the O'Mulconrys, adhered to strictly by Dr.
Joyce, and which is also the basis of Haliday's text. I have not
modernized their system of inflection, or altered the orthography,
save in certain mannerisms, which I have not felt bound to adopt. It
is probable that this family of professional scribes and antiquaries
would have adhered more rigidly than Keating himself to classic but
obsolescent usages. In fact, the important MS. cited as F, prefers
living forms such as tugadar where C has tugsad &c. The authentic
copies differ occasionally from each other, and where I have had to
choose between them, or prefer another authority, the ancillary
manuscript and other sources from which omissions have been supplied
and various readings drawn, will be indicated wherever necessary. The
MSS., here and there, retain antiquated forms of spelling from which I
have felt at liberty to depart when their use in other places of more
modern forms gives sanction to the innovation. Thus, for instance,
O'Mulconry uses the obsolete doridisi, and aridhisi, almost side by
side with the living arís. The latter I have uniformly adopted, as it
exists in texts much older than Keating's time, such as the 'Homilies'
in the Leabhar Breac: and so I have, where authority was equal,
endeavoured to attain uniformity of spelling, and given the preference
to the simplest forms and those still in living use. No substitution
of words has, however, been admitted, and there is over the whole text
a slightly archaic flavour, not too unfamiliar, and by no means
unpleasing, but such as a great classic work in any other living
tongue presents to readers three centuries later than its author.

I have endeavoured to prepare a closely literal translation, though
not actually word for word: thus, while not unreadable, it will aid
students in the better understanding of the text, to which object it
is entirely subsidiary: no attempt being made to draw away the
reader's attention from the plain meaning of the author, by a
sophisticated version for the sake of superficial correctness or
elegance of style. Any such considerations must give place to the
necessity for the study and understanding of Keating's text by the
native reader and the Gaelic student, who will be alike unwilling to
substitute any translation, however successful, for the original
language of this standard work. This view has also guided me in the
forms of personal and place names in the translation. I should prefer
to retain the correct spelling in every instance, especially when so
many are now studying the language and becoming familiarized with its
phonetics: however, in the case of some very familiar names, I have
adopted no hard and fast rule, but wherever I follow the usual corrupt
spelling, I point out the correct Irish form also. The few foot-notes,
here and there, on the translation, must of necessity be brief: but I
hope, later, to give a full Index, and, for the present, will merely
indicate, in loco, the place or person alluded to, where this may be
necessary, or not obvious from the context.

The Latin quotations used by Keating are here relegated to the margin
to avoid disturbing the continuity of the text, and distracting the
reader's attention. In each case our author gives the Gaelic
equivalent, and from this the English translation has been made. A
letter will indicate the reference at the foot, and, in the case of
the notes to the present volume, which are chiefly 'various readings,'
the number of the line to which they refer will be given, and so the
appearance of our text, which is of some importance, will not be
marred by the insertion of too many figures.

Not only among the "strange facts wildly put," and the traditions
gathered by Keating, but also in the more authentic portions of his
narrative, there will be found recorded occurrences which may offend
certain readers who would fain judge every age and people by the
standards of modern European civilization; or, rather, by their own
narrow experience and reading, and their ill-informed prepossessions.
Persons whose susceptibilities are so easily shocked, and who cherish
their convictions so tenderly, have no business studying the history
of human progress in ancient times, or during the middle ages, or
among people who have developed under special conditions; or, indeed,
any subject outside of the commonplace.

Among the many writers who have censured Geoffrey Keating's work and
method, as the introduction to Haliday points out, Roderick
O'Flaherty, at least, had a sufficient knowledge of the language and
the subject: but, without this title to a hearing, Isaac D'Israeli
presumes to denounce Keating and O'Flaherty, alike, in the most
sweeping manner, among the various literary cranks and humbugs whom he
criticises. We need not wonder, therefore, though we may regret, that
Thomas Moore, in his History of Ireland, speaks slightingly of
Keating, whose text he could not read, but there is reason to believe
that Moore subsequently recognised the need of acquaintance with the
native records; as it is well known that he expressed to O'Curry and
Petrie his conviction, that without this knowledge he should not have
undertaken to write a History of Ireland, a work, now, in its turn,
notwithstanding its fascinating style, almost as much neglected as,
and of far less value than, either Keating or O'Flaherty.

Our author concludes his vindicatory introduction by affirming that if
there be anything in his history inviting censure, it is there not
from evil intent but from want of knowledge or ability. Being a
descendant of the old foreign settlers, Keating cannot be said to have
inherited a prejudice in favour of the native Irish; and his testimony
on their behalf; as he himself argues, ought on that account to be the
more readily received. While indignantly refuting the calumnies of
ignorance and malice, his honesty of purpose is yet such as impels him
to relate some strange facts which his keenly sensitive regard for his
country's honour must have induced him to wish could be related
differently. But not less is this the case with the native annalists
of Ireland. Having had the advantage of writing their own history, for
their own people, in their own language, they did not attempt to make
the facts bend to preconceived theories, but, to the best of their
ability and according to their lights, they delivered the stories as
they found them, not condescending to pander to any mistaken patriotic
zeal, or to insert and omit with a purpose in view, and so colour
their narrative as to place their ancestors before their own fellow-
countrymen and the world in any better light than they felt was
warranted by the authorities available. Though occasionally vain-
glorious, and by no means free from clan predilections, they do not
conceal faults or errors, or extenuate crimes: they are, in general,
too candid. In this way the ancient history of Ireland often appears
to the modern reader at a disadvantage, compared with the nicely
adjusted narratives told by historians of remote times in other
countries.

In closing these remarks I have to express my great regret at the
delay in the publication of this annual volume owing to unforeseen
difficulties and unavoidable interruptions.

DAVID COMYN.
43, BRIGHTON SQUARE, RATHGAR, DUBLIN,
1st October, 1901.



INTRODUCTION.
THE AUTHOR TO THE READER.

I.

WHOSOEVER proposes to trace and follow up the ancient history and
origin of any country ought to determine on setting down plainly the
method which reveals most clearly the truth of the state of the
country, and the condition of the people who inhabit it: and forasmuch
as I have undertaken to investigate the groundwork of Irish historical
knowledge, I have thought at the outset of deploring some part of her
affliction and of her unequal contest; especially the unfairness which
continues to be practised on her inhabitants, alike the old
foreigners[1] who are in possession more than four hundred years from
the Norman invasion down, as well as the native Irish[2] who have had
possession during almost three thousand years. For there is no
historian of all those who have written on Ireland from that epoch
that has not continuously sought to cast reproach and blame both on
the old foreign settlers and on the native Irish.
Whereof the testimony given by Cambrensis, Spenser, Stanihurst, Hanmer,
Camden, Barckly, Moryson, Davies, Campion, and every other new
foreigner[3] who has written on Ireland from that time, may bear
witness; inasmuch as it is almost according to the fashion of the
beetle they act, when writing concerning the Irish. For it is the
fashion of the beetle, when it lifts its head in the summertime, to go
about fluttering, and not to stoop towards any delicate flower that
may be in the field, or any blossom in the garden, though they be all
roses or lilies, but it keeps bustling about until it meets with dung
of horse or cow, and proceeds to roll itself therein. Thus it is with
the set above-named; they have displayed no inclination to treat of
the virtues or good qualities of the nobles among the old foreigners
and the native Irish who then dwelt in Ireland; such as to write on
their valour and on their piety, on the number of abbeys they had
founded, and what land and endowments for worship they had bestowed on
them; on the privileges they had granted to the learned professors of
Ireland, and all the reverence they manifested towards churchmen and
prelates: on every immunity they secured for their sages, and the
maintenance they provided for the poor and for orphans; on each
donation they were wont to bestow on the learned and on petitioners,
and on the extent of their hospitality to guests, insomuch that it
cannot truthfully be said that there ever existed in Europe folk who
surpassed them, in their own time, in generosity or in hospitality
according to their ability. Bear witness the literary assemblies which
were proclaimed by them, a custom not heard of among any other people
in Europe, so that the stress of generosity and hospitality among the
old foreigners and the native Irish of Ireland was such that they did
not deem it sufficient to give to any who should come seeking relief,
but issued a general invitation summoning them, in order to bestow
valuable gifts and treasure on them. However, nothing of all this is
described in the works of the present-day foreigners, but they take
notice of the ways of inferiors and wretched little hags, ignoring the
worthy actions of the gentry: yet as far as regards the old Irish, who
were inhabiting this island before the Norman invasion, let it appear
whether there has been in Europe any people more valiant than they,
contending with the Romans for the defence of Scotland.[4] For they
compelled the Britons to make a dyke between their portion of Britain
and Scotland, to protect (Roman) Britain from the incursion of the
Irish; and notwithstanding that there were usually fifty-two thousand
of a Roman army defending the dyke, and two hundred (scouts) riding
about, and twenty-three thousand foot and thirteen hundred horse with
them (besides), defending the frontier and harbours of the country
against the violent attacks of the Scots[5] and of the Picts[6]; yet,
with all that, the Irish would burst over the dyke, and the country
would be harried by them, despite these great hosts, according to
Samuel Daniel in his chronicle. Cormac, son of Cuileannan, says also
in his 'Saltair,' that, as a result of the violence of the Irish (or
Scots) and of the Crutheni (who are called Picts) against Britain, the
Britons three times conspired against the Roman governors set over
them, as a means of purchasing peace with the Scots and Picts. Observe,
moreover, the straits in which the Irish had placed the Britons whilst
Vortigern was king over them, whence it arose that he subsidised
Hengist, with his German host, as may be read in Geoffrey of Monmouth.
It is stated by Samuel Daniel that the Romans had fourteen garrisons
to oppose the Scots and Picts, and that the Scots and Picts kept
disturbing Britain, despite the Romans, from the time of Julius Cæsar
to that of the Emperor Valentinian the Third, during the space of five
hundred years; and the year of the Lord was four hundred and forty-
seven when the Romans abandoned the suzerainty of Britain: and it is
before that epoch a dispute arose between Theodosius and Maximus,
whence it resulted that Maximus led with him a great body of the
people of Britain to [French] Armorica, which is called [little]
Brittany, and having banished the people who were before them in the
land, he gave the country to the company who went with him to inhabit,
so that some of their posterity are still there.

II.

There are some ancient authors who lay lying charges against the
Irish; such as Strabo, who says in his fourth book that the Irish are
a man-eating people. My answer to Strabo is, that it is a lie for him
to say that the Irish are a people who eat human flesh; for it is not
read in the ancient record that there was ever one in Ireland who used
to eat human flesh, but Eithne the loathsome, daughter of Criomhthann,
son of Eanna Cinnsiolach, king of Leinster,[7] who was in fosterage
with the Deisi of Munster[8]: and she was reared by them on the flesh
of children, in hope that thereby she would be the sooner marriageable.
For it had been promised to them that they should receive land from
the man to whom she would be married; and it is to Aonghus, son of
Nadfraoch, king of Munster, she was married, as we shall relate
hereafter in the body of the history. Understand, reader, since the
antiquaries do not suppress this disgusting fact, which was a reproach
to the daughter of a king of Leinster, and the wife of a king of
Munster, that they would not conceal, without recounting it in the
case of lesser people than they, if it had been a custom practised in
Ireland: wherefore it is false for Strabo to say that it was a custom
for the Irish to eat human flesh, since this was never done among them
but by the aforesaid girl, and even that in time of paganism. My
answer also to St. Jerome, who relates this same thing, writing
against Jovinian, is that it must have been a base asserter of lies
who informed him, and therefore it ought not be brought as a charge
against the Irish.

Solinus, in the twenty-first chapter, says that there are no bees in
Ireland; and he says, that it is from the point of a sword the first
bit is tasted by a male child in Ireland. He says, moreover, that the
Irishman is wont, when his enemy is slain by him, to bathe himself in
the blood. It is clear from the ancient record, which will be (found)
in the history, that every one of these things is false. Pomponius
Mela, in the third book, says these words, speaking of the Irish, "a
people ignorant of all the virtues"[9]: and so of many other ancient
foreign authors who wrote rashly without evidence concerning Ireland,
on the lying statements of false witnesses, whom it would not be right
to trust in such a matter: wherefore Camden, setting down the
testimony of these people concerning Ireland, says these words: "We
have not (says he) credible witness of these things."[10] It is clear
that it is false to say that there were not bees in Ireland, according
to the same Camden, where he says, speaking of Ireland: "Such is the
quantity of bees there, that it is not alone in apiaries or in hives
they are found, but (also) in trunks of trees, and in holes of the
ground."[11]

III.

We shall set down here a few of the lies of the new foreigners who
have written concerning Ireland, following Cambrensis; and shall make
a beginning by refuting Cambrensis himself, where he says that Ireland
owed tribute to King Arthur, and that the time when he imposed the tax
on them at Caerleon was, when the year of the Lord was five hundred
and nineteen, as Campion sets forth in his chronicle, in the second
chapter of the second book, where he says that Gillamar was then king
of Ireland. Howbeit, notwithstanding that (the author of)
Polychronicon, and (Geoffrey of) Monmouth, and others of the new
foreigners assert this Gillamar to have been king of Ireland, I defy
any of their followers (to show) that there is a lay or a letter from
the ancient record of Ireland in which there is mention or account of
Gillamar having ever been king of Ireland: unless it be to
Muircheartach the Great, son of Earc, they call it, who was king of
Ireland, and was a contemporary of King Arthur; and Muircheartach
could not have been tributary to King Arthur, because, that he himself
was mighty in Ireland and in Scotland, and that it was he who sent his
six brothers into Scotland, and that it was one of them became the
first king of the Scotic race in Scotland, namely, Feargus the Great,
son of Earc; and moreover, that it was by the Scots and the Picts King
Arthur himself was slain. This Feargus, whom I have mentioned, was the
first king of Scotland of the Scotic race: for, notwithstanding that
Hector Boetius, in his history of Scotland, enumerates thirty-nine
kings to have ruled over Scotland before this Feargus, yet, according
to the ancient record, there was not any king of the Scotic race in
Scotland before him: and it is not true for him where he says that it 
is Feargus, son of Fearchar, king of Ireland, who was the first king
of Scotland of the Scotic race, for there never was a king of Ireland
named Fearchar, and so Feargus, son of Fearchar, was not king of
Scotland, as Hector Boetius says: and, granted that Muircheartach the
Great wished his brother Feargus (son of Earc) to become king of
Scotland, yet, withal, the title which is given to Muircheartach
himself, in the annals of Ireland, is 'King of Scots,' to signify that
he had supremacy over the Scots, both in Ireland and in Scotland; and
it is not conceivable that he, who was in so much power, should have
been tributary to King Arthur. And, moreover, Speed says in his
chronicle, that it was not tribute King Arthur had from the king of 
Ireland, but an alliance of friendship in war, so that whichever of
them should be attacked by enemies, it was obligatory on the other
party to send an auxiliary force to him who should be attacked: and
the name Speed calls this co-operation is "mutual obligation of
war,"[12] such as exists between the king of Spain and the Emperor;
for each of these sends aid in time of need to the other, and it is
not to be understood from this that the Emperor is tributary to the
king of Spain, or the king of Spain to the Emperor. In like manner, if
there existed a close alliance of war between King Arthur and
Muircheartach, son of Earc, king of Ireland, so that they were
accustomed to aid each other whenever an attack was made on either of
them, it must not be thence inferred that either was tributary to the
other. The truth of this matter is still more to be understood from
what (William of) Newbury says in the twenty-sixth chapter of the
second book of his history, where he speaks of Ireland: here is what
he says:-- "Ireland never lay under foreign dominion[13]." Cambrensis
himself corroborates this matter in his twenty-sixth chapter, where he
says:-- "From the first, Ireland has remained free from the invasion
of any foreign nation."[14] From these words it is evident that
neither Arthur, nor any other foreign potentate, ever had supremacy
over Ireland from the beginning till the Norman invasion: and,
moreover, it is not conceivable that the Britons had any control over
Ireland, since even the Romans did not venture to meddle with it, and
it is not alone that the Romans, or other foreigners, had no control
over Ireland, but it is Ireland that was a refuge to the other
territories to protect them from the violence of the Romans and other
foreigners.

Here we may see how Camden corroborates this in the book called
Camden's 'Britannia,' where he says:-- "When the Romans had widely
extended their dominion, there came, without doubt, many hither
(speaking of Ireland) from Spain, from France, and from Britain, in
order to extricate their necks from the most grievous yoke of the
Romans."[15] From this it may be understood that it is not alone that
the Romans did not come to Ireland, but even that it is there the
people of other countries were protected from the Romans. Here also is
what the same Camden says, refuting the folk who say, according to
(their) opinion, that the Romans had power over Ireland:-- "I should
find it difficult to persuade myself that Ireland had ever been under
the authority of the Romans.[16]"

Cambrensis says, in his ninth chapter, that in Ireland the men used to
marry the wives who had been married to their brothers, upon the death
of their brothers: and he says that the tithe used not to be paid in
Ireland, and that there was no regard for marriage there till the
coming of Cardinal John Papiron; this, however, is not true for him,
as we shall prove in the body of the history, and as will be evident
from this same introduction shortly hereafter. He says, in his seventh
chapter, where he treats of the wonders of Ireland, that there is a
well in Munster which presently makes a man grey when he washes his
hair or his beard in its water, and that there is likewise a well in
Ulster[17] which prevents greyness. Howbeit, there are not the like of
these wells in Ireland now, and I do not think there were in the time
of Cambrensis, but these wonders were (merely) set forth as a
colouring for his lies.

Cambrensis says, in his twenty-second chapter, that whenever the
nobles of Ireland are making a compact with each other, in presence of
a bishop, they kiss at that time a relic of some saint, and that they
drink each other's blood, and at that same time they are ready to
perpetrate any treachery on each other. My answer to him here (is),
that there is not a lay nor a letter, of old record or of ancient text,
chronicle or annals, supporting him in this lie: and, moreover, it is
evident that it was obligatory on the antiquaries not to conceal the
like of this evil custom, and even to put it in (their) manuscript on
pain of losing their professorship, if it had been practised in
Ireland. Wherefore it is clear that it is a lie Cambrensis has uttered
here. Cambrensis says, in his tenth chapter, that the Irish are an
inhospitable nation: here is what he says:-- "Moreover, this nation is
an inhospitable nation[18] (says he). However, I think Stanihurst
sufficient in his history by way of reply to him in this matter; here
is what he says, speaking of the generosity of the Irish:-- "Verily
(he says), they are a most hospitable people; and there is no greater
degree in which you may earn their gratitude, than freely, and of your
own will, to make your resort to their houses[19]." Hence it may be
inferred, without leave of Cambrensis, that they are hospitable people,
(and) truly generous in regard to food. Cambrensis says, where he
writes concerning Ireland, that it was the wife of the king of
Meath[20] who eloped with Diarmuid of the foreigners; yet this is not
true for him, but she was the wife of Tighearnan O'Ruairc, king of
Brefny,[21] and daughter to Murchadh, son of Flann, son of
Maoilseachlainn, king of Meath, and Dearbhforgaill was her name. He
says, moreover, that it is from Sliev Bloom' the Suir,[22] Nore, and
Barrow take their rise, though that is not true for him, for it is
clear that it is from the brow of Sliev Bloom[23], on the east side,
the Barrow springs, and that it is from the brow of Sliev Aldun,[24]
which is called the mountain of the Gap in Ikerrin,[25] the Suir and
the Nore rise.
Again, he says, in the twenty.fifth chapter of his narration
concerning Ireland, that the king of Cinéal Conaill,[26] i.e.
O'Donnell, used to be inaugurated in this wise: an assembly being made
of the people of his country on a high hill in his territory, a white
mare being slain, and being put to boil in a large pot in the centre
of the field, and, on her being boiled, he to drink up her broth like
a hound or a beagle with his mouth, and to eat the flesh out of his
hands without having a knife or any instrument for cutting it, and
that he would divide the rest of the flesh among the assembly, and
then bathe himself in the broth. It is manifest that this thing
Cambrensis tells is false, according to the ancient record of Ireland,
for it is thus it describes the mode in which O'Donnell was proclaimed,
to wit, by his being seated in the midst of the nobles and of the
council of his own territory; and a chief of the nobility of his
district used to stand before him with a straight white wand in his
hand, and on presenting it to the king of Cinéal Conaill, it is this
he would say to him, to receive the headship of his own country, and
to maintain right and equity between each division of his country: and,
wherefore the wand was appointed to be straight and white, was to
remind him that so ought he to be just in his administration, and pure
and upright in his actions. I marvel at Cambrensis reporting this lie,
and I conceive that it was through malice he inserted it in his work.
For it is well known that they have been at all times devout and
religious people; and that many of them forsook the world, and
finished their lives under religious rule, and, moreover, that from
them came many saints, such as Columcille, Baoithin, Adhamnan, and
many other saints whom we shall not mention here. Besides, it is not
credible that the nobility of Ireland would permit the king of Cinéal
Conaill to have in use that barbarous custom which Cambrensis mentions,
seeing that the Catholic religion has lived among them from the time
of Patrick to the Norman invasion, and, accordingly, I consider that
it is a malicious unwarranted lie Cambrensis has uttered here.

IV.

Spenser, in his narrative, says that Egfrid, king of the Northumbrians,
and Edgar, king of Britain, had authority over Ireland, as may be read
in the thirty-third page of his history: yet this is not true for him,
because the old records of Ireland are opposed to that, and, moreover,
British authors themselves confess that the Saxons did not leave them
any ancient texts, or monuments, by which they might know the
condition of the time which preceded the Saxons. For Gildas, an
ancient British author says, that the monuments, and consequently the
history of the Britons, were destroyed by the Romans and by the Saxons.
Samuel Daniel, in the first part of his chronicle, agrees with this
author on the same matter, and Rider, in the Latin dictionary he wrote,
where he treats of this word Britannia; moreover he says, that it is
not from Brutus Britain is called Britannia, and, if it were, that it
should be Brutia or Brutica it should be called; and it were likely,
if it had been from Brutus it was named, that Julius Cæsar, Cornelius
Tacitus, Diodorus Siculus, or Bede, or some other ancient author would
have stated whence is this word Britannia; and since they knew not
whence is the name of their own country, it was no wonder they should
be in ignorance of many of the ancient concerns of Britain, and,
therefore, it is not strange that Spenser likewise should be ignorant
of them.

It is a marvellous thing Spenser took in hand to trace up antiquity
concerning some of the nobles of Ireland, and to assert that they are
foreigners in regard to their origin. Seven surnames, in especial, of
the nobles of the Gael are mentioned by him, to wit, Mac Mahon, Mac
Sweeny, Mac Sheehy, Macnamara, Cavanagh, Toole, and Byrne. He says
that it is from Ursula (or Fitz Urse, a surname which is in England)
Mac Mahon is derived, and that 'ursula' and bear' are equal, and that
'bear' and 'mahon' are alike (in meaning), and, accordingly, that it
is from that house Mac Mahon of Ulster came. My answer to this
reasoning is, that it is not more probable that Mac Mahon of Oriel[27]
should have come from that house, in such fashion, according to the
derivation of the word, than Mac Mahon of Thomond,[28] or O'Mahony of
Carbry,[29] and as neither of these is from the house of Fitz Urse, or
Bear, in England, neither is Mac Mahon of Ulster: but truly he is of
the posterity of Colla-dá-Chríoch, son of Eochaidh Doimhléan son of
Fiachadh Sraibhtheine, son of Cairbre Lifeachar of the race of
Eireamhón. The second race, the Mac Sweenys, he says that it is from a
house in England which is called 'Swyn,' they have come; howbeit,
'Swyn' and 'Sweeny' are not equal, and, accordingly it is not from
that house Mac Sweeny has sprung, but truly he is of the race of
Niall: for it is from the posterity of Aodh Athlamh son of
Flaithbheartach of the pilgrim-staff, Mac Sweeny comes. He also says
that the Mac Sheehys are of the foreigners; however, that is not true,
for it is known that they are of the posterity of Colla Uais, and that
they have sprung from Sítheach, son of Eachdunn, son of Alastar, son
of Dómhnall from whom are named the Mac Donnells of Ireland and
Scotland. Again he says that the Macnamaras are of the foreigners, and
that they came from a family of the Normans called Mortimer; however,
that is not true, for it is from a person named Cúmara they are called
children of Cúmara: the proper surname for them is the race of Aodh,
and it is from Caisin, son of Cas, son of Conall of the swift steeds,
of the race of Éibhear, they are derived, as may be read in the
genealogical account of the Dal Cas. He states, likewise, that it is
from Great Britain came these three following surnames, Byrne, Toole,
and Cavanagh; and the proof which he offers for this statement is
unreliable, where he says that these three words are British words.
First, he says that 'brin' and' woody' are alike (in meaning); I allow
that 'brin' and 'woody' are the same, yet it is not from this word
'brin' the Byrnes are called, but from the name of a young warrior
called Brannút.[30] Secondly, he says that 'tol' and 'hilly' are alike,
and that it is from it the Tooles are named; I allow that 'tol' and
'hilly' are equal, yet 'tol' and 'Tuathal' are not like each other,
for it is from the name of a warrior called Tuathal[31] they are
(called): wherefore the opinion of Spenser is false. Once again he
says that 'caomhan' and 'strong' are alike, and that it is from it the
Cavanaghs are named. My answer to him is, that 'caomhan' is the same
as a 'mild' or pleasant person, and that the Cavanaghs were so named
from Dómhnall Caomhanach, son of Diarmuid of the foreigners. The
epithet adhered to Domhnall himself from his having been nurtured in
Kilcavan, in the lower part of Leinster;[32] and it is from the
Kinsellachs[33] they are by descent. Moreover, it is manifest,
according to genuine record, that these three peoples are of the Gael,
and that these three surnames are of the posterity of Fiachadh Aiceadh,
son of Cathaoir the Great, king of Leinster, as may be read in the
genealogical account of Leinster. I am surprised how Spenser ventured
to meddle in these matters, of which he was ignorant, unless that, on
the score of being a poet, he allowed himself license of invention, as
it was usual with him, and others like him, to frame and arrange many
poetic romances with sweet-sounding words to deceive the reader.

V.

Stanihurst asserts that Meath was the allotted portion of Slainghe,
son of Deala, son of Loch; howbeit, that is not true for him. For,
according to the Book of Invasion, there was of Meath, in Slainghe's
time, but one district of land only, which lies hard by Usna,[34] (and
so) till the time of Tuathal the Welcome: and where he says that it is
from Slainghe the town of Slane is called, and, consequently, that
Meath was the allotted share which came to him from his brothers, it
is not more reasonable to suppose that it was his share than to
suppose that it was the province of Leinster that was allotted to him,
and that it is from him is named Inver Slaney[35] which flows through
the midst of Leinster to Lochgarman (or Wexford)[36]; and that it is
from him is named Dumha Slainghe, otherwise called Dionnriogh, on the
bank of the Barrow, between Carlow[37] and Leighlin,[38] on the west
side of the Barrow, and that it was his fortified residence, and that
it was there he died.

It is no marvel that Stanihurst should be without knowledge of this
matter, since he had never seen the records of Ireland, from which he
might have known her previous condition; and I fancy he did not make
any great inquiry after them, since he is so ignorant about Irish
affairs that he asserts Rosmactriuin[39] to be in Munster, and that
Meath is a province, (or 'fifth '), in opposition even to Cambrensis,
who does not reckon Meath as a province, and contrary to the Book of
Invasion of Ireland. As Stanihurst divides Ireland, he makes up one
half from the race of the foreigners[40] apart, and the other half of
Ireland outside that (jointly) between Gall and Gael; and, moreover,
he says that the least colonist among the race of the foreigners would
not deem it fitting to form a matrimonial alliance with the noblest
Gael in Ireland; thus, he says, in his chronicle:-- "The most lowly of
the colonists who dwell in the foreign province would not give his
daughter in marriage to the greatest prince among the Irish."[41] I
ask Stanihurst which were the more honourable, the more noble, or the
more loyal to the crown of England, or which were better as securities
for preserving Ireland to the crown of England, the colonists of
Fingall, or the noble earls of the foreigners who are in Ireland, such
as the earl of Kildare, who contracted alliance with Mac Carthy
riabhach,[42] with O'Neill, and with others of the nobles of the Gael;
the earl of Ormond[43] with O'Brien, with Mac Gil Patrick, and with
O'Carroll; the earl of Desmond[44] with Mac Carthy mór,[45] and the
earl of Clanricard with O'Ruarc. I do not reckon the viscounts nor the
barons, who were as noble as any settler who was ever in Fingall, and
by whom frequently their daughters were given in marriage to the
nobles of the Gael. It is, moreover, manifest that it is more
frequently the English authorities entrusted the care of defending and
retaining Ireland to the charge of the earls {whom we have mentioned}
who made alliance with the native Irish, than to the charge of all the
settlers that ever were in the English pale. Wherefore I conceive not
whence it is that they do not contract alliance with the nobles of
Ireland, unless it be from disesteem for their own obscurity, so that
they did not deem themselves worthy to have such noble Gaels in their
kinship.

From the worthlessness of the testimony Stanihurst gives concerning
the Irish, I consider that he should be rejected as a witness, because
it was purposely at the instigation of a party who were hostile to the
Irish that he wrote contemptuously of them; and, I think, that hatred
of the Irish must have been the first dug he drew after his first
going into England[46] to study, and that it lay as a weight on his
stomach till, having returned to Ireland, he ejected it by his writing.
I deem it no small token of the aversion he had for the Irish, that he
finds fault with the colonists of the English province for that they
did not banish the Gaelic from the country at the time when they
routed the people who were dwelling in the land before them. He also
says, however excellent the Gaelic language may be, that whoever
smacks thereof, would likewise savour of the ill manners of the folk
whose language it is. What is to be understood from this, but that
Stanihurst had so great a hatred for the Irish, that he deemed it an
evil that it was a Christian-like conquest the Gaill had achieved over
Ireland and the Gael, and not a pagan conquest. For, indeed, he who
makes a Christian conquest thinks it sufficient to obtain submission
and fidelity from the people who have been subdued by him, and to send
from himself other new people to inhabit the land over which his power
has prevailed, together with the people of that country. Moreover, it
is the manner of him who makes a pagan conquest, to bring destruction
on the people who are subdued by him, and to send new people from
himself to inhabit the country which he has taken by force. But he who
makes a Christian conquest extinguishes not the language which was
before him in any country which he brings under control: and it is
thus William the Conqueror did as regards the Saxons. He did not
extinguish the language of the Saxons, seeing that he suffered the
people who used that language to remain in the country, so that it
resulted therefrom that the language has been preserved from that time
down among the Saxons. Howbeit, it is a pagan conquest which Hengist,
the chief of the Saxons made over the Britons, since he swept them
from the soil of Britain, and sent people from himself in their
places; and having altogether banished everyone, he banished their
language with them. And it is the same way Stanihurst would desire to
act by the Irish; for it is not possible to banish the language
without banishing the folk whose language it is: and, inasmuch as he
had the desire of banishing the language, he had, likewise, the desire
of banishing the people whose language it was, and, accordingly, he
was hostile to the Irish; and so his testimony concerning the Irish
ought not to be received.

Stanihurst also finds fault with the lawgivers of the country, and
with its physicians: although I wonder how he ventured to find fault
with them, seeing that he understood neither of them, nor the language
in which the skill of either class found expression, he being himself
ignorant and uninformed as regards the Gaelic, which was their
language, and in which the legal decisions of the country and the
(books of) medicine were written. For he was not capable of reading
either the law of the land or the medicine in their own language, and
if they had been read to him, he had no comprehension of them.
Accordingly, I think that it is the same case with him, depreciating
the two faculties we have mentioned, and the case of the blind man who
would discriminate the colour of one piece of cloth from another: for
as the blind man cannot give a decision between the two colours,
because he does not see either of them, in like manner, it was not
possible for him to form a judgment between the two aforesaid
faculties, inasmuch as he never understood the books in which they
were written, and did not even understand the doctors whose arts these
were, because the Gaelic alone was their proper language, and he was
out and out ignorant of it.

He finds fault also with those who play the harp in Ireland, and says,
that they have no music in them. It is likely that he was not a judge
of any sort of music, and especially of Irish music, he being
unacquainted with the rules which appertain to it. I think Stanihurst
has not understood that it is thus Ireland was (being) a kingdom apart
by herself, like a little world, and that the nobles and the learned
who were there long ago arranged to have jurisprudence, medicine,
poetry, and music established in Ireland with appropriate regulations:
and, therefore, it was not seemly for him to have formed and delivered
a hasty rash judgment censuring the music of Ireland. It is a marvel
to me that he had not read Cambrensis in the nineteenth chapter, where
he praises the music of the Irish, unless it were that he had
determined to attain a degree beyond Cambrensis in disparaging the
Irish: for there is nothing at all in which Cambrensis more commends
Irishmen than in the Irish music. Here is what he says in the same
chapter:-- "In instruments of music alone I find the diligence of this
nation praiseworthy, in which, above every nation that we have seen,
they are incomparably skilful."[47] As he says further, according to
the same chapter, here is the information he gives concerning Irish
music, praising it:-- "Their melody, says he, is perfected and
harmonized by an easy quickness, by a dissimilar equality, and by a
discordant concord."[48] From this it may be understood, on the
testimony of Cambrensis, that it is false for Stanihurst to say that
there is no music in Irish melody. It is not true for him, either,
what he says, that the greater part of the singing folk of Ireland are
blind; for it is clear that, at the time he wrote his history, there
was a greater number of persons with eyesight engaged in singing and
playing than of blind people, so from that down, and now, the evidence
may rest on our contemporaries.

Understand, reader, that Stanihurst was under three deficiencies for
writing the history of Ireland, on account of which it is not fit to
regard him as an historian. In the first place, he was too young, so
that he had not had opportunity for pursuing inquiry concerning the
antiquity of this country, on which he undertook to write. The second
defect, he was blindly ignorant in the language of the country in
which were the ancient records and transactions of the territory, and
of every people who had inhabited it; and, therefore, he could not
know these things. The third defect, he was ambitious, and accordingly, 
he had expectation of obtaining an advantage from those by whom he was
incited to write evil concerning Ireland: and, moreover, on his having
subsequently become a priest, he promised to recall most part of the
contemptuous things he had written concerning Ireland, and I hear that
it is now in print, to be exhibited in Ireland.

Stanihurst says that when Irishmen are contending, or striking each
other, they say as a shout with a loud voice, 'Pharo, Pharo,' and he
thinks that it is from this word 'Pharao,' which was a name for the
king of Egypt, they use it as a war-cry: howbeit, that is not true for
him, for it is the same as 'watch, watch O,' or, 'O take care,'
telling the other party to be on their guard, as the Frenchman says,
'gardez, gardez,' when he sees his neighbour in danger.

VI.

Dr. Hanmer states in his chronicle that it was Bartholinus who was
leader of the Gaels at their coming into Ireland, and it is to
Partholón he calls Bartholinus here. However, according to the ancient
record of Ireland, there were more than seven hundred years between
the coming of Partholón and the coming of the children of Míleadh[49]
to Ireland. For at the end of three hundred years after the deluge
came Partholón, and at the end of a thousand and four score years
after the deluge came the sons of Míleadh to Ireland. And in the
opinion of Camden, it is more fitting to rely on the history of
Ireland in this matter than on the words of Hanmer. Here is what he
says:-- "Let its due respect be given to antiquity in these
things,"[50] (says he): and if it should be given to any record in the
world on the score of being ancient, the antiquity of Ireland is
indeed worthy of respect, according to the same Camden, in the book
which is called 'Camden's Britannia,' where he says, speaking of
Ireland:-- "Not unjustifiably was this island called 'Ogygia' by
Plutarch, i.e. most ancient."[51] Camden furnishes a reason for this,
and here is what he says:-- "From the most profound memory of
antiquity they derive their own history (speaking of the Irish),
insomuch that there is not in all antiquity of all other nations but
newness or almost infancy,"[52] beside the antiquity of Ireland: and,
therefore, that it is more fitting to rely on it than on Dr. Hanmer,
who never saw the old record of Ireland.
The same author says that it was a king of Scandinavia,[53] whose name
was Froto, was king of Ireland when Christ was born; however, that is
not true for him, for according to the ancient history, it is during
the time of Criomhthann Nia Náir being in the sovereignty of Ireland
that Christ was born; and according to that, it was not Froto, king of
Scandinavia, who was king of Ireland at that time. It is marvellous
how Hanmer, an Englishman, who never either saw or understood the
history of Ireland, should know who was king of Ireland at the time
Christ was born, he being without definite information as to who was
king of Great Britain itself. For Samuel Daniel, Gildas, Rider, and
Nennius, and many other authors who have written the history of Great
Britain, acknowledge that the old account they have themselves on the
ancient condition of Britain was inexact, because the Romans and
Saxons deprived them of their records and their ancient texts;
insomuch that they had but a conjecture or an opinion to offer
concerning the ancient affairs of Britain before the Saxons and the
Romans: and, therefore, the learned Camden himself says that he knew
not whence it was that Britain was called Britannia, but to give his
opinion like any man. He says also that he did not know when the Picts
came to inhabit the northern part of Great Britain; and since there
were many of the ancient transactions of Great Britain obscure to him,
it was no wonder their being still more obscure to Hanmer, and that
there should be greater obscurity than that in his case concerning the
ancient affairs of Ireland: and, accordingly, he is not a trustworthy
warrant as regards the king of Scandinavia having been king of Ireland
at the time of the birth of Christ.

He says, likewise, that it is not Patrick, the apostle of Ireland (he
by whom the Catholic faith was first propagated in the country), who
discovered the cave of Patrick's purgatory in the island of purgatory,
but another Patrick, an abbot, who lived in the year of the Lord,
eight hundred and fifty. Nevertheless, this is not true for him
according to holy Caesarius, who lived within six hundred years of
Christ, and consequently flourished two centuries and a half before
this second Patrick. Here is what he says in the thirty-eighth chapter
of the twelfth book he wrote, entitled 'Liber dialogorum':-- "Whoever
casts doubt on purgatory, let him proceed to Ireland, let him enter
the purgatory of Patrick, and he will have no doubt of the pains of
purgatory thenceforward."[54] From this it may be understood that it
is not that second Patrick whom Hanmer mentions, who discovered
Patrick's purgatory in the beginning, but the first Patrick. For how
could it be possible that it should have been the second Patrick who
discovered it, seeing that two centuries and a half elapsed from the
time Cæsarius wrote on the purgatory of Patrick to the time the second
Patrick lived; and moreover, we have the record and the tradition of
Ireland stating, that it was Patrick the apostle who discovered
purgatory at first in Ireland. Wherefore, it is clear that it is a
malicious lie Hanmer has stated here, in hope that thereby the Irish
would have less veneration for the cave of Patrick.

Another thing he says, in his twenty-fourth page, that Fionn, son of
Cumhall, was of the Scandinavians of Denmark; though this is not true
for him, according to the chronicle, but he is of the posterity of
Nuadha Neacht, king of Leinster, who came from Eireamhón, son of
Míleadh. He says also, in the twenty-fifth page, that the person whom
authors call Gillamar,[55] king of Ireland, was son to the king of
Thomond; howbeit, we deem the confutation we have already given this
thing sufficient.

I think that it is mockingly Hanmer inserts the battle of Ventry,
deceitfully ridiculing the antiquaries, so that he might give the
reader to understand that there is no validity in the history of
Ireland, but like the battle of Ventry. However, it is clear that the
'shanachies'[56] do not, and did not, regard the battle of Ventry as a
true history, but that they are assured that it is a poetical romance,
which was invented as a pastime. The same answer I give to every other
story he recounts concerning the Fianna.[57] It is untrue for him also
where he says that Sláinghe son of Deala, was thirty years in the
sovereignty of Ireland, whereas, according to the record, he reigned
but one year only.

It is untrue, likewise, for him to say that the archbishop of
Canterbury had jurisdiction over the clergy of Ireland from the time
of Augustine the monk. For it is certain that the archbishop of
Canterbury had no jurisdiction over the clergy of Ireland until the
time of William the Conqueror, and even then he had not jurisdiction,
except over the clergy of Dublin, Wexford, Waterford, Cork, and
Limerick;[58] and it is those clergy themselves who placed themselves
under the control of the archbishop of Canterbury, through affection
of kinship with the people of Normandy, they being themselves of the
remnant of the Danes usually called Normans, and also through dislike
of the Irish; and I do not think there was authority over those same
(clerics), but during the time of three, archbishops who were in
Canterbury, namely, Radulph, Lanfranc, and Anselm. Therefore it is
false for him to say that the archbishop of Canterbury had
jurisdiction over the clergy of Ireland from the time of Augustine the
monk.

It is also false what he says that Murchadh Mac Cochlain was king of
Ireland in the year of the Lord one thousand one hundred and sixty-six,
for it is certain that it was Ruaidhri Ua Conchubhair[59] who was at
that time assuming the headship of Ireland, and that that time was
four years before the Norman invasion.

Again, he says, that it is in Great Britain Comhghall, abbot of
Beannchar[60] in the Aird of Ulster,[61] was born: yet that is not
true for him, for it is read in his life that it was in Dal n-
aruidhe[62] in the north of Ulster he was born, and that he was of the
race called Dal n-aruidhe. It is wherefore Hanmer thought to make a
Briton of Comhghall, because that it was Comhghall founded the abbey
of Beannchar in the Aird of Ulster, which was the mother of the abbeys
of all Europe, and that he founded another abbey in England beside
west Chester, which is called Bangor: and if it should happen to
Hanmer to convince the reader that Comhghall was a Briton, that he
would give him consequently to understand that every excellence which
adorned the abbey of Beannchar of Ulster would tend to the renown of
the Britons in regard to Comhghall belonging to them; or that all the
fame which Beannchar of Ulster had earned would be imputed to the
abbey named Bangor, which is in England.

Hanmer says that Fursa, Faolan, and Ultan were bastard children of a
king of Leinster; although truly they were children of Aodh Beannan,
king of Munster, according to the account of the saints of Ireland. So
also for many other of the lies of Hanmer writing on Ireland, and I
pass on without pursuing them further, because it would be tedious to
mention them all.

VII.

John Barckly, writing on Ireland, says these words:-- "They build
(says he, speaking of the Irish) frail cabins to the height of a man,
where they themselves and their cattle abide in one dwelling."[63] I
think, seeing that this man stoops to afford information on the
characteristics and on the habitations of peasants and wretched petty
underlings, that his being compared with the beetle is not unfitting,
since he stoops in its fashion to give an account of the hovels of the
poor, and of miserable people, and that he does not endeavour to make
mention or narration concerning the palatial princely mansions of the
earls and of the other nobles who are in Ireland. I consider also that
the repute of an historian ought not to be given to him, nor to any
body else who would follow his track in the same degree: and thus,
with one word, I discard the witness of Fynes Moryson who wrote
jeeringly on Ireland; for, though his pen was skilful for writing in
English, I do not think that he intended by the power of the pen to
disclose the truth, and so I do not consider that it is worth (while)
giving him an answer. For, the historian who proposes to furnish a
description of any people who may be in a country, ought to report
their special character truthfully [on them], whether good or bad; and
because that it was of set purpose, through evil and through a bad
disposition (at the suggestion of other people, who had the same mind
towards the Irish), he has left in oblivion, without estimating the
good qualities of the Irish, whereby he has abandoned the rule most
necessary for an historian to preserve in his narrative, and,
therefore, the status of history ought not to be accorded to his
writing. These are, indeed, the rules which should be most observed in
writing history, according to Polydorus, in the first book he has
written 'de rerum inventoribus,' where he treats of the fittest rules
for writing history: here is the first rule he sets down -- "That he
should not dare to assert anything false."[64] The second rule:--
"That he should not dare to omit setting down every truth": here are
the author's words: "in order (says he) that there should be no
mistrust of friendship or unfriendliness in the writing."[65] He says,
moreover, in the same place, that the historian ought to explain the
customs and way of life, the counsels, causes, resolves, acts, and
development, whether good or bad, of every people who dwell in the
country about which he has undertaken to write: and, inasmuch as Fynes
Moryson has omitted to notice anything good of the Irish, he has
neglected to observe the aforesaid rules, and, accordingly, the
dignity of history cannot be allowed to his composition.

Whoever should determine to make a minute search for ill customs, or
an investigation into the faults of inferior people, it would be easy
to fill a book with them; for there is no country in the world without
a rabble. Let us consider the rough folk of Scotland, the rabble-rout
of Great Britain, the plebeians of Flanders, the insignificant fellows
of France, the poor wretches of Spain, the ignoble caste of Italy, and
the unfree tribe of every country besides, and a multitude of ill-
conditioned evil ways will be found in them; howbeit, the entire
country is not to be disparaged on their account. In like manner, if
there are evil customs among part of the unfree clans of Ireland, all
Irishmen are not to be reviled because of them, and whoever would do
so, I do not think the credit of an historian should be given him; and
since it is thus Fynes Moryson has acted, writing about the Irish, I
think it is not allowable he should have the repute of an historian:
and so I say also of Campion.

Camden says that it is usual in Ireland for the priests with their
children and concubines to dwell in the churches, and to be drinking
and feasting in them: and moreover, that it is a habit there to call
the children of these clerics, son of the bishop, son of the abbot,
son of the prior, and son of the priest. My answer to him here is,
that the time the clergy of Ireland began that bad system was after
the eighth Henry had changed his faith, and, even at that time and
thenceforward, there did not practise that bad habit but such of them
as followed their own lusts, and denied the lawful superiors who were
set over them. Camden himself concurs with this reply, where he says,
speaking of Ireland:-- "Whoever among them (says he) give themselves
to a religious life, restrain themselves even to miracle in a
condition of austerity, governed by rule, watching, praying, and
fasting for their mortification."[66] Here is what Cambrensis says in
the twenty-seventh chapter, speaking also of the clergy of Ireland:--
"The clergy of this land (says he, speaking of Ireland) are abundantly
commendable as to the religious life, and amongst every other virtue
which they possess, their chastity excels all the other virtues."[67]
From this it may be understood that chastity prevailed among the
clergy of Ireland in Cambrensis' time: and, moreover, it may be
inferred from this, that it is not every body of the clergy of Ireland
who followed that evil custom, but only the lustful set who broke
their obligation, and went schismatically in disobedience to their
ecclesiastical superiors. Stanihurst agrees with this thing in the
narrative which he wrote concerning Ireland, in the year of the Lord
one thousand five hundred and eighty-four. Here is what he says:--
"The most part of the Irish (says he) have great regard for devotion
or the religious state."[68] From this it may be understood that that
bad practice which Camden mentions was not common in Ireland, except
only among the clergy who rejected their obligation as we have said
above.

Camden says that the marriage bond is not strictly observed in Ireland,
outside of the great towns: however, this is not true for him, and
casts great discredit on the true aristocracy of Ireland, both native
and foreign, because that it is in the country they mostly reside.
Howbeit, I say not that there be not some of them lustful, as there be
in every country, those who are not obedient to their ecclesiastical
superiors: and, accordingly, it is unjust for Camden to charge this
offence, rarely occurring, as a reproach against the Irish who reside
in the rural districts. For, if there were one or two, or a few, of
them unruly, the inhabitants of the entire country should not be
censured because of these: and, consequently, it is not fair of Camden
to say that marriage is seldom regarded among the Irish, except among
the people of the large towns and cities: and as for the folk who say
that a marriage contract for a year is customary in Ireland, it is
certain that it was never practised there, but by misguided people who
were not submissive to their ecclesiastical superiors, and, for that
reason, a general reproach should not be flung at the Irish because a
few indocile unrestrained individuals practise this.

Campion says, in the sixth chapter of the first book of his narrative,
that the Irish are so credulous, in a manner, that they will regard as
truth whatever their superior may say, however incredible, and he
propounds a dull fabulous tale in support of this. That is to say,
that there was a greedy prelate in Ireland who was capable of imposing
on his people anything he might say, and, being straitened for money,
and in hope that he might obtain assistance from them, he made known
to them that, within a few years, Patrick and Peter had been
contending with each other concerning an Irish galloglass[69] whom
Patrick wanted to have admitted into the kingdom of Heaven, and that
Peter became angry, and with that he struck Patrick on the head with
the key of Heaven, so that he broke his pate, and Campion says that
the prelate obtained a subsidy by this story. My answer to him here is,
that he is like a player who would be recounting jeering stories on a
platform rather than an historian. For, how could it be possible that
any Christian who was in Ireland would believe that Patrick's crown
could be broken, and he having died more than a thousand years before:
and moreover, as everybody knows, that it is a key of authority Peter
had, and not an iron key by which any headpiece could be broken.
Wherefore I think it was a silly lie Campion invented in making up
this thing about the Irish; and orasmuch as he admits himself in the
epistle he writes at the beginning of his book, that he spent but ten
weeks in writing the history of Ireland, I think that it is not worth
making areply to any more of his lies.

Here is the testimony which Mr. Good, an English priest who was
directing a school in Limerick, gives concerning the Irish in the year
of the Lord fifteen hundred and sixty-six:-- "A nation this, (he says)
which is strong of body, and active, which has a high vigorous mind,
an acute intellect, which is warlike, lavish of its substance, which
is gifted with endurance of labour, cold, and hunger, which has an
amorous turn, which is most kind towards guests, steadfast in love,
implacable in enmity, which is credulous, greedy of obtaining renown,
impatient of enduring insult or injustice."[70] Here is also the
testimony which Stanihurst gives of them:-- "A people much enduring in
labours, beyond every race of men, and it is seldom they are cast down
in difficulties."[71]

Spenser says that it was from the Irish the Saxons first received the
alphabet, and, according to that, the Saxons had no knowledge whatever
of literature till they acquired it from Irishmen.

VIII.

John Davies finds fault with the legal system of the country, because,
as he thinks, there are three evil customs in it. The first custom of
these is that the tanist[72] takes precedence of the son of the lord
of the soil. The second custom is the division which was made on the
land between brethren, which the Galls call 'gavalkind,'[73] where a 
subdivision of the land is made between the kinsmen. The third custom
is to take 'eric'[74] for the slaying of man. My answer in this matter
is, that there is not a country in the world in which a change is not
made in statutes and customs, according as the condition of the
country alters. For, those customs were not sanctioned in the law of
the land until the Irish had entered upon war and conflict between
every two of their territories, so that they were usually slaying,
harrying, and plundering each other: and as it was apparent to the
nobles of Ireland, and to their 'ollavs,'[75] the damage which ensued
from the disunion among the inhabitants, they deemed it expedient to
ordain those three customs.

In the first place, they understood that the 'tanistry'[76] was
suitable in order that there should be an efficient captain
safeguarding the people of every district in Ireland, by defending
their spoils and their goods for them. For, if it were the son should
be there, instead of the father, it might happen, occasionally, for
the son to be in his minority, and so that he would not be capable of
defending his own territory, and that detriment would result to the
country from that circumstance. Neither was it possible to dispense
with the second custom obtaining in Ireland at that time, that is to
say, to have fraternal partnership in the land. For, the rent of the
district would not equal the hire which would fall to the number of
troops who would defend it: whereas, when the territory became divided
among the associated brethren, the kinsman who had the least share of
it would be as ready in its defence, to the best of his ability, as
the tribal chief who was over them would be. No more was it possible
to avoid having the 'eric' established at this time: for, if any one
slew a man then, he would find protection in the territory nearest to
him, and since it was not in the power of the friends of him who was
slain to exact vengeance or satisfaction from him who did the deed,
they would sue his kin for the crime, as punishment on the slayer; and
inasmuch as his kin had no privity of the slaying, it would not be
lawful to shed their blood; nevertheless, a fine was imposed on them
as punishment for him who had committed the crime, and I notice the
same custom obtaining among the Galls now, where the 'kin-cogaish'[77]
is adopted by them. Indeed, 'eric' and 'kin-cogaish' are alike; for
'cion' and 'coir,' (i.e. a crime) are equal, and 'comghas' and 'gaol,'
(i.e. kinship) are equal, and what 'kin-cogaish' signifies is to exact
a tax or payment in 'eric' or honour-price[78] for the hurt or the
loss which anyone causes (though it be slaying or other evil deed),
from his friend or from his kindred; and I perceive that the Galls
keep up that system now, since the 'kin-cogaish' is adopted by them.
Wherefore, it is not honest in John Davies to find fault with the
native jurisprudence because of it; and, as far as regards the other
two customs, there was no way of doing without them in Ireland when
they were appointed, and, therefore, the native law of the land should
not be censured on their account. For, though they are not suitable
for Ireland now, they were necessary at the time they were established.

Camden says it is a system among the Irish for their nobles to have
lawgivers, physicians, antiquaries, poets, and musicians, and for
endowments to be bestowed on them, and also their persons, lands, and
property to enjoy immunity. Here is what he says, speaking of them:
"These princes (he says) have their own lawgivers, whom they call
'brehons,'[79] their historians for writing their actions, their
physicians, their poets, whom they name 'bards,' and their singing men,
and land appointed to each one of these, and each of them dwelling on
his own land, and, moreover, every one of them of a certain family
apart; that is to say, the judges of one special tribe and surname,
the antiquaries or historians of another tribe and surname, and so to
each one from that out, they bring up their children and their
kinsfolk, each one of them in his own art, and there are always
successors of themselves in these arts "[80]

From these words of Camden it is clear that the order is good which
the Irish had laid down for preserving these arts in Ireland from time
to time. For they assigned professional lands to each tribe of them,
in order that they might have sustenance for themselves for the
cultivation of the arts, that poverty should not turn them away; and,
moreover, it is the most proficient individual of one tribe or the
other who would obtain the professorship of the prince of the land
which he held; and it used to result from that that every one of them
would make his best efforts to be well versed in his own art in hope
of obtaining the professorship in preference to the rest of his tribe:
and it is thus it is done beyond the sea now by many who go to obtain
(college) chairs in consideration of their learning. It was all the
more possible to preserve these arts, as the nobility of Ireland had
appointed that the land, the persons and the property of the
'ollavs'[81] should enjoy security and protection; for when the native
Irish and the foreigners would be contending with each other, they
should not cause trouble or annoyance to the professors, or to the
pupils who were with them for instruction, hindering them from
cultivating the arts. It is read in Julius Cæsar, in the sixth book of
his history, that the 'druids'[82] who came from the west of Europe to
direct schools in France enjoyed a similar immunity, and I think that
it was from Ireland they brought that custom with them.

IX

The refutation of these new foreign writers need not be pursued by us
any further, although there are many things they insert in their
histories which it would be possible to confute; because, as to the
most part of what they write disparagingly of Ireland, they have no
authority for writing it but repeating the tales of false witnesses
who were hostile to Ireland, and ignorant of her history: for it is
certain that the learned men who were conversant with antiquity in
Ireland did not undertake to enlighten them in it, and, so, it was not
possible for them to have knowledge of the history and ancient state
of Ireland. And Cambrensis, who undertook to supply warrant for
everything, it is likely in his case that it was a blind man or a
blockhead who gave him such a shower of fabulous information, so that
he has left the invasion of the Tuatha Dé Danann without making
mention of it, although they were three years short of two hundred in
the headship of Ireland, and that there were nine kings of them in the
sovereignty of Ireland: and (yet) he had recounted the first invasion
of Ireland, although it were only the invasion of Ceasair, and that
the antiquaries do not regard it for certain as an invasion,
notwithstanding that it is mentioned by them in their books. Truly I
think that he took no interest in investigating the antiquity of
Ireland, but that the reason why he set about writing of Ireland is to
give false testimony concerning her people during his own time, and
their ancestors before them: and, besides, it was but brief
opportunity he had for research on the history of Ireland, since he
spent but a year and a half at it before going (back) to England; and
his history not being finished (in that time), he left a half year's
portion wanting (to be completed) of it under the care of a companion
of his, named Bertram Verdon.

Wherefore, I have hope that whatsoever impartial reader shall read
every refutation which I make on Cambrensis, and on these new
foreigners who follow his track, will trust the refutation I make on
their lies rather than the story-telling they all do, for I am old,
and a number of these were young; I have seen and I understand the
chief historical books, and they did not see them, and if they had
seen them, they would not have understood them. It is not for hatred
nor for love of any set of people beyond another, nor at the
instigation of anyone, nor with the expectation of obtaining profit
from it, that I set forth to write the history of Ireland, but because
I deemed it was not fitting that a country so honourable as Ireland,
and races so noble as those who have inhabited it, should go into
oblivion without mention or narration being left of them: and I think
that my estimate in the account I give concerning the Irish ought the
rather to be accepted, because it is of the Gaels I chiefly treat.
Whoever thinks it much I say for them, it is not to be considered that
I should deliver judgment through favour, giving them much praise
beyond what they have deserved, being myself of the old Galls as
regards my origin.

If, indeed it be that the soil is commended by every historian who
writes on Ireland, the race is dispraised by every new foreign
historian who writes about it, and it is by that I was incited to
write this history concerning the Irish, owing to the extent of the
pity I felt at the manifest injustice which is done to them by those
writers. If only indeed they had given their proper estimate to the
Irish, I know not why they should not put them in comparison with any
nation in Europe in three things, namely, in valour, in learning, and
in being steadfast in the Catholic faith: and forasmuch as regards the
saints of Ireland, it needs not to boast what a multitude they were,
because the foreign authors of Europe admit this, and they state that
Ireland was more prolific in saints than any country in Europe; and,
moreover, they admit that the dominion of learning in Ireland was so
productive, that she sent forth from her learned companies to France,
to Italy, to Germany, to Flanders, to England, and to Scotland, as is
clear from the introduction to the book in which were written in
English lives of Patrick, Columcille, and Brigid: and forasmuch as
concerns the ancient history of Ireland, it may be assumed that it was
authoritative, because it used to be revised at the assembly[83] of
Tara[84] every third year, in presence of the nobility, the clergy,
and the learned of Ireland; and since the Irish received the faith, it
has been placed under the sanction of the prelates of the Church.
These chief books following which are still to be seen, will testify
to this; namely, the Book of Armagh;[85] the 'Saltair'[86] of
Cashel,[87] which holy Cormac, son of Cuileannan, king of the two
provinces,of Munster and archbishop of Cashel, wrote; the Book of
Uachongbháil;[88] the Book of Cluaineidhneach[89] of Fionntan in
Leix;[90] the Saltair na rann,[91] which Aonghus the 'Culdee'[92]
wrote; the Book of Glendaloch;[93] the Book of Rights, which holy
Benen, son of Sesgnen wrote; the 'Uidhir'[94] of Ciaran, which was
written in Clonmacnois;[95] the Yellow Book of Moling, and the Black
Book of Molaga. Here follows a summary of the books which were written
in those,[96] namely, the book of Invasion, the book of the Provinces,
the Roll of Kings, the book of tribes,[97] the book of
synchronism,[98] the the book of famous places,[99] the book of
remarkable women, the book which was called 'Cóir anmann';[100] the
book which was called 'Uraicheapt,'[101] which Ceannfaolaidh the
learned wrote, and the book which is called the 'Amhra'[102] of
Columcille, which Dallan Forgaill wrote shortly after the death of
Columcille. There are yet to be seen in Ireland many other histories,
besides the chief books which we have mentioned, in which there is
much of ancient record to be discovered, such as the battle of Magh
Muccraimhe, the siege of Druim Damhghaire, the fates of the knights,
the battle of Crionna, the battle of Fionnchoradh, the battle of Ros-
na-Ríogh, the battle of Magh Léana, the battle of Magh Rath, the
battle of Magh Tualaing, and many other histories which we shall not
mention here. Furthermore, the historical record of Ireland should be
considered as authoritative, the rather that there were over two
hundred professors of history[103] keeping the ancient record of
Ireland, and every one of them having a subsidy from the nobles of
Ireland on that account, and having the revision of the nobility and
clergy from time to time. Because of its antiquity, likewise, it is
the more worthy of trust, and, also, that it has not suffered
interruption or suppression from the violence of strangers. For,
notwithstanding that the Norsemen had been troubling Ireland for a
period, there were such a number of learned men keeping the ancient
record that the historical compilation was preserved, even though many
books fell into the hands of the Norsemen. Howbeit, it is not thus
with other European countries, because the Romans, Gauls, Goths,
Vandals, Saxons, Saracens, Moors, and Danes destroyed their old
records in every inroad (of their kings) which they made upon them:
yet, it fell not to any of these to plunder Ireland, according to
Cambrensis, in the forty-sixth chapter, where he says, speaking of
Ireland: "Ireland was, from the beginning, free from incursion of any
foreign nation."[104] From this it may be understood that Ireland was
free from the invasion of enemies by which her ancient history and her
former transactions would be extinguished; and it is not so with any
other country in Europe. Wherefore I think that it is more fitting to
rely on the history of Ireland than on the history of any other
country in Europe, and, moreover, as it has been expurgated by Patrick,
and by the holy clergy of Ireland, from time to time.

Understand, nevertheless, O reader, that I have made a change in the
computation of the years which are stated to have been in the reign of
a few of the pagan kings of Ireland apart from how it is set down in
the Roll of Kings, and in the poems which have been composed on them;
and the reason I have for that is, that I find them not agreeing with
the enumeration of the epochs from Adam to the birth of Christ,
according to any reputable foreign author. I have, besides, another
reason, that it seems to me that an undue number of years is assigned
to some of them, such as Síorna the long-lived to whom three fifties
of years are attributed, and that we may read in the old book of
Invasion that Síorna was an hundred years old before he assumed the
sovereignty of Ireland, and if I set down his being thrice fifty years
in the sovereignty, I would not be believed. Wherefore I give him one
and twenty years, according to the verse which is in his reign, which
gives to Síorna but a year and twenty, as will be clear to the reader.
They allow fifty years of reign to Cobhthach 'Caolmbreágh,' although
there should be given to him but thirty: for Moiriath, daughter of
Scoiriath, king of Corca Duibhne, loved Maon, who was called Labhra
'loingseach,' he being then in exile in her father's house, he a youth
and she a young maiden; and, after he had returned to Ireland from his
exile, and after the slaying of Cobhthach, it is she who became wife
to him, and bore him children. Wherefore, if I were to give fifty
years of reign to Cobhthach, she would be three-score years, when she
bore children to Labhra the navigator, and since this cannot be true,
Cobhthach cannot have been in the sovereignty fifty years. Also, for
other reasons, I make a change in the number of years of the reign of
a few of the kings of Ireland before the Faith: but I think it was not
through the ignorance of the antiquaries this change became necessary,
but through the ignorance of some people who copied after them, who
had no skill save only to practise the art of writing: because, since
the time the suzerainty of Ireland passed to the Galls, the Irish have
abandoned making the revision which was customary with them every
third year of the ancient record, and so the professors of archæology
have neglected its purification, having lost the immunity and the
emolument which it was customary with them to obtain from the Gaels in
regard of preserving the ancient record; and because, moreover, there
has been continual dissension between Galls and Gaels in Ireland, by
which unrest was caused to the professors -- preventing them from
revising and purifying the record from time to time.

And if any one be surprised at the discrepancy which exists among some
of the authors of our ancient record as to the calculation of time
from Adam to the birth of Christ, it is no cause for wonder, seeing
that there are few of the standard authors of all Europe who agree
together in the computation of the same time. Let us take as witness
of this, the disagreement which these chief authors following make
with each other:

In the first place, of the Hebrew authors:-Baalsederhelm, 3518: the
Talmudists, 3784: the New Rabbis, 3760: Rabbi Nahsson, 3740: Rabbi
Levi, 3786: Rabbi Moses, 4058: Josephus, 4192.

Of the Greek authors:-
Metrodorus, 5000: Eusebius, 5190: Theophilus, 5476.

Of the Latin authors:- St. Jerome, 3941: St. Augustine, 5351: Isidore,
5270: Orosius, 5199: Bede, 3952: Alphonsus, 5984.

Here is the reckoning of the twelve men and three score[105] on the
four first ages of the world, together with the calculation which the
wise learned men who have followed them in the direct track have given
on the epochs from the creation of the world to the birth of Christ,
dividing them into five parts, i.e. from Adam to the deluge, 2242,
from the deluge to Abraham, 942, from Abraham to David 940, from David
to the captivity of Babylon, 485, from the captivity to the birth of
Christ, 590:-- Sum, 5199: it is why the authorities who follow the
seventy-two men place the fifth period as their own time, because it
is thus this era is completed, 5199, from the creation of Adam to the
birth of Christ: and it is to the authors who follow the seventy-two
men in the four first periods, i.e. Eusebius, who counts in his
history from the creation of the world to the birth of Christ, 5199;
Orosius, in the first chapter of his first book, says that there are
from Adam to Abraham, 3184, and from Abraham to the birth of Christ,
2015; and the sum of both is 5199. St. Jerome says, in his epistle to
Titus, that six thousand years of the age of the world had not been
completed to the birth of Christ. St. Augustine, too, says, in the
tenth chapter of the twelfth book 'de civitate Dei,' that six thousand
years are not computed from the creation of the world to the birth of
Christ. Let both be set on that part that they agree with these
calculators, in the number of the count from the creation of the world
to the birth of Christ nineteen years on four score, on one hundred,
on five thousand. Another proof of the same computation is the Roman
Martyrology, which declares the total of these epochs, from the
creation of Adam to the birth of Christ, five thousand, one hundred,
ninety and nine.

And since these chief authorities agree not with each other in the
computation of the time which is from Adam to the birth of Christ, it
is no wonder that there should be discrepancy among some of the
antiquaries of Ireland about the same calculation. However, I have not
found among them a computation I rather think to be accurate than the
numbering which some of them make four thousand, fifty and two years,
for the time from Adam to the birth of Christ; and (it is) what I
desire is to follow the standard author who comes nearest to this
reckoning in the synchronism of the sovereigns, of the epochs, of the
popes, and of the general councils at the end of the book in their own
proper places.

If anyone should charge it upon me as a strange thing wherefore I give
many verses as evidence for the history out of the old record, my
answer to him is that my reason for that is, that the authors of the
ancient record framed the entire historical compilation in poems, in
order that thereby the less change should be made in the record; and
also, that in this manner, it might the more be committed to memory by
the students who were attending them: for it is through being in verse
metre the saltair[106] of Tara was called to the chief book which was
in the custody of the king of Ireland's own professors, and the
'saltair' of Cashel to the chronicle of Cormac, son of Cuileannan, and
the 'saltair' of the verses' to the record of Aonghus the
'culdee'[107]: for, as psalm' and 'duan' (poem) or 'dán' (song) are
alike, equal are 'saltair' or 'psalterium' and 'duanaire,'[108] in
which there would be many poems or songs: and forasmuch as in the
poems are the bone and marrow of the ancient record, I think that it
is expedient for me to rely on it as authority in treating of the
history. Therefore I have often said, in opposing the authors who have
been refuted by us, that the ancient record was against them, because
I considered that the record which was common and had been frequently
revised, had more of authority, as we have said, than any one solitary
author of those who are in the history.

Some people profess astonishment how it should be possible to trace to
Adam the origin of any man. My answer to that is, that it was easy for
the Gaels to keep themselves (traced) even to Adam, because they had,
from the time of Gaedheal down, 'druids' who used to preserve their
generations of descent and their transactions in every expedition (of
all) that befel them up to reaching Ireland, as is clear from the
history following: and, moreover, they had an affection for science,
insomuch that it was owing to his learning Níul, the father of
Gaedheal, obtained every possession he got; and also the length the
Gaels have been without change in the possession of one and the same
country, and the excellence of the order they laid down for the
preservation of the record, as we have said. Here follows an example
from a British author, where he gives the pedigree to Adam of a king
who was over Britain, from which the reader will allow that it was
possible for the Gaels to do the same thing; and the author's name is
Assher: here is the name of that king -- Aelfred, son of Aethelwulf,
son of Egbert, son of Etalmund, son of Eafa, son of Eowua, son of
Ingeld, son of Coenred, son of Coelwald, son of Cudam, son of Cutwin,
son of Ceawlin, son of Cenric, son of Creoda, son of Cerdic, son of
Elesa, son of Gelwus, son of Brond, son of Beld, son of Woden, son of
Fritilwald, son of Frealaf, son of Fritilwulf, son of Fingodwulf, son
of Gead, son of Caetwa, son of Beawua, son of Sceldwa, son of Eremod,
son of Itermod, son of Atra, son of Hwala, son of Bedug, son of Japhet,
son of Noah, &c., &c.

Here is a vindication or defensive introduction to the groundwork of
knowledge on Ireland, in which is a compendium of the history of
Ireland briefly: which has been gathered and collected from the chief
books of the history of Ireland, and from a good many trustworthy
foreign authors by Geoffrey Keating, priest and doctor of divinity, in
which is a brief summary of the principal transactions of Ireland from
Partholón to the Norman invasion: and whoever shall desire to write
fully and comprehensively on Ireland hereafter, he will find, in the
same ancient books, many things desirable to write of her which have
been purposely omitted here, lest, putting these all in one work,
thereby this compilation should less likely come to light from the
greatness of the labour of putting them in one writing.

The history is divided into two books: the first book makes known the
condition of Ireland from Adam to the coming of Patrick into Ireland;
the second book from the coming of Patrick to the invasion of the
Galls, or down to this time.

I think that there is not a reader, impartial and open to conviction,
whom it concerns to make a scrutiny into the antiquity of Ireland, but
such as will be pleased with what we have said in this introduction:
and if it should happen that he deems insufficient every explanation 
which I have given, it is beyond my ability he would go. Wherefore, I
take leave of him, and let him excuse me, if it happen to me to go out
of the way in anything I may say in this book, for if there be
anything blameworthy in it, it is not from malice it is there, but
from want of knowledge.

Your ever faithful poor friend till death,

GEOFFREY KEATING.



BOOK I.
SECTION I.

HERE (I proceed to write) of the history[109] of Ireland,[110] and of
every name that was given to it, and of every division that was made
of it, and of every invasion that was made of it, and of every people
who took it, and of every famous deed which was done in it during the
time of each high-king who was over it at any time from the beginning
to this time, as many of them as I have found to publish.

In the first place, we shall set down every name that was at any time
on Ireland.

The first name which was given to Ireland was 'Inis na bhfiodhbhadh,'
that is to say Island of the woods; and the person who called that
name to it was a warrior of the people of Nin, son of Bel, who came
from him to spy out Ireland, and on his coming thither he found it to
be all one forest-wood, except Magh-n-ealta[111] alone. Three times,
indeed, Ireland was one continuous wood, according to this old saying,
which is in the ancient record: "Three times Éire put three coverings
and three barenesses off her."

The second name was 'Crioch na bhfuineadhach,'[112] from its being at
the limit or end of the three divisions of the world which had then
been discovered; 'fuin' indeed, from the Latin word 'finis,' being
equivalent to 'end.'

The third name was Inis Ealga,' that is, noble island; for 'inis' and
'oiléan' are equivalent, and likewise 'ealga' and 'uasal': and it is
during the time of the Firbolg it was usual to have that name on it.

The fourth name was Éire, and it is said that wherefore that name is
called to it, according to a certain author, is from this word
'Aeria,' which was an old name for the island which is now called
Creta or Candia; and why that author thinks that is because the
posterity of Gaedheal glas[113] dwelt in that island some space of
time after Sru, son of Easru, son of Gaedheal, had been driven out of
Egypt: and, moreover, Aere is given as a name for Egypt whence the
Gael proceeded. However, it is the common opinion of antiquaries that
why it is called Éire is from the name of the queen of the Tuatha Dé
Danann who was in the land at the time of the coming of the Clanna
Míleadh[114] into it: Éire, daughter of Dealbhaoth, was her name, and
it is she was wife to Mac Gréine who was called Ceathúr who was king
of Ireland when the sons of Míleadh came into it.

The fifth name was Fódhla, from a queen of the Tuatha Dé Danann, who
was called Fódhla: it is she was wife to Mac Cécht, whose proper name
was Teathúr

The sixth name was Banbha, from a queen of the Tuatha Dé Danann, that
was in the land, who was called Banbha: it is she was wife to Mac
Cuill, whose proper name was Eathúr. These three kings held the
sovereignty of Ireland each year by turns; and it is the name of the
wife of each one of them would be on the island the year he was
himself king. It is why the island is called Éire oftener than Fódhla
or Banbha, because that is the husband of the woman whose name was
Éire was king the year the sons of Míleadh came there.

The seventh name was Inis Fáil; and it is the Tuatha Dé Danann gave
that name to it, from a stone they brought with them into it, which
was called the Lia Fáil: and 'Saxum fatale,' i.e. 'Stone of Destiny,'
Hector Bocce calls it in the history of Scotland;[115] and it was a
stone on which were enchantments,[116] for it used to roar under the
person who had the best right to obtain the sovereignty of Ireland at
the time of the men of Ireland being in assembly at Tara[117] to
choose a king over them. However, it has not roared from the time of
Conchubhar forward, for the false images of the world were silenced
when Christ was born. Here is a verse of quotation proving that it is
from this stone Ireland is called Inis Fáil, as Cionaoth[118] the poet
said:-

The stone which is under my two heels, from it is named Inisfail;
Between two shores of a mighty flood, the plain of Fál on all Ireland.

The eighth name was Muicinis; and it is the children of Míleadh who
gave it that name before they arrived in it. When, indeed, they had
come to the mouth of Innbhear Sláinghe which to-day is called the
haven of Lochgarman,[119] the Tuatha Dé Danann, with their druids,
assembled to oppose them there, and they practised magic on them, so
that the island was not visible to them but in the likeness of a pig,
so it is, therefore, they gave (the name) Muicinis[120] to Ireland.

The ninth name was Scotia; and it is the sons of Míleadh who gave that
name to it, from their mother, whose name was Scota, daughter of
Pharao Nectonibus; or it is why they called it Scotia, because that
they are themselves the Scottish race from Scythia.[121]

The tenth name was Hibernia; and it is the sons of Míleadh gave that
name to it. However, it is said that it is from a river that is in
Spain which is called Iberus[122] (the name) Hibernia is given to it.
It is said also that it is from Éibhear,[123] son of Míleadh, it is
called Hibernia; but, however, holy Cormac, son of Cuileannan, says,
that why it is called Hibernia is from this compound Greek word
'hiberoc' (i.e. 'occasus' in Latin) and 'nyaon' (i.e. 'insula'); that
is equivalent to saying 'insula occidentalis,' i.e.' western island.'

The eleventh name was Iuernia, according to Ptolemy, or Iuerna,
according to Solinus, or Ierna according to Claudian, or Vernia
according to Eustatius. I think there is no meaning in the difference
which is between these authors concerning this word Hibernia, but that
they did not understand whence came the word itself; and, accordingly,
that each one of them separately gave a guess from himself at it, so
that from that came this variation on the word.

The twelfth name was Irin, according to Diodorus Siculus.

The thirteenth name was Irlanda; and I think that the reason why that
name was given to it is, because that it was Ir, son of Míleadh, was
the first man of the Clanna Míleadh who was buried under the soil of
Ireland, and accordingly, the island was named from him: 'Irlanda' and
'land of Ir' being indeed equivalent, for 'land' in English, and
'fonn' or 'fearann' in Gaelic are alike. The truth of this thing is
the more admissible, since the book of Armagh says that a name for
this island is Ireo, that is to say, the grave[124] of Ir, because
that it is there is the sepulchre or grave of Ir.

The fourteenth name was Ogygia, according to Plutarch: indeed,
'Ogygia' in Greek and 'insula perantiqua,' i.e. 'most ancient island,'
are equivalent; and that is a suitable name for Ireland, because that
it is long since it was first inhabited, and that perfect is the sound
information which its antiquaries possess on the transactions of their
ancestors from the beginning of eras, one after another.



SECTION II.
Here follows every division which was made on Ireland.

The first division, it is Partholón who divided it into four parts
among his four sons, whose names were Er, Orba, Fearon, and Feargna.
He gave the first part to Er, namely, all that is from Aileach
Néid[125] in the north of Ulster to Athcliath of Leinster.[126] He
gave the second part to Orba, namely, all that is from Athcliath to
Oiléan Arda Neimheadh, which is called Oiléan Mór an Bharraigh.[127]
He gave the third part to Fearon, from the Great Island to Athcliath
Meadhruidhe[128] at Galway.[129] He gave the fourth part to Feargna,
namely, from Meadhruidhe to Aileach Néid.

The second division, that is, the division of the children of
Neimheadh. Three leaders of the children of Neimheadh divided Ireland
among them into three parts:-- Beothach, Simeon, and Briotán their
names. Beothach takes from Tóirinis[130] to the Boyne.[131] Simeon
takes from the Boyne to Bealach Chonglais near to Cork. Briotán takes
from Bealach Chonglais to Tóirinis in the north of Connacht.

The third division here, i.e. the division of the Firbolg. The five
sons of Deala, son of Loch, divided Ireland into five parts among them,
and it is those are called the five provinces, and it is that is the
division which is the most permanent that was ever made in Ireland, as
we shall shortly hereafter relate. Cambrensis agrees with this
division in the book he wrote of an account of Ireland, where he
says:-- "In five parts, indeed, almost equal, (he says), this country
was anciently divided, which are, the two Munsters, north Munster and
south Munster, Leinster,[132] Ulster, and Connacht."[133] Here are the
five leaders of the Firbolg who took the headship of those five
provinces: Sláinge Seangann, Gann, Geanann, and Rughruidhe.[134]
Sláinge took the province of Leinster, from Droicheadátha[135] to
Cumar-na-dtrí-n-uisge;[136] Gann takes the province of Eochaidh
Abhradhruaidh, from Cumar-na-dtri-n-uisge to Bealach Chonglais[137]:
Seangann takes the province of Cúraoi, son of Dáire, from Bealach
Chonglais to Luimneach; Geanann takes the province of Connacht from
Luimneach to Drobhaois[138]: Rughruidhe takes the province of Ulster
from Drobhaois to Droicheadátha"

Although some antiquaries hold that it is a tripartite division which
was on Ireland among the three sons of Cearmad Milbheoil of the Tuatha
Dé Danann, I do not think that they divided Ireland among them, but it
is my opinion that it is a permutation of the sovereignty each
succeeding year which they had between them, according as we have said
above, in showing why Éire is called to this country more frequently
than Fodhla or Banbha.

The fourth division, that is, the division of the children of Míleadh.
It is the opinion of some antiquaries that it is thus Ireland was
divided between Éibhear and Eireamhón:-- all that is from Athcliath
and from Gaillimh[138] southwards, and Eisgir riadha for a boundary
between them, to Éibhear; and what there is from that northwards to
Eireamhón. However, this is not the division which was made between
them, as we shall prove hereafter; but it is thus they divided
Ireland:-- the two provinces of Munster to Éibhear; the province of
Connacht and the province of Leinster to Eireamhón; and the province
of Ulster to Éibhear, son of Ir, i.e. their brother's son: and a party
of the nobles who had come with them, in the company of each one of
them in his own division of the country.

The fifth division, that is, the division of Cearmna and Sobhairce.
Cearmna and Sobhairce, indeed, in [two] halves between them, namely,
from Innbhear Colptha at Droicheadátha[139] to Luimneach Mumhan,[140]
and the half which was north to Sobhairce, and he built a fortress in
his own half, namely Dún Sobhairce.[141] Cearmna takes the southern
half, and he built a fortress beside the south sea, namely, Dún
Cearmna, which to-day is called Dún-mic-Padraic, in De Courcy's
country.

The sixth division, that is, the division of Ugaine Mór. Ugaine Mór
divides Ireland in twenty-five parts, among the five and twenty
children that he had, as we shall set down in the Roll of Kings.

The seventh division, namely, the division of Conn Céad-chathach[142]
and Mógh Nuadhat.[143] Conn and Mógh Nuadhat divided Ireland into
halves between them, that is to say, all that is from Gaillimh and
from Athcliath northwards, and Eisgir riadha for a boundary between
them to Conn: and it is from that came Leath Chuinn[144] to be given
to the side which was north; and Leath Mhógha[145] to Mógh Nuadhat;
and it is from that was given Leath Mhógha to the half which was south.

Notwithstanding, however, that I have set down in order these seven
divisions which were made of Ireland, according to the sequence of the
invasions and of the epochs, I shall return to the usual division
which is on Ireland from the time 	of the Firbolg apart, for it is
the most permanently established, namely, five provinces to be made of
it, as we have said. And it is where the common centre of these five
provinces was, at a pillar-stone which is in Uisneach,[146] until that
Tuathal Teachtmhar came into the sovereignty, and that he took away a
portion of each province as mensal land for every high-king who should
be in Ireland: so that it is of these Meath[147] was formed, as we
shall show in the reign of Tuathal.



SECTION III.
Of the subdivision of Meath and of the provinces here.

I shall now make the subdivision of Meath and of the provinces also;
and I shall give the beginning of this division to Meath until its
lands are described, because it is the mensal land of the king of
Ireland, according to the Gael, and that it used to be free, without
obligation, without control, without a tax from any one in Ireland,
except from the king of Ireland alone. Eighteen 'triochas'[148] the
extent of its land; thirty 'bailes'[149] in the 'triocha-céd' of them;
twelve 'seisreachs'[150] of land in the 'baile,' according to the
ancient record, and six score acres in the 'seisreach.' Three score
and three hundred 'seisreachs' of land in the 'triocha-céd'
accordingly.
eFour score and four hundred and six thousand 'seisreachs' of land in
all Meath, according to this computation. It is why it is called Meath,
because that it is from the neck[151] of each province Tuathal
Teachtmhar cut it. Or it is why Meath is called to it from Midhe, son
of Brath, son of Deaghfhath, chief druid of the children of Neimheadh;
and it is by him was kindled the first fire in Ireland, after the
coming of the children of Neimheadh; and hard by Uisneach he kindled
it. The children of Neimheadh bestowed on him the 'tuath'[152] of land
which was there, and from that druid it is called Midhe. And there was
not, about that time, of land in Meath, but the one 'tuath' aforesaid,
until Tuathal Teachtmhar put a 'meidhe' or neck of every province with
it, as we have said.

Of the boundary of Meath with the provinces here, as Tuathal
Teachtmhar ordained; i.e. as one goes from the Shannon[153] east to
Dublin,[154] from Dublin to the river Righe,[155] from the river Righe
west to Cluain-Connrach,[156] from Cluain-Connrach to Ath-an-mhuilinn-
Fhrancaigh,[157] and to the confluence of Cluain-Ioraird,[158] from
that to Tóchar Cairbre,[159] from Tóchar Cairbre to Crannach of
Géisill[160] to Druimchuilinn,[161] to Birr, to the river which is
called Abhainnchara[162] to the Shannon northwards, to Loch Ribh[163]
and all the islands belong to Meath: and the Shannon to Loch-Bó-
dearg,[164] from that to Maothail,[165] thence to Athluain,[166] 
thence to upper Sgairbh,[167] to Druimleathan,[168] till one reaches
the Magh,[169] to the confluence of Cluain-eois,[170] to Loch-dá-eun
to Magh Cnoghbha, to Duibhir, to Linn-átha-an-daill on Sliabh
Fuaid,[171] to Mághan-chosnamhaigh at Cillshléibhe,[172] to Snámh
Eugnachair, to Cumar, and from Cumar to Life:[173] as the ancient
writer says --

From Loch-bó-dearg to Biorra, from the Shannon east to the sea,
To the confluence of Cluain-ioraird, and to the confluence of Cluain-
airde.

Thirteen 'triochas' in the body of Meath itself, and five 'triochas'
in Breagh, as is said in these verses below --

Thirteen 'triochas' in Meath, as every poet says;
Five 'triochas' in rich Breagh's plain -- it is a memory with the
learned;
The territory of Meath I will tell to you, and the territory of Breagh
most pleasant,
From Shannon of the fair gardens to the sea -- we have known it --
The men of Teathbha[174] on the northern border, and Cairbre of bright
victory;
With abundance of bee-swarms and of oxen,(?) the men of Breagh[175]
(possess) as far as the Casan.[176]

Meath was divided after this by Aodh Oirdnidhe, king of Ireland,
between the two sons of Donnchadh son of Dómhnall (who was king of
Ireland before Aodh Oirdnidhe); Conchubhar[177] and Oilioll their
names. He gave the western half to one of them, and the eastern half
to the other man, so that that division adhered to it from that out:
and it is in it is the royal seat, Tara.[178]

Of the division of the province of Connacht[179] here.

The province of Connacht from Limerick[180] to Drobhaois: nine hundred
'bally-betaghs'[181] that are in it, and that is thirty 'triochas';
and thirty 'bailes' in each 'triocha-céd' of them, and twelve
'seisreachs' of land in the 'baile.' Six score acres in the
'seisreach': eight hundred and ten thousand 'seisreachs' of land in
all Connacht. It is why it is called Connacht: a contention of magic
which took place between two druids of the Tuatha Dé Danann,
Cithneallach and Conn their names. Conn brought a great snow round
about the province through art magic, so that from it was named
Connacht, i e. Conn's snow. Or it is why it is called Connacht, i.e.
Conn-iochta, namely, the children of Conn, for 'iocht' and 
'clann'[182] are equivalent: and because that they are the children of
Conn who inhabited the province, that is to say, the race of Eochaidh
Moighmheadhón they are called Connachta.[183] Eochaidh Feidhleach
divides the province of Connacht in three parts among three. He gave
to Fidheach, son of Fiach, of the men of the Craobh, from Fidhic to
Limerick. He gave to Eochaidh Alath, Iorras Domhnann,[184] from Galway
to Dubh and to Drobhaois. He gave to Tinne, son of Connrach, Magh
Sainbh, and the old districts of Taoidhe from Fidhic to Teamhair
brogha-niadh: it is Cruachan[185] was its royal seat.

Of the division of the province of Ulster here.

The province of Ulster from Drobhaois[186] to Innbhear Cholptha,[187]
five and thirty 'triochas '; or six and thirty that are in it. Nine
score and nine hundred 'Bally-betaghs' in it. Three score nine hundred
and twelve thousand 'seisreachs' of land in all this province. It is
why they are called Ulaidh,[188] from this word 'oll-sháith,' i.e.
great plenty, signifying that Ulster is very rich with regard to fish
and cattle. This verse testifies that sáith and ionnmhas (treasure)
are equivalent:--

Wednesday Judas transgressed his order, following demons vengeful-
fierce;
Wednesday he became eager for treasure; Wednesday he betrayed Jesus the
exalted.

Or it is wherefore they are called Ulaidh, from Ollamh Fodhla, son of
Fiachaidh Fionnscothach, as this verse certifies

Ollamh Fodhla of prudent valour, from him were named (the) Ulaidh,
After the real assembly of Tara of the tribes, it is by him it was
first appointed.

And Eamhain Mácha[188] and Aileach Néid[190] its royal seats.

Of the division of the province of Leinster here.

The province of Leinster from the strand of Innbhear Cholptha to
Cumar-na-dtrí-n-uisge, thirty-one 'triochas' in it. Nine hundred and
thirty 'ballybetaghs' that: eleven thousand one hundred and sixty
'seisreachs' in this whole province. It is why they are called
Laighin,[191] from the broad green spears which the Dubh-Ghaill[192]
brought with them into Ireland, when they came with Labhraidh
Loingseach: laighean and sleagh are, indeed, equivalent. And because
that these spears had flat broad heads to them, it is from them the
province was named. After the slaying of Cobhthach Caoilbhreágh king
of Ireland in Dionnriogh, Leinster took its appellation. It is to show
that it is from these spears Leinster was named, that this verse was
made:--

Two hundred and twenty hundred Galls,[193] with broad spears with them
hither; From those spears, without blemish, of them the Laighin were
named.

Two chief seats were indeed in Leinster, in which its kings used to
reside, namely Dionnríogh[194] and Nás.[195]

Of the division of the province of Eochaidh Abhradhruaidh here.

The province of Eochaidh Abhradhruaidh,[196] from Cork[197] and from
Limerick east to Cumar-na-dtrí-n-uisge; thirty-five 'triochas' in it.
Ten ['ballys'] seven score and nine hundred 'bally-betaghs' that are
in it. Six hundred and twelve thousand 'seisreachs' of land that are
in east Munster. Two royal seats of residence the kings of this
province had, namely, Dún gCrot and Dún Iasgaigh.[198]

Of the division of the province of Cúraoi son of Mire here.

The province of Cúraoi son of Dáire from Bealach Chonglais[199] to
Limerick, and from Limerick west to the western land of Ireland.
Thirty-five 'triochas' in it: one thousand and fifty 'bally-betaghs'
in that. Twelve thousand six hundred 'seisreachs' of land that are in
west Munster. Two royal seats of residence the kings of this province
anciently had, namely, Dún gCláire[200] and Dún Eochair Mhaighe.[201]

There were two races who used to be in possession of these two
provinces of Munster, that is to say, the race of Dáirfhine and the
race of Deirgthine, up to the time of Oilioll Ólom of the race of
Deirgthine who took the chieftaincy of the two provinces, having
banished from Ireland Mac Con, who was of the race of Dáirfhine. And
he left the chieftaincy of the two provinces with his own posterity
from that out: by way of alternation to be with the race of Eoghan mór
son of Oilioll Ólom, and with the race of Cormac Cas (second son of
Oilioll Ólom), every generation by turns, in the sovereignty of the
two provinces of Munster.

It is the four royal seats aforesaid which were the chief mansions of
residence for the kings of these two provinces till the time of Corc,
son of Lughaidh,[202] being in the sovereignty of Munster. For it is
during his time Cashel became known first; and Siothdhruim was the
name for the place which to-day is called the Rock of Cashel. The same
place used also to be called Leac na gcéad and Druim
Fiodhbhuidhe,[203] for there were many woods round about that ridge in
the time of Corc. There came, however, about that time, two swineherds
to feed their hogs among the woods of this ridge, namely the swineherd
of the king of Éile, Ciolarn his name, and the swineherd of the king
of Musgraidhe-tire,, which is called Ur-Mhumha,[204] Duirdre his name.
They were occupying the hill during a quarter, till there was shown to
them a figure which was as bright as the sun, and which was sweeter
(of voice) than any music they had ever heard, and it blessing the
hill and the place, and foretelling Patrick to come there. And the
figure that was there was Victor, Patrick's own angel. After the
swineherds had returned back to their houses, they make known this
thing to their own lords. These stories having reached Corc, son of
Lughaidh, he comes without delay to Síothdhruim, and he built a
fortress there which was called Lios-na-laochraidhe[205]; and on his
becoming king of Munster, it is on the rock which is now called
Carraig Phádraic he used to receive his royal rent. It is hence that
rock is called Caiseal, for Caiseal and Cíosáil are equivalent: áil,
indeed, a name for a rock; so that, therefore, that place is called
Caiseal, i.e. tribute rock.

Here is an assurance on this matter, from the poem which has beginning
-- 'Cashel, city of the clans of Mogha,' which Ua Dubhagáin composed:-
-

Corc, son of Lughaidh, warrior-like the man, first man who sat in
Cashel;
Under a thick mist was the place, till the two herdsmen found it.
The swineherd of the king of Muskerry of the gold, (?) Duirdre his name
and it is not wrong;
And Ciolarn through the plain of rue (?), swineherd of the worthy king
of Éile.
It is they who got knowledge of the place at first in Druim
Fiodhbhuidhe.
Druim Fiodhbhuidhe without fault with you, most dear to Core of Cashel.

Of the subdivision of Munster here.

The race of Oilioll Ólom having acquired the two provinces of Munster,
they divided them into five parts, which are called the five Munsters.
The first part which is called North Munster,[206] its length is from
Léim Chongculainn[207] to Slighe Dala, i.e. the great road in
Osraidhe,[208] and its breadth from Sliabh Eichtge[209] to Sliabh
Eibhlinne.[210] And notwithstanding that all that is from Sliabh
Eichtge to Limerick was in the ancient division of Connacht, yet
Lughaidh Meann, son of Aonghus Tíreach, son of Fear Corb,son of Mogh
Corb, son of Cormac Cas, son of Oilioll Ólom, made sword-land of all
that is from Eichtge to Limerick, and from the Shannon west to Léim
Chongculainn, so that he annexed it[211] to Munster: and the name it
was usually called was the rough land of Lughaidh, and the Dal
gCais[212] had it free without rent, without taxing, from the kings of
Ireland. The second part East Munster,[213] its length is from
Gabhran[214] to Cnamhchoill[215] near Tipperary,[216] and its breadth
from Béarnan Éile[217] to Oiléan O'Bric.[218] The third part, namely,
Middle Munster,[219] its length is from Cnámhchoill to Luachair
Dheaghaidh,[220] and its breadth from Sliabh Eibhlinne to Sliabh
Caoin.[221] The fourth part South Munster,[222] its length is from
Sliabh Caoin to the sea southwards. The fifth part West Munster,[223]
its length is from Luachair Dheaghaidh to the sea west, and its
breadth from Gleann Ua-Ruachta[224] to the Shannon.
         According to Breasal Ua Treasaigh, when Munster was divided into
its five parts, there were five tribes in each part, and five
companies in a tribe, and five hundred effective men in the company.
And if the strength of all Ireland at that time be estimated, the
opinion is unsound of the people who thought that the Roman with a
legion or with two legions would be able to bring Ireland under power
of spear and sword[225] to himself, [and] the Irish always being
valiant men.
        
It is why these two provinces of Munster are called Mumha [i.e. that
it is greater], because that it is greater than any other province of
Ireland. For there are thirty-five 'triochas' in each province of
these two provinces of Munster, and not that much in any other
province in Ireland. For,
3 allowing that thirty-six are reckoned in the province of Ulster,
there were but thirty-three in it till the time of the provincial
kings. For it is Cairbre Nia Fear, king of Leinster, who yielded to
the province of Ulster three 'triocha-céads' of Leinster (that is to
say from Loch an Chúigidh to the sea), in consideration of obtaining
the daughter of Conchubhar son of Neasa as his wife, as we shall
relate hereafter in the body of the history.

Five ['triochas'] and nine score triocha-céads in all Ireland: ten
['ballys'] and two score and five hundred and five thousand(5,500)
'Bally-betaghs' there are in it: six, hundred, and six thousand, and
three-score thousand (66,600) 'seisreachs' of land in it, according to
the old division of the Gael. Under stand, O reader, that the acre of
the measure of the Gael is greater, twice or thrice, than the acre of
the division of the Gall now.

Of the situation of Ireland here.

It is the situation which is on Ireland; Spain to the south-west side
of it, France to the south-east side of it, Great Britain to the east
side of it, Scotland to the north-east side, and the ocean to the
north-west side and to the west side of it. And in the form of an egg
it is shaped, and its foot to Scotland, north-eastwards, its head to
Spain, south-westwards; and, according to Maginus, writing on Ptolemy,
it is four degrees and a half of the solar zone, which is called the
Zodiac, that are in its breadth; and the same man says that it is
sixteen hours and three-quarters that are in length in the longest day
in the year in the side of Ireland which is farthest towards the south,
and eighteen hours in the longest day at the northern side. The length
of Ireland is from Carn Uí Néid[226] to Cloch an Stocáin,[227] and its
breadth from Innbhear mór[228] to Iorrus Domhnann.[229]

Understand, O reader, that it is not through forgetfulness that I do
not mention here the counties, nor the cities, nor the great towns of
Ireland; but that Camden and these new chronicles give their
description down clearly, and that this is not the place for inserting
them, but at the beginning of the invasion of the foreigners, by whom
they were arranged.



SECTION IV.
Of the creation of the first father from whom we have sprung, i.e.
Adam, here, and of his race to Noah, and from that to Noah's
children's children, until the genealogical account of each tribe
which obtained possession of Ireland is given by us completely up to
Noah; and also the kinship of each people of these same with each
other.

In the beginning Adam was created, the sixth day of the age of the
world: the fifteenth year of the life of Adam, Cain and his sister
Calmana were born: the thirtieth year of the life of Adam, Abel and
his sister Delbora were born: at the end of a hundred and thirty years
of the life of Adam, Seth was born, according to the Hebrews, as is
read in Polychronicon.

Of the age of the fathers from Adam to Noah, and the length of the
period from
Adam to the deluge; and the genealogy of Noah to Adam.

Noah was son of Lamech, son of Mathusalem, son of Enoch, son of Iared,
son of Malaleel, son of Cainan, son of Enos, son of Seth, son of Adam:
for it is of the race of Seth are all those who live after the deluge,
and all the race of Cain were drowned under the deluge. And, according 
to the Hebrews, it is the length from the creation of Adam to the
deluge, one thousand six hundred and fifty-six years; it is therefore
the ancient author recited this verse:-
The first period of true life, from when Adam is to the deluge;
Six years, fifty, a clear saying, on six hundred, on a thousand.

Here is how another antiquary agrees with the same calculation:--

Six years and fifty, and six hundred, as I count,
And a thousand, as I calculate, from Adam to the deluge.

Yet another ancient author agrees with the same computation:--

Ten hundred years, six hundred fair, on fifty, with six years,
As I reckon, it is known without blemish, from the deluge to the
beginning of the World.

Here is the age of every man from whom Noah sprang in the direct
line:-- Adam thirty and nine hundred years; Seth twelve years and nine
hundred; Enos five years and nine hundred; Cainan ten years and nine
hundred; Malaleel nine hundred but five years wanting of them; Jared
two years and three score on nine hundred; Enoch five years and three
score on three hundred; Mathusalem nine years, three score, on nine
hundred; Lamech seventeen years, three score, on seven hundred; Noah
ten years, two score, on nine hundred.

Here is the assurance of the ancient writer on the age of every
patriarch of them, as is read in the poem which has for beginning:--
'Father of all, Ruler of Heaven,' &c.[230]

Thirty (and) nine hundred fair years,
The life of Adam to be narrated;
Ten years together with all that (was)
The age of his yellow-haired wife:
The life of Seth, that is known to me,
Twelve (years) and nine hundreds;
Five years nine hundred, it has been heard,
Until death took away Enos;
Ten years nine hundred, without reproach,
The age of the son of Enos,
Cainan Nine hundred but five, with renown,
The life of Malaleel of mighty deed;
Two years, sixty, (and) nine hundred,
To Jared before going to death;
Three hundred, sixty, (and) five, it has been heard,
For Enoch before going into Paradise:
Nine years sixty, with renown,
And nine hundred of years,
That is the life, glorious,
Which was given to Mathusalem;
The life of Lamech, it is mentioned to thee,
Seven hundred, seventy, and seven:
The life of Noah, pure bright his fame,
Fifty and nine hundred years.

When, indeed, God saw the race of Seth transgressing his own covenant,
where he had commanded them not to make intermixture or alliance with
the race of the wicked Cain, and that they had not observed that
injunction, he sent a deluge to drown all the people, except Noah and
his wife, whose name was Coba, and his three sons, Sem, Cham, and
Japheth, and their three wives, Olla, Oliva, and Olivana: for Noah had
not mixed with the race of Cain, and he was righteous. After the
subsiding of the deluge, Noah divides the three parts of the world
among his three sons, as the antiquary says:-

Sem took his place in Asia;
Cham with his children in Africa;
The noble Japheth and his sons,
It is they who obtained Europe.

Of the genealogical account of those three sons from whom were sprung
the seventy-two tribes who were building the tower.

Twenty-seven sons had Sem, including Arphaxad, Asshur, and Persius;
and it is from his seed (came) the Hebrews. Thirty sons had Cham, and
of those were Cus and Canaan. Fifteen from Japheth, and of those were
Gomer and Magog. Here is a 'rann'[231] certifying those kindreds to
have come from the three sons of Noah:-

Thirty gentle sons, a clear fact,
Sprang from Cham, son of Noe;
Seven and twenty are from Sem,
Fifteen (are) from Japheth.

Many of the people of Asia, and the people of all Europe have
descended from Japheth. The people of Scythia are of the posterity of
Magog, son of Japheth, and especially the tribes who occupied Ireland
after the deluge, before the sons of Míleadh, as we shall show in
(relating) the invasions of Ireland after the deluge. Nevertheless, we
shall set down here at first, concerning the invasions of Ireland
before the deluge, according to some antiquaries, before we shall
treat of the real occupation of it which was made after the deluge.



SECTION V.
Of the invasions of Ireland before the deluge down here.

I. Some say that it is three daughters of the wicked Cain who
inhabited it at first, so to certify that I have set down here a verse
out of the poem which commences "I found in the Saltair of Cashel ":--

Three virgin daughters of Cain,
With Seth, son of Adam,
They first saw Banbha,
I remember their adventure.

The book of Dromsneachta says that Banbha was the name of the first
maiden who occupied Ireland before the deluge, and that Ireland is
called Banbha from her. Thrice fifty women came there, and three men:
Ladhra was the name of one of them, and it is from him Ard
Ladhrann[232] is named. Two score years they were in the island, till
a plague fell on them, so that they all died in one week. Ireland
after that, was desert, empty, without anyone alive in it, for two
hundred years till after that came the deluge.

II. Some others say that it is three fishermen who were driven by a
storm of wind from Spain unwillingly; and as the island pleased them
that they returned for their wives to Spain; and having come back to
Ireland again, the deluge was showered upon them at Tuaigh
Innbhir,[233] so that they were drowned: Capa, Laighne, and Luasad,
their names. It is about them the verse was sung:--

Capa, Laighne, and Luasad pleasant,
They were a year before the deluge
On the isle of Banbha of the bays;
They were eminently brave.

III. It is said, however, that it is Ceasair, daughter of Bioth, son
of Noe, who came there before the deluge, so the verse was made about
it:--

Ceasair, daughter of lasting Bioth,
Foster-child of Sabhall, son of Nionuall;
The first valiant woman who came
To the isle of Banbha before the deluge.

If one should wish, indeed, to obtain knowledge what brought her to
Ireland:-- Bioth had sent a messenger to Noe, to know whether he
himself and his daughter Ceasair would obtain a place in the ark to
save them from the deluge; Noe says they should not get (that).
Fionntain asks the same, and Noe says he should not get it. Whereupon
Bioth, Fionntain and the maiden Ceasair go to consult. "Let my advice
be followed by you," says Ceasair. "It shall be done," say they. "Well
then," says she, "take to ye an idol, and adore him, and forsake the
God of Noe." After that they brought with them an idol, and the idol
told them to make a ship, and put to sea: although he did not know
what time the deluge would come. A ship was fitted, accordingly, by
them, and they went to sea. Those who went into it were three men,
namely, Bioth, Fionntain, and Ladhra: (also) Ceasair, Barrann, and
Balbha, and fifty maidens along with them. Seven years and a quarter
for them on the sea, until they put into port at Dún na mbarc[234] in
the district of Corca Dhuibhne,[235] the fifteenth day of the moon, as
the antiquary says:--

It is there they took harbour
At Dún na-mbarc, the female company,
In Cúil Ceasrach, in the district of Carn,[236]
The fifteenth, (being) Saturday.

And that was forty days before the deluge, as is said:--

Two score days before the deluge,
Ceasair came into Ireland,
Fionntain, Bioth, and Ladhra fierce,
And fifty beautiful maidens.

Another poet agrees with the same thing, where he says in this verse:-
-

Ceasair set out from the east --
Daughter of Bioth was the woman --
With her fifty maidens,
And with her three men.

A ship's company were on that expedition to Dún na mbarc: Ceasair, and
her ship's lading, came to land there; namely, fifty women and three
men, i.e. Bioth and Fionntain, and Ladhra, as we have said. It was
that Ladhra, as we have said, who was the first dead person of Ireland,
according to the folk who say that no people at all occupied Ireland
before the deluge, but Ceasair and those who came with her. And from
him is named Ard Ladhrann.[237] From Bioth Sliabh Beatha[238] is
named; and from Fionntain is named Feart Fionntain over Tultuinne[239]
in Duthaigh Aradh,[240] near to Loch Deirgdheirc.[241] From Ceasair is
named Carn Ceasrach in Connacht. They proceed thence to Bun Suaimhne,
i.e. Cumar na dtri-n-uisge,[242] where is the junction of Suir and,
Nore and Barrow. There they share their fifty women in three parts
among them. Fionntain took Ceasair with him, and seventeen women along
with her. Bioth took Barrann with him, and seventeen other women in
her company: and Ladhra took Balbha with sixteen women likewise with
him, till he reached Ard Ladhrann, and died there. Balbha and her
sixteen women return to Ceasair again. Ceasair sends tidings to Bioth.
Bioth comes to acquaint Fionntain, so that they shared those sixteen
women equally between them. Bioth brought his own share of them with
him to Sliabh Beatha in the north of Ireland, and it was not long
afterwards until he died there. As for these women of Bioth, they come
to Fionntain after that. Howbeit, Fionntain flies before them from
Leinster, across Bun Suaimhne, across Sliabh gCua[243] into Ceann
Feabhrad[244] of Sliabh Caoin, and with left hand towards the Shannon
east to Tultuinne over Loch Deirgdheirc. Ceasair goes with her female
company to Cúil Ceasrach[245] in Connacht, till her heart broke
through being in estrangement from her husband, and through the death
of her father and of her brother: and there were not then from her to
the deluge but six days. So to attest that, this verse was spoken:--

It is those -- after appointed time -- 
Their deaths, their proceedings; 
There was not, but a week alone, 
From them to the forty (days' rain).

IV. Know, O reader, that it is not as genuine history I set down this
occupation, nor any occupation of which we have treated up to this;
but because I have found them written in old books. And, moreover, I
do not understand how the antiquaries obtained tidings of the people
whom they assert to have come into Ireland before the deluge, except
it be the aerial demons gave them to them, who were their fairy
lovers[246] during the time of their being pagans; or unless it be on
flags of stones they found them graven after the subsiding of the
deluge, if the story be true: for it is not to be said that it is that
Fionntain who was before the deluge who would live after it, because
the Scripture is against it, where it says that there did not escape
of the human race, without drowning, but the eight persons of the ark
alone, and it is clear he was not of those. The argument is unsound
which some antiquaries have concerning Fionntain to have lived during
the deluge, where they said that there lived four in the four quarters
of the world during the time of the deluge, namely, Fionntain, Fearón,
Fors, and Andóid. However, think not, O reader, that this is the
opinion of the people who are most authoritative in history. Therefore,
a certain author sets this thing before us in a poem, to show that it
does not accord with the truth of the faith to say that Fionntain or
any of the other three should live after the pouring forth of the
deluge and before it. Here is the poem:--

The names of four -- in right resolved
Whom God left (safe) throughout the deluge,
Fionntain, Fearon, Fors, just, gentle,
And Andoid, son of Eathor.
Fors in the eastern land, east, was allowed;
Fearón for [northern] coldness (in need) of clothing;
Fionntain for the west limit fairly 
And Andóid for the southern part.
Though antiquaries record that,
The just canon[247] does not record
But Noe who was in the ark, and his children,
And their wives, who obtained protection of their lives.

Whence it is understood that it is not the common opinion of all the
antiquaries, any of these to have lived after the deluge: however, if
any antiquary should say, as a safeguard against perverting the faith,
that Fionntain, a man like the rest, was drowned under the deluge, and
that he was revived by God after that, to save and to keep the
proceedings of the ancients, with their stories, to the time of
Patrick, and after that to the time of Finnian of Magh Bile;[248] I do
not understand how it would be possible to conceal throughout Europe
so wonderful a thing as this, [seeing] the frequency, during the time
of Finnian, and from that forth, [with which there] went accomplished
parties of divines and philosophers, and many of other learned wise
people from Ireland through the principal countries of Europe to
instruct the clergy and congregations, and to teach public schools;
and (yet) to say that there would not be [in their track] after them
some disciple by whom would be left a poem or a letter in which there
would be a mention or a narrative concerning Fionntain; and
[considering also] the frequency that they wrote other things which
are now to be seen, and, moreover, that I do not see any narrative
about him in their chief authentic books: and, accordingly, I think
that there is nothing but a poetical romance in the history which
would relate Fionntain to have lived before the deluge and after it.
However, I do not say that there was not a very aged and wise man
before the coming of Patrick to Ireland, and that he lived many
hundred years, and that he related to Patrick everything which he
remembered, and moreover every tradition which he had got from the
ancestors concerning the times which had elapsed before him: and I
think that there was his like of an elder, who was called Tuan son of
Caireall according to some antiquaries, and according to others Roanus,
that is Caoilte son of Rónán, who lived more than three hundred years,
and who made known to Patrick much of antiquity, as is evident in the
"Dialogue of the Ancients"; and it is [on] Caoilte that it is right to
call Roanus or Ronanus. For it is not read in any book of the history
of Ireland that Fionntain was called Roanus or Ronanus: Even though it
is on him Cambrensis puts the name like every other lie of his partial
history, and as he set down Roanus in his chronicle in place of
Ronanus, every one of the new Galls who writes on Ireland, writes
Roanus, in imitation of Cambrensis, as a name for Fionntain, because
it is Cambrensis who is as the bull of the herd for them for writing
the false history of Ireland, wherefore they had no choice of guide.
It is the more right to think that it is to Caoilte Ronanus is given,
since ancient authors set down among the works of Patrick that he
wrote "A History of Ireland, from Roanus or Ronanus": it is, indeed,
the surname of the author which it is the custom to put over the head
of every work which anyone writes, as is clear to every reader who
practises reading authors.

And it is not true for Hanmer in his chronicle, where he says that the
Gaels hold in great esteem the stories of Fionntain, whom he himself
calls Roanus, where they say that he was hidden from the deluge, and
that he lived after it more than two thousand years till he met with
Patrick, and that he received baptism from him, and that he made known
to him much of antiquity, and that he died at the end of a year after
the coming of Patrick into Ireland, and that he was buried beside Loch
Ribh in Urmhumha,[248] where there is a church named or dedicated in
his name, and, moreover, that he is named among the saints of Ireland.
Nevertheless, it is clear that an antiquary never said, and also that
he never left written this thing Dr. Hanmer says. For there are three
persons being mentioned here in the guise of one man, namely,
Fionntain, whom Cambrensis calls Roanus, i.e. Caoilte, son of Rónán,
who was baptised by Patrick, and gave much of ancient record to him;
and Ruadhan, to whom Lothra in Urmhumha was dedicated (it is beside
Loch Deirgdheirc and not, as Hanmer says, beside Loch Ribh): and Tuan,
son of Caireall. We shall not follow any more of the lies of Hanmer,
or of the authority he has. Moreover, I think that it is instead of
this word Ronanus Cambrensis wrote Roanus at first, and that it was
left without amendment by his followers from that forward.



SECTION VI.
I. Of the first occupation that was made on Ireland here.

According to some antiquaries, there came a youth of the family of Nin
son of Bel (whose name was Adhna son of Bioth) to spy Ireland about
seven score years after the deluge. However, it was not long the stay
he made in it. He went back to give an account of the island he had
seen, to his neighbours, and with him a part or certain bulk of the
grass of Ireland, as is read in the poem (to which is) beginning, "I
found in the Saltair of Caiseal," &c.[249] [Here is what the poem
says.]

Adhna, son of Bioth, with prophecy(?)[250]
A warrior of the family of Nin son of Bel,
Came into Ireland to explore it,
So that he plucked grass in wood island[251]:
He brought with him the full of his fist of its grass,
He goes back to tell the news:
That is the clear complete possession,
Shortest in duration which occupied Ireland.

Howbeit, I do not think that the expedition of that man ought to be
called a conquest, because he did not make any stay in it, and
therefore that it is more right to reckon the conquest of Partholón as
the first occupation of it after the deluge.

II. Of the first chief-conquest which was made on Ireland after the
deluge, namely the invasion of Partholón here.

Ireland, indeed, was desert three hundred years after the deluge, till
Partholón son of Sera, son of Sru, son of Esru, son of Fraimint, son
of Fathacht, son of Magog, son of Japheth came to occupy it, according
as it is found in the poem [to which is] beginning, -- "Adam, father,
fountain of our hosts" [as the poet says]

Three hundred years after the deluge,
It is a tale of truth, as I reckon,
All holy Ireland was desert,
Until Partholón came.

Accordingly, I think that it is twenty-two years before Abraham was
born, Partholón came into Ireland, and that it is it which was the age
of the world therefore, about this time a thousand, nine hundred and
three score and eighteen years, as this verse states:-

Eight and seventy -- a clear gradation --
A thousand and nine hundred years,
From the time of Adam, virtuous, just,
To the birth of Abraham our father.

However, the opinion of the people who say that it is at the end of
two years and a thousand after the deluge that Partholón came to
Ireland, is not truthful, and they, admitting that it is in the time
of Abraham he came into it, and that it is Abraham, who was only the
eighth generation from Sem, son of Noe, and Sem himself to be reckoned.
For it is not likely that more than a thousand years would have been
spent during the time of seven generations after the deluge. Wherefore
I deem the former opinion more sound than the latter opinion; and,
accordingly, it is probable that it was at the end of three hundred
years after the deluge Partholón came into Ireland.

From middle Greece, i.e. 'Migdonia,' Partholón set out. It is the way
which he took (was) through the 'Torrian' Sea to Sicily, and with the
right hand towards Spain till he reached Ireland. Two months and a
half he was on the sea till he took harbour in Innbhear Sceine,[252] 
in the western part of Munster, the fourteenth day in the month May.
It is of it this verse was recited [as the poet says]:--

The fourteenth, on (day of) Mars,
They put their noble barks
Into the port of fair lands, blue, clear,
In Innbhear Scéine of bright shields.

Here is the company who came with Partholón to Ireland, and with his
wife, Dealgnaid her name: their three sons, namely, Rudhruidhe,
Slangha, and Laighlinne, with their wives, and a thousand of a host
along with them, according to Nennius, as is read in the Saltair of
Caiseal.

It is the place where Partholón dwelt at first in Ireland, in Inis
Saimher,[253] near to Eirne. It is why it was called Inis Saimher; a
lap-dog or hound-whelp which Partholón had, which was named Saimher;
and he killed it through jealousy with his wife, who committed
misconduct with her own attendant, Todhga; and when Partholón accused
her, it is not an apology she made, but said it was fitter the blame
of that ill-deed to be on himself than on her: and she said these
words: "O Partholón", says she, "do you think that it is possible a
woman and honey to be near one another, new milk and a child, food and
a generous person, flesh meat and a cat, weapons or implements and a
workman, or a man and woman in private, without their meddling with
each other": and she repeats the verse

Honey with a woman, new milk with a child,
Food with the generous, flesh with a cat,
A workman in a house, and edge tools,
One with the other, it is great risk.

After Partholón had heard that answer, his jealousy was so increased
by it that he struck the dog to the ground, till it was killed: so
that from it the island is named. The first jealousy of Ireland after
the deluge (was) that. So for it was recited this verse:--

The king strikes the hound of the woman
With his hand -- it was not sad that it was (so); --?
The hound was dead.... [254]
That was the first jealousy of Ireland.

The seventh year after the occupation of Ireland by Partholón the
first man of his people died, namely, Feadha, son of Tortan, from whom
is named Magh Feadha.[255]

It is the cause on account of which Partholón came to Ireland, because
he had slain his father and his mother, seeking the kingdom from his
brother, so that he came in flight (because of) his parricide till he
reached Ireland, so that it is therefore God sent a plague on his race,
by which nine thousand of them were slain during one week in Beann
Eadair.[256]

Some of our authors reckon another occupation of Ireland before
Partholón namely, the invasion of Ciocal, son of Nel, son of Garbh,
son of Ughmhór from Sliabh Ughmhóir, and Lot Luaimhneach (was) his
mother: they (were) two hundred years (living) on fish and fowl till
the coming of Partholón into Ireland, till the battle of Magh
Iotha[257] took place between them, in which Ciocal fell, and in which
the Fomorians[258] were destroyed by Partholón. In Innbhear
Domhnann[259] Ciocal, with his people, took harbour in Ireland: six
ships their number; fifty men and fifty women the complement of each
ship [of them]. It is about them it is recited:--

The seventh invasion which took
Spoil of Ireland of the high plains
(Was) by Ciocal the stunted, of withered feet,[260]
Over the fields of Innbhear Domhnann;
Three hundred men, the number of his host,
Who came from the regions of Ughmhór
Till they were scattered after that,
Being cut off in a week.

Seven lakes burst forth in Ireland in the time of Partholón namely,
Loch Masc in Connacht; over Magh Leargna it sprang up: at the end of
three years after giving battle to Ciocal, Loch Con burst over the
land, and Magh Cró (was) the name of the plain over which it came:
Loch Deichet[261] at the end of twelve years after the coming of
Partholón into Ireland. A year after that the fourth chieftain of his
people died, namely, Slangha, and it is at Sliabh Slangha[262] he was
buried. At the end of a year after that (was) the eruption of Loch
Laighlinne[263] in Ua-mac-Uais Breagh,[264] i.e. (the lake of)
Laighlinne, son of Partholón; and when his sepulchre was being built,
the lake sprang forth from the earth, it is from that it is called
Loch Laighlinne. At the end of a year after that (was) the eruption of
Loch Eachtra,[265] between Sliabh Mudhairn[266] and Sliabh Fuaid,[267]
in Oirghialla.[268] After that, the eruption of Loch Rudhruidhe,[269]
in which Rudhruidhe himself was drowned. In the same year the eruption
of Loch Cuan.[270]

Partholón did not find before him in Ireland but three lakes and nine
rivers: the names of the lakes (are) Loch Luimneach[271] in Desmond,
Loch Foirdhreamhain[272] at Tráigh-lí,[273] by Sliabh Mis in Munster,
and Fionnloch Ceara[274] in lorros Domhnann[275] in Connacht. It is
for them this verse was recited [as the poet says]:--

Three lakes -- wondrous their brilliancy,
And nine plentiful rivers;
Loch Foirdhreamhain, Loch Luimnigh,
Fionn Loch beyond the bounds of Iorros.

Here are the rivers:-- The Buas,[276] between Dal n-Áruidhe[277] and
Dalriada,[278] i.e. the Rúta; the Rurthach, i.e. Abhann Life,[279]
between the Ui Neill[280] and the Leinstermen; Laoi,[281] in Munster,
through Muscraidhe[282] to Cork; the Sligeach[283]; the Samhaoir[284];
the Muaidh[285] in Connacht, through Ui Fiachrach of the north[286];
the Moghurn[287] in Tír-Eoghain; the Fionn,[288] between Cinéal
Eoghain and Cinéal Conaill[289]; and the Banna, between Lí and
Eille[290]; as is said in the poem to which (this) is the beginning,
"Ye learned of the plain of fair gentle Conn ":--

Muaidh, Sligeach, Samhaoir of name[291]?
Buas, a torrent of melodious sound;
Moghurn, Fionn, with face of brightness;
Banna, between Lí and Eille.

Or yet in the poem which has for beginning, "Adam, father, fount of
our hosts," &c.:--

Laoi, Buas, Banna, lasting Bearbha,[292]
Samhaoir, Sligeach, Moghurn, Muaidh,
And Life in Leinster with them,
There they are, the old rivers.

At the end of four years after the eruption of Murthol,[293] Partholón
died in Sean-mhagh Ealta Eudair,[294] and it is there he was buried.
It is called Sean-mhagh, 'old plain,' because a wood never grew on it;
and, moreover, it is why it is called Magh n-Ealta,[295] as it was
there the birds of Ireland used to come to bask in the sun. At the end
of thirty years from the coming of Partholón to Ireland, he died. Some
antiquaries say that the age of the world when Partholón died was two
thousand six hundred and twenty-eight years: nevertheless, what I
think is, according to everything we have said before, that it is one
thousand nine hundred and four score and six years from the beginning
of the world to the death of Partholón. Some others say that it is
five hundred and twenty years from the death of Partholón to the
plague of his people: however, the general opinion of the antiquaries
is against that, since they say that Ireland was not a desert but
thirty years [the time which] was from the death of Partholón's people
to the coming of Neimheadh into it, as the poet says in this verse:--

During thirty years of a period
It was empty of (its) skilled warriors,
After the destruction of its host in a week,
In crowds upon Magh n-Ealta.

Holy Cormac son of Cuileannan agrees with the same thing in the
Saltair of Caiseal, where he says that it is three hundred years
(that) were from the coming of Partholón into Ireland to the plague of
his people. The poet Eochaidh Ua Floinn agrees with it likewise,
according to this verse:--

Three hundred years, who know it?
Over very great (or wide) excellent corn-lands,(?)
The rank sharp-pointed stalks (or weeds)(?)[296]
(Were) in noble Erin grass-grown.

From all these things (it appears that) those who say that there was
more than five hundred years from the death of Partholón till the
destruction of his people, are not to be believed; and it is not
probable that Ireland could have been settled so long, without more
people in it than five thousand men and four thousand women.

III. Here is the division which the four sons of Partholón made on
Ireland; and
it is the first partition of Ireland.

Er, Orba, Fearón and Feargna their names, and there were four their
namesakes among the descendants of Míleadh, as we shall set down in
(relating) their special conquest.

From Aileach Néid (in the) north to Áthcliath Laighean, the portion of
Er.

From the same Áthcliath to OiléanÁrda Neimeadh [to] which is called
Oiléan Mór an Bharraigh now, the portion of Orba.

From the Oiléan Mór to Meadhraidhe by Gaillimh, the division of Fearón.

From Áthcliath Meadhraidhe to Aileach Néid, the portion of
Feargna,[297] as Eochaidh Ua Floinn says in these verses: and he was
the chief professor of poetry in Ireland in his time:--

Four sons, (who) were fierce of voice,
For noble children had Partholón:
They took under direction among them
The tribes of Ireland without objection:
Not easy to the kings was their division,
The island of Erin (being all) one wood,
Treasure close (? safe) in each dwelling[298] during their time;
Each man got knowledge of his share.
Er, their eldest, (who) was free in happiness,
Pleasant his portion, long without change;
From Aileach Néid, land without treachery, To Áthcliath Laighean full-
strong.
From Áthcliath of Leinster -- leap of the sea[299] --
To the isle of Neimheadh's Height,
Without misery -- not weak his conduct --
(Was) Orba's portion of the land of his race.
From the ford where Neimheadh was slain
To Meadhraidhe of the great districts,
A cause of good content without cease there,
The portion of Fearón, long the tract.
From Meadhraidhe, (it is) long also,
To Aileach Ned of good customs,
If we follow the boundary in every track;
Feargna got an extensive tract.
On Erin itself, not a cause of deceit (this),
Were born the strong men (whom) I enumerate,
A noble company, who were established in fame,
Gentle (and) knightly were the four.

IV. Of the people of Partholón here.

Here are the names of the ploughmen he had, namely, Tothacht, Treun,
Iomhas, Aicheachbhéal, Cúl, Dorcha, and Damh. The names of the four
oxen they had, namely, Liag, Leagmhagh, Iomaire, and Eitrighe. Beoir
(was) the name of the man who gave out free entertainment or
hospitality at first in Ireland. Breagha, son of Seanbhoth (it was)
who established single combat first in Ireland. Samaliliath first
introduced ale-drinking in it. Fios, Eolus and Fochmorc (were) his
three druids. Macha, Mearan, and Muicneachán his three strong-men.
Biobhal and Beabhal his two merchants. Partholón had ten daughters and
ten sons-in-law.



SECTION VII.
Of the second conquest which was made on Ireland here, i.e. the
conquest of the
children of Neimheadh.
I	reland, indeed, was waste thirty years after the destruction of
the race of Partholón till Neimheadh son of Agnoman, son of Pamp, son
of Tat, son of Seara, son of Srú, son of Easrú, son of Framant, son of
Fathacht, son of Magog, son of Japheth, came to settle in it: for
every invasion which occupied Ireland after the deluge is of the
children of Magog. At Srú, son of Easrú, Partholón and the children of
Neimheadh separate from each other: and at Seara the Firbolg, the
Tuatha Dé Danann, and the sons of Míleadh separate. And it is the
Scotic[300] language every tribe of these had. That is evident from
(the occasion) when Ith, son of Breogan, came into Ireland; for it is
through the Scotic language he himself and the Tuatha Dé Danann spoke
with each other; and they said that they were of the race of Magog on
both sides. Some others say, as for Neimheadh, that he was of the
posterity of the son, Adhla his name, whom Partholón had left in the
east. It is the track in which Neimheadh journeyed, coming into
Ireland from Scythia on the narrow sea which reaches from the ocean
called 'Mare Euxinum,[301]- it is it (i.e. the narrow sea) which is
the boundary between the north-west side of Asia and the north-east
side of Europe, -- and at the north-west part of Asia are the
mountains of Riffé,[302] according to Pomponius Mela, on the boundary
line of the narrow sea[303] we have mentioned and the northern ocean.
He gave his right hand to the mountains of Riffé, till he came into
the ocean to the north,[304] and his left hand towards Europe till he
came to Ireland. Thirty-four ships (was) the number of his fleet, and
thirty persons in every ship of them.

Starn, Iarbhoinel Fáidh, Ainninn, and Fearghus Leithdhearg[305] (are)
the names of the four sons of Neimheadh.

Four lake-eruptions in Ireland in the time of Neimheadh, namely, Loch
mBreunainn[306] on Mágh n-Asail in Uí Nialláin; Loch Muinreamhair[307]
on Mágh Sola among the Leinstermen: at the end of ten years after
Neimheadh had arrived in Ireland, Loch Dairbhreach and Loch n-
Ainnin[308] sprang up in Magh Mór in Meath: for when the grave of
Ainnin was dug, it is then Loch Ainnin sprang forth. It is in proof
that it was in Neimheadh's time these lakes burst forth that this
verse was made:--

Four lakes of abundant water
Burst forth over Fodhla truly great:--
Loch Dairbhreach, Loch mBreunainn sweet sounding,
Loch Muinreamhair, Loch n-Ainnin,

The wife of Neimheadh -- Macha her name -- died in Ireland sooner than
Ainnin; and the twelfth year after their coming into Ireland this
Macha died; and she was the first dead person of Ireland after the
coming of Neimheadh into it. And it is from her Ard Macha[309] is
named; for it is there she was buried. Two royal forts were built by
Neimheadh in Ireland, namely, Rath Chinneich[310] in Uí Nialláin, and
Rath Ciombaoth[311] in Seimhne.[312] The four sons of Madán
Muinreamhair[313] of the Fomórians built Rath Cinneich in one day, Bog, 
Robhog, Ruibhne, and Rodan their names: and Neimheadh slew them on the
morrow in the morning, in Daire Lighe,[314] for fear that they should
resolve on the destruction of the fort again; and they were buried
there.

Twelve plains were cleared from wood by Neimheadh in Ireland; namely,
Magh Ceara,[315] Magh Neara, Magh Cuile Toladh,[316] Magh Luirg[317]
in Connacht, Magh Tochair in Tír Eoghain,[318] Leacmhagh in Munster,
Magh mBreasa,[319] Magh Lughaidh in Ui Tuirtre,[320] Magh Seireadh in
Teathbha,[321] Magh Seimhne[322] in Dal n-Aruidhe, Magh
Muirtheimhne[323] in Breagh,[324] and Magh Macha in Oirghialla.[325]

Neimheadh won three battles on the Fomorians, namely, navigators of
the race of Cham, who fared from Africa; they came fleeing to the
islands of the west of Europe, and to make a settlement for themselves,
and (also) fleeing the race of Sem, for fear that they might have
advantage over them, in consequence of the curse which Noe had left on
Cham from whom they came; inasmuch as they thought themselves to be
safe from the control of the posterity of Sem by being at a distance
from them: wherefore, they came to Ireland, so that the three battles
aforesaid were won over them, i.e. the battle of Sliabh Bádhna;[326]
the battle of Ross Fraocháin[327] in Connacht, in which there fell
Gann and Geanann, two leaders of the Fomorians; and the battle of
Murbholg[328] in Dalriada, i.e. the Rúta, the place where Starn son of
Neimheadh fell by Conaing son of Faobhar in Leithead Lachtmhaighe.
Moreover, he fought the battle of Cnámhros[329] in Leinster, where
there was a slaughter (made) of the men of Ireland, including Artur,
son of Neimheadh, i.e. a son born in Ireland to him; and including
Iobcan son of Starn, son of Neimheadh. However, it is by Neimheadh
these three battles were won over the Fomorians, as these verses below
certify:--

Neimheadh defeated -- illustrious his strength -- 
(Their sepulchre was satiated I think),
Gann and Geanann, by his attack.
They were slain by him, one after the other.
Geanann by Neimheadh was worn out.
Their little grave -- what tomb is greater (than it)?-
By Starn, son of Neimheadh the mighty,
Gann fell, and it is not deceit.
The battle of Murbholg -- he fought it --
Till it was closed, it was stiff,
It was won by Neimheadh of the arms,
Though Starn came not back (from it).
During the battle of Cnamhros, which was very great,
It is much there was of hacking of flesh;
Artur and Iobcan fell there,
Although in it Gann was routed.

After that Neimheadh died of the plague in Oiléan Arda Neimheadh in
Críoch Liatháin[330] in Munster, which is called Oiléan Mór an
Bharraigh; and two thousand (of) people with him, both men and women.

There was slavery and great oppression afterwards on the race of
Neimheadh by the Fomorians, revenging the battles which Neimheadh had
gained over them. Morc, indeed, son of Deileadh, and Conaing, son of
Faobhar, from whom is named Tor Conaing on the border of Ireland north
[who] had a fleet, and they residing in Tor Conaing which is called
Toirinis[331], enforcing a tribute on the children of Neimheadh and
the extent of that tribute was two thirds of the children, and of the
corn, and of the milch-kine of the men of Ireland, to be offered to
them every year on the eve of Samhain[332] at Magh gCéidne between the
Drobhaois and the Eirne.[333] It is why it is called Magh gCéidne from
the frequency (with which) the tribute was brought to the same
plain.[334]

The Fomorians had still more tyranny on the children of Neimheadh, to
wit, three full measures from every single household in Ireland of the
cream of milk, of the flour of wheat, and of butter, to be brought to
Morc and to Conaing to Toirinis; and a female steward who was called
Liagh, enforcing that tax throughout Ireland, so that of that tax this
verse was recited:--

That tax which was devised there,
Three measures which were not very scant;
A measure of the cream of rich milk,
And a measure of the flour of wheat,
The third obligation -- we think it was hard --
A measure of butter over it for a condiment.

Anger and rage indeed seize upon the men of Ireland by reason of the
heaviness of that tribute and tax, insomuch that they went to do
battle with the Fomorians. It is wherefore they used to be called
Fomorians, namely, from their being committing robbery on sea:
Fomhóraigh[335] i.e. along the seas.

There were, however, three good warriors among the children of 
Neimheadh at this period, namely, Beothach, son of Iarbhoineol the
prophetic, son of Neimheadh; Fearghus the red-sided, son of Neimheadh;
and Earglan, son of Béoan, son of Starn, son of Neimheadh, with his
two brothers, namely, Manntán and Iarthacht: and their number was
thirty thousand on sea, and the same number on land, as this verse
shows:--

Three score thousand, -- bright array -
On land and on water;
It is the number went from their dwelling,
The race of Neimheadh to the demolition (of the tower).

The tower was demolished then, and Conaing falls with his children by
the race of Neimheadh. Afterwards, Morc, son of Deileadh, brought the
crew of three score ships from Africa to Toirinis, till he gave battle
to the children of Neimheadh, so that they fell side by side, and that
everyone of them who was not slain was drowned, but Morc and a few of
his company who took possession of the island: for they did not
perceive the sea coming under them with the obstinacy of the fighting,
so that there escaped not of the race of Neimheadh (as many of them as
were in this warfare) but the crew of one bark, in which were thirty
strong men, including three chiefs, namely, Simeon Breac, son of Starn,
son of Neimheadh; Iobath, son of Beothach, son of Iarbhoineol Fáidh,
son of Neimheadh; and Briotán Maol, son of Fearghus Leithdhearg, son
of Neimheadh, as the verse says:--

But one bark with its full company,
There escaped not of them, the entire of their hosts
Simeon and Iobath good,
And Briotán Maol, in that ship.

On their coming away from that conflict, it is the counsel on which
they resolved, to fare from Ireland to fly the tyranny of the
Fomorians. They were seven years making ready towards this adventure;
and a fleet is prepared by each chief of them, and a party of the
people who had come with Neimheadh to Ireland, and of his descendants,
go with each one of the aforesaid chiefs; and some of them remain
behind in Ireland, namely, ten warriors whom they left taking the
headship of the remnant of the race of Neimheadh who remained under
servitude of the Fomorians till the time of the Firbolg.

A chief of the three above (named), viz. Simeon Breac, son of Starn,
goes to Greece, even to Thrace, and a company with him; it is there
they were under bondage, and it is from him the Firbolg have come, as
we shall say hereafter.

The second chief, namely, Iobáth, son of Beothach, goes into the
regions of the north of Europe; and some antiquaries say that it is to
'Boetia'[336] he went: it is from him the Tuatha Dé Danann have
descended.
The third chief, i.e. Briotán Maol goes with a company with him to
Dobhar and to Iardhobhar in the north of Scotland, so that he himself
and his posterity after him dwelled there. It is the total of the
fleet these chiefs, the children of Neimheadh, (had) on this
expedition, between ship, bark, skiff, and small boat, one thousand
one hundred and thirty vessels.

However, Briotán Maol, son of Fearghus Leithdhearg, son of Neimheadh,
and his posterity, were inhabiting the north of Scotland until the
Crutheni, i.e. the Picts, went from Ireland to dwell in Scotland in
the time of Eireamhón. Holy Cormac, son of Cuileannan, in his Saltair,
says that it is from Briotán Britannia is called to the island which
is to-day called Great Britain: and the ancient record of Ireland is
agreeing with him on that, as the poem says, which has for beginning
"Adam father, fountain of our hosts," where it says

Briotán went beyond sea, without stain,
Generous son of red-sided Fearghus;
The Britons all, victory with renown,
From him, without deception, they have descended.

Another author supports him on that where he says:--

Briotán Maol, son of the prince,
Noble the stock-branch spreading from him,
Son of Leithdheirg from Leacmhagh,[337]
From whom are the Britons of the world.

It is the more right to think that to be true since it is not probable
that it is from Brutus it is called (Britain); for if it were from him,
it is likely that it is Brutania it would be called; and, besides, it
is the more its name was obscured by the children of Brutus, according
to (Geoffrey of) Monmouth, since Laegrus, son of Brutus, gave Laegria
for name to the part of Britain which came to him; Camber, the second
son of Brutus, gave Cambria for name to the part of it that came to
himself; and Albanactus, the third son of Brutus, gave Albania for
name to his own portion of the same territory.[338]

As to the remnant of the race of Neimheadh, who remained dwelling in
Ireland after those chiefs; they were oppressed by the Fomorians from
time to time, till the arrival of the posterity of Simeon Breac, son
of Starn, son of Neimheadh, in Ireland from Greece. Two hundred and
seventeen years from the coming by Neimheadh into Ireland till the
coming of the Firbolg into it, as this verse certifies:--

Seventeen years and two hundred
During their reckoning, (there is) no exaggeration -- 
Since Neimheadh came from the east,
Over sea with his great sons,
Till the children of Starn came
From Greece,[339] terrifying, very rugged.



SECTION VIII.
Of the invasion of the Firbolg here.

The posterity of Simeon Breac, son of Starn, son of Neimheadh, having
been in Greece, i.e. Thrace, as we have said, they grew so that the
people who were there of them were numerous. Howbeit, the Greeks put
bondage and great tyranny on them, such as their being digging the
ground, raising earth, and carrying it in bags or in sacks of leather
for putting it on stony crags, until it should become fruitful soil.
Great sadness seized them, and enmity to the Greeks through the
slavery in which they had them: and with that it was resolved by them
to leave that evil plight. Having determined on that counsel, five
thousand of them get together, and they make boats of the bags or of
the wallets of leather in which they used to be drawing the clay: or
it is the fleet of the king of the Greeks they stole, as the Cin of
Druim Sneachta says,[340] so that this posterity of Simeon Breac, son
of Starn, came back to Ireland at the end of two hundred and seventeen
years after Neimheadh had occupied Ireland.

Here are the chiefs who were over them that time, namely, Sláinghe,
Rughruidhe, Gann, Geanann, and Seanghann, i.e. the five sons of Deala,
son of Loch, son of Teacht, son of Triobuat, son of Othorb, son of
Goiste, son of Oirtheacht, son of Simeon, son of Arglán son of Beoán,
son of Starn, son of Neimheadh, son of Agnamon, &c. Their five wives,
Fuad, Eudar, Anust, Cnucha, and Liobhra, their names: and it is of
them it was said:--

Fuad wife of Slainghe -- not deceiving you
Eudar wife of Gann the valorous,
Anust wife of Seanghann of the spears,
Cnucha was wife of Geanann bright, (?)
Liobhra wife of Rughruidhe of the way. (?)

Five thousand the number of the host who came with them; one thousand
one hundred and thirty ships (between ship, bark, skiff, and small
boat) the number of their fleet, as these verses of antiquity[341]
show which follow[342]:--

Thirty ships on one hundred,
And a thousand -- it is not a lie
It is the number who came from the east,
The good Sláinghe with his hosts:]
Many were the Firbolg, without a lie,
At their coming out from Greece;
Good the tribes who were not diffident (in setting out),
Nor was the fleet wooden.[343]
Wednesday they went westward,
Over the great broad Torrian Sea;
The period of three days on a fair year (went by)
Until they reached to Spain:
From that by them to noble Ireland -- 
A convenient sailing from Spain --
Better then not to conceal it from all, (?)
The space of three days and ten.

These five chiefs divide Ireland in five parts among them, as we have
said before, speaking of the third partition which was made of
Ireland; as this verse says:--

Five chiefs at the head of the host
Divide into five Banbha the ancient;
Geanann, Rughraidhe -- a brilliant roll --
Gann, Seangann, and Sláinghe

Sláinghe (from whom is named Innbhear Sláinghe at Lochgarman, [the
youngest of the children]) took the province of Leinster from Innbhear
Colptha at Droichead-átha to Cumar na dtrí-n-uisge, and a thousand the
number of his host. Gann takes from Cumar na dtrí-n-uisge to Bealach
Chonghlais, and a thousand the number ofhis host. Seangann takes from
Bealach Chonghlais to Luimneach, and a thousand the number of his host.
Geanann takes the province of Connacht from Luimneach to Drobhais, and
a thousand the number of his host. Rughraidhe takes the province of
Ulster, namely, from Drobhaois to Droichead-átha and a thousand the
number of his host.

It is [to] these chiefs with their companies that are called Fir Bolg,
Fir Domhnann and Gaileon. Fir Bolg, indeed, from the bags of leather
they used to have in Greece, carrying earth to put it on bare flags so
that they might make of them flowery plains in bloom. Fir Domhnann
from the pits[344] they used to dig in the soil by carrying it to the
Fir Bolg. Gaileoin, indeed, they were named from the darts; because it
is these which used to be their arms defending everybody when they
would be (i.e. the others) doing their work; and from the darts or the
spears which were their arms, they were named.

Understand, O reader, that it is one conquest they made, and that it
is in one week they came into Ireland, i.e. Sláinghe on Saturday in
Innbhear Sláinghe Gann and Seangann the Tuesday after that in lorrus
Domhnann,[345] Geannan and Rughraidhe the Friday afterwards in Tracht
Rughraidhe.[346] (The name) Gaileoin is given to Sláinghe with his
people: Fir Bolg is given to Gann and to Seangann with their people:
and Fir Domhnann is given to Geanann and to Rughraidhe. And some of
the antiquaries say that it is in Iorrus Domhnann[347] (in the north-
west of the province of Connacht) these two came to land with a third
of the host, and that it is from them Iorrus Domhnann is called.
However, they are all commonly called Fir Bolg. Thirty-six years (was)
the length of the dominion of the Fir Bolg over Ireland: and no one to
whom the title of high-king was given came into the island before
them; so it is to prove that the following rann[348] was composed:--

Sixteen years and two tens,
Fir Bolg over Banbha throughout,
Till the coming of the Tuatha Dé to the people,
(And) that they seized all Ireland.



SECTION IX.
Of the first kings who took the sovereignty of Ireland; and of every
king after them who assumed it, according to the order of the periods
and of the invasions, down here.

Sláinghe son of Deala, son of LÓch, took rule of Ireland (for) a year,
till he died in Dionnriogh, which is called Dumha Sláinghe[349]: and
he was the first king of Ireland [ever]; and, moreover he was the
first dead among the Fir Bolg.

Rughraidhe, son of Deala, son of Loch, took the kingdom of Ireland two
years till he fell in the Brugh[350] over the Bóinn[351]

Gann and Geanann took the kingdom of Ireland four years till they died
of the plague in Freamhainn Midhe.[352]

Seangann held the kingship five years till he fell by Fiachaidh
Ceinnfhionnán.[353]

Fiachaidh Ceinnfhionnán son of Starn, son of Rughraidhe, son of Deala,
son of Lóch, held the kingdom five years, till he fell by Rionnal, son
of Geannan, son of Deala, son of Lóch. There were white heads on the
men of Ireland during his time: hence he was called Ceinnfhionnán.

Rionnal took the kingdom of Ireland six years, till he fell by
Foidhbghein, son of Seangann, son of Deala, son of Lóch.

This Foidhbghein held the kingship four years, until he was slain by
Eochaidh, son of Earc, in Magh Muirtheimhne.[354]

Eochaidh, son of Earc, son of Rionnal, son of Geannan, held the
kingship ten years. There was no rain nor bad weather during his time,
nor yet a year without fruit and increase. It is in his time injustice
and lawlessness were put down in Ireland, and approved and elaborated
laws were ordained in it. This Eochaidh fell by the three sons of
Neimheadh, son of Badhraoi (Ceasarb, Luamh, and Luachra their names),
in the battle of Magh Tuireadh.[355] It is this Eochaidh who was king
of the Fir Bolg at the coming of the Tuatha Dé Danann into Ireland. It
is she who was queen to him, Taillte, daughter of Madhmór, king of
Spain, and in Taillte[356] she was buried, so that from her it was
named Taillte. Nuadha Airgeadlámh[357] was king over the Tuatha Dé
Danann at that time. This battle of Magh Tuireadh was very long being
fought between the two kings aforesaid. Howbeit, it was gained at last
over Eochaidh and over the Fir Bolg, till Eochaidh was slain, and a
hundred thousand of his people cut off from Magh Tuireadh to Tráigh
Eothaile.[358] It is in this battle his hand was cut off from Nuadha
Airgeadlámh so that he was seven years being cured, until a hand of
silver was put on him, whence it is that he was named Nuadha of the
silver hand.

The small number of Fir Bolg who escaped out of this battle departed
in flight before the Tuatha Dé Danann, so that Ára,[359] Ilé,[360]
Reachra,[361] Inse Gall,[362] and many islands besides, were inhabited
by them; and they dwelt there until the time of the provincial kings
being in the sovereignty of Ireland, until the Cruithnigh, i.e. Picts,
banished them out of those islands, so that they (i.e. Fir Bolg) came
to seek Cairbre Niadh-fir, king of Leinster, (and) obtained land from
him under tenure. However, the heaviness of their rent was such that
they were not able to endure it. They depart thence to seek Meadhbh
and Oilioll[363] so that they gave land to them, whence it is that
that is the migration of the sons of Ughmhór. Aonghus son of Ughmhór
was prince over them in the east. It is from them are named the lands
where they took up residence in Ireland, namely, Loch Cime,[364] from
Cime Ceithircheann, Rinn Tamhain[365] in Meadhraidhe,[366] Loch
Cútra,[367] Rinn mBeara,[368] Maoilinn,[368] Dún Aonghusa in Ara,[369]
Carn Conaill in Crich Aidhne,[368] Magh n-Aghar[370] (i.e. the plain
of Aghar) son of Ughmhór the poet, Druim n-Asail,[371] Magh
Maoin[372](i.e. the plain of Maon) son of Ughmhór, Loch Uair[373] (i.e.
the lake of Uar) son of Ughmhór: and they occupied fortresses and
islands in like manner in Ireland till they were expelled by
Cuchulainn, by Conall Cearnach and by the Ulstermen also. It is not
recounted 'raths'[374] to have been built, lakes to have burst forth,
or plains to have been cleared of woods during the dominion of the Fir
Bolg. Some antiquaries say that it is from them (come) these three
tribes which are in Ireland but not of the Gael, namely, the
Gabhraidhe of Suca[375] in Connacht, the Uí Tairsidh in Crích Ua
bhFailghe,[376] and the Gaileoin of Leinster. Those are the
proceedings of the Fir Bolg, according to the antiquary, the learned
Tanuidhe Ua Maoilchonaire, in the 'duan'[377] of which the beginning
is this 'rann':-

The Fir Bolg were here a while
In the great island of the sons of Míleadh:
Five chiefs they came hither,
I have knowledge of their names.



SECTION X.
Of the invasion of the Tuatha Dé Danann here.

The Tuatha Dé Danann are of the posterity of the third chief of the
race of Neimheadh who had gone on adventures from Ireland after the
destruction of the tower of Conaing, namely, Iobath son of Beothach;
and, according to some antiquaries, the place which was inhabited by
them was Boetia[378] in the north of Europe. Some others say that it
is in the Athenian territory they dwelt, where the city of Athens is.
Understand, O reader, that Boeotia and the city of Athens, according
to Pomponius Mela, are in the district of Greece which is called
Achaia: and that it is there they learned their magic and their arts
until they became skilled in every trick of sorcery.

It happened about that time that a great fleet came from the country
of Syria to make war on the people of the Athenian country, so that
there was daily warfare between them; and those of the Athenians who
would be slain, it is they who would be on the morrow fighting with
the people of Syria. That necromancy used to be done through the art
magic of the Tuatha Dé Danann: for they would put demons into the same
bodies to restore them. And when the people of Syria became aware of
this, they go to take counsel with their own druid. The druid says to
them, to set a watch on the site or on the place of the battle-field,
and to thrust a stake [of a spit] of quicken-tree[379] through the
trunk of every dead person who would be rising up against them; and if
it were demons who would cause their bodies to revive, that they would
be from that immediately turned into worms, while, if it were really
their revival that had been brought about, the bodies would not suffer
change or corruption. The people of Syria come to join battle on the
morrow, and it is won by them, and they thrust the stakes of ash
through the dead, as the druid had told them, and presently worms were
made of them: and the people of Syria fell on the others after that,
slaughtering them.

As regards the Tuatha Dé Danann, when they saw the people of Syria
prevailing over the people of the country, they, in one band, depart
from that territory, for fear of them, and they made no stay till they
came to the country of Lochlonn,[53] i.e. Fionn-Lochlonn, viz. the
people of Norway, where they got welcome from the people of the
country for the extent of their science and of their varied arts. It
is Nuadha Airgeadlámh son of Euchtach, son of Edarlámh of the
posterity of Neimheadh who was chief over them at that time. Indeed,
they obtained four cities, so as to be teaching the young folk of that
country in them. The names of the cities here: Fáilias Gorias, Finias,
and Murias. The Tuatha Dé Danann place four sages in those cities to
teach the sciences and the varied arts they had to the youths of the
country; Semias in Murias, and Arias in Finias, and Eurus in Gorias,
and Morias in Fáilias. After being a while of their time in these
cities, they proceed to the north of Scotland,[4] so that they were
seven years at Dobhar and at Iardobhar. They had four noble jewels,
which they brought from those cities, namely, a stone of virtue from
Fáilias; it is it that is called 'Lia Fáil'; and it is it that used to
roar under each king of Ireland on his being chosen by them up to the
time of Conchubhar (as we mentioned before), and it is to that stone
is called in Latin 'Saxum fatale.' It is from it, moreover, is called
Inis Fáil to Ireland. So that it is therefore a certain antiquary
composed this verse:-

The stone which is under my two heels,
From it Inis Fáil is named;
Between two shores of a mighty flood,
The plain of Fál (is for name) on all Ireland.'[380]


[This stone which is called 'Lia Fáil'], another name for it (is) the
Stone of Destiny[381]; for it was in destiny for this stone whatever
place it would be in, that it is a man of the Scotic nation, i.e. of
the seed of Míleadh of Spain, that would be in the sovereignty of that
country, according as is read in Hector Boetius in the history of
Scotland. Here is what he says, viz. --

The Scotic nation, noble the race,
Unless the prophecy be false,
Ought to obtain dominion,
Where they shall find the Lia Fáil.[382]

When the race of Scot heard that the stone had this virtue, after
Feargus the great, son of Earc, had obtained the power of Scotland,
and after he had proposed to style himself king of Scotland, he sends
information into the presence of his brother Muircheartach, son of
Earc, of the race of Eireamhón, who was king of Ireland at that time,
to ask him to send him this stone, to sit upon, for the purpose of
being proclaimed king of Scotland. Muircheartach sends the stone to
him, and he was inaugurated king of Scotland on the same stone, and he
was the first king of Scotland of the Scotic nation; and although some
of the Cruithnigh, i.e. the Picts, had been styled kings of Scotland,
before Feargus was made king, there was not one of them full king
without being under tax and under tribute to the kings of Ireland from
time to time; and especially from the time of Eireamhón son of Míleadh
[forward], by whom the 'Picts' were sent out of Leinster to inhabit
Scotland, (as we shall say in the reign of Eireamhón), to the reign of
this Feargus. Concerning the stone, they had it accordingly some space
of time, age to age, till it reached after that to England,[383] so
that it is there now in the chair in which the king of England is
inaugurated, it having been forcibly brought from Scotland, out of the
abbey of Scone; and the first Edward king of England brought it with
him, so that the prophecy of that stone has been verified in the king
we have now, namely, the first king Charles, and in his father, the
king James, who came from the Scotic race (that is to say, from the
posterity of Maine son of Corc son of Lughaidh, who came from Éibhear
son of Míleadh of Spain); who[384] assumed the style of kings of
England upon the stone aforesaid.

The second jewel the Tuatha Dé Danann brought into Ireland then, that
is the sword which Ugh Lámhfada[385] had used, and from Gorias it was
brought. The third jewel, namely, the spear which the same Lúgh had
when prepared for battle, and from Finias it was brought. The fourth
jewel, the caldron of the Daghdha: a company would not go away
unsatisfied from it, and from Murias it was brought. Here is a poem
from a certain book of invasion for proof on the same things:--

Tuatha Dé Danann of the precious jewels,
The place in which they acquired learning
They attained their complete culture,
Their art magic (and) their diablerie.
Iarbhoineol fair -- an excellent seer --
Son of Neimheadh, son of Aghnomon,
To whom the doughty fool-hardy Beothach was son,
Who was a hero full-active, given to slaughter.
The children of Beothach -- vivid their fame
They arrived a powerful host of heroes,
After much travail and wandering,
The entire of their fleet to Lochlonn.[53]
Four cities, justly famous,
They occupied in sway with great power,
Where they used to wage war ingeniously (?)[386]
For learning (and) for exact knowledge.
Fáilias and Gorias bright,
Finias (and) Murias of great deeds,
To blazon their sallies abroad (?)
(And) the names of the great cities.
Morias and Euras high-placed,
Arias (and) Semias austere;
Their naming is profitable discourse,
Of the names of the sages of the noble gain.
Morias the sage of Fáilias itself,
Euras in Gorias, of good disposition,
Semias in Murias, southern stronghold (?)
Arias fair, sage of Finias.
Four gifts with them (brought) from afar,
By the nobles of the Tuatha Dé Danann:--
A sword, a stone, a shapely caldron,
A spear for facing tall champions.
Lia Fáil from Pallas hither,
Which used to roar under the king of Ireland;
The sword of the hand of Lúgh the active (?),
From Gorias -- choicest of great store.
From Finias far over the sea,
Was brought the spear of Lúgh who was not weak;
From Murias -- great prodigious gift
The caldron of the Daghdha of lofty deeds.
King of heaven, king of feeble men,
Protect me, king of the great stars,
Prince, who hast endurance of hateful things,(?)
And the strength of the gentle tribes.

Concerning the Tuatha Dé Danann, they, having spent seven years in the
north of Scotland, came to Ireland; and, on their coming to land,
Monday Béaltaine[387] in the north of Ireland, they burn their ships,
so to certify that, this 'rann'[231] was composed:--

Each warrior of them burned his ship, 
When he reached noble Éire:
It was a grave decision in his state(?)
The vapour of the ships being burned.

After that they put of mist of druidism[388] around them for the space
of three days, so that they were not manifest to any one of the Fir
Bolg till they reached Sliabh-an-iarainn.[389] Thence they send an
embassy from them to Eochaidh, son of Earc, and to the chiefs of the
Fir Bolg, to demand the kingdom of Ireland or battle on its account.
Whereupon, the battle of Magh Tuireadh South[390]is fought between the
Fir Bolg and the Tuatha Dé Danann, so that the battle was gained[391]
on the Fir Bolg, and that a hundred thousand[392] of them were slain,
according as we have said above.[393]

Thirty years from the battle of Magh Tuireadh South to the battle of
Magh Tuireadh North,[394] as the verse says:--

Thirty years, it is known,
From the battle of Magh Tuireadh South,
To the battle of Magh Tuireadh North,
In which fell Balor of the great host.

Some antiquaries say that it is from the three sons whom Danann,
daughter of Dealbhaoth, bore, the Tuatha Dé Danann were called, to wit,
Brian, Iuchar and Iucharbha, i.e. three of the children of Dealbhaoth,
son of Ealatha, son of Ned, son of Iondaoi, son of Allaoi, son of Tat,
son of Tabharn, son of Enna, son of Bathach, son of Iobath, son of
Beothach, son of Iarbhoineol Fáidh, son of Neimheadh: because that the
aforesaid three were so accomplished [as that] in heathen arts, that
these tribes with whom they were wished to style them gods, and to
name themselves from them. Here is a stave of a quotation certifying
it, that these three are the three gods of Danann, as the poem says,
which has for beginning, 'Hear, ye learned without blemish,' &c.:--

Brian, Iucharbha and Iuchar there,
Three gods of the Tuatha Dé Danann;
They were slain at Mana[395] over the great sea 
By the hand of Lugh, son of Eithneann.

It is from [the] Danann, who was mother to these three, Dá Chích
Danann[396] is called to the two hills which are in Luachair
Deaghaidh[397] in Desmond.

Others say that it is why they are called Tuatha Dé Danann, because it
is in [their] three orders they were, of those who had come into
Ireland on this expedition. The first order of them, which is called
'Tuath,'[398] used to be in the rank of nobility and headship of
tribe: tuathach, indeed, and tighearna[399] being equivalent, as tuath
and tighearnas[400] are equal. That is the more fit to believe,
inasmuch as 'Dá Bhantuathaigh'[401] is given (as an epithet) for
Beuchuill and for Danann, whom they had for female rulers: so this
verse gives us to understand:--

Beuchuill and Danann beloved --
The two female chiefs were slain;
The extinction of their magic at last
By pale demons of air.

The second order (to) which used to be called 'Dé,'[402] such are
their druids,[403] whence it is the above three used to be called the
three gods of Danann. Wherefore they were called 'gods' (is) from the
wonderfulness of their deeds of magic. The third order which was
called 'Danann,' namely, the order which was given to dán,[404] or to
crafts; for dán and céard[405] are equal.



SECTION XI.
Of the branching of the tribe that was noblest of the Tuatha Dé Danann
down here.[406]

Eochaidh Ollathar, i.e. the Daghdha, Oghma, Allód, Breas and
Dealbhaoth, the five sons of Ealatha, son of Ned, son of Iondaoi, son
of Allaoi, son of Tat, son of Tabharn, son of Enna, son of Báthadh son
of Iobath, son of Beothach, son of Iarbhoineol Fáidh, son of Neimheadh,
son of Aghnoman.

Manannán son of Allód, son of Ealatha, son of Dealbhaoth.
The six sons of Dealbhaoth, son of Oghma: Fiachaidh, Ollamh, Iondaoi,
Brian, Iuchar and Iucharbha.

Lúgh, son of Cian, son of Dianchéacht son of Easarg, son of Ned, son
of Iondaoi.

Goibhneann the smith and Creidhne the artist: Dianchéacht the
physician and Luchtain the mechanic; and Cairbre the poet, son of Tara,
son of Tuirreall.

Beigreó, son of Cairbre Caitcheann, son of Tabharn. Fiachaidh, son of
Dealbhaoth, and Ollamh, son of Dealbhaoth.

Caichér and Neachtain, two sons of Námha, son of Eochaidh Garbh, son
of Duach Dall.

Siodhmall, son of Cairbre Crom, son of Ealcmhar, son of Dealbhaoth.

Éire and Fódhla and Banbha, three daughters of Fiachaidh, son of
Dealbhaoth, son of Oghma. Eirnin, daughter of Eadarlámh mother of
those women.

Badhbh, Macha, and Móirríoghan, their three goddesses. Danann and
Beuchuill, the two female chiefs, and Brighid the poetess.

Appertaining to these noble females were the two royal institutes, i.e.
Fe and Meann (being) their names:[407] it is from them is named Magh 
Feimhin.[408] It is among to them also was Triath-rí-thorc,[409] from
whom is called Treitheirne Mumhan[410]

[Cridhinbhéal Bruinne, and Casmhaol, the three satirists.][411]
It is they[412] who won[413] the battle of Magh Tuireadh North on the
Fomórians, and the battle of Magh Tuireadh South[355] on the Fir Bolg.
It is in the first battle his hand was cut off Nuadha, and his head in
the last battle.[414]



SECTION XII.
Of the kings of the Tuatha Dé Danann here, and of the length of their
sovereignty over Ireland.

Nuadha Airgeadlámh son of Euchtach, son of Eadarlámh son of Orda, son
of Allaoi, son of Tat, son of Tabharn, son of Enna, son of Iobáth, son
of Beothach, son of Iarbhoineol Fáidh, son of Neimheadh, took the
kingdom of Ireland thirty years, till he fell in the battle of Magh
Tuireadh North.

Breas, son of Ealatha, son of Ned, son of Iondaoi, son of Allaoi, son
of Tat, held the kingship seven years.

Lúgh Lámhfada, son of Cian, son of Dianchéacht son of Easar Breac, son
of Ned, son of Iondaoi, son of Allaoi, held the kingdom of Ireland
forty years. It is this Lúgh who appointed the Fair of Taillte at
first as a yearly commemoration of Taillte, daughter of Madhmór i.e.
king of Spain, who was wife to Eochaidh, son of Earc, last king of the
Fir Bolg, and who was wife after that to Eochaidh Garbh, son of Duach
Dall, a chief of the Tuatha Dé Danann. It is by this woman Lúgh
Lámhfada was fostered and trained till he was fit to bear arms; and it
is as an honourable commemoration for her Lúgh instituted the games of
the Fair of Taillte[356] a fortnight before Lúghnasadh,[415] and a
fortnight after it, resembling the games called 'Olympiades': and it
is from that memorial which Ugh used to make Lúghnasadh is given (as
name) to the first day (or) to the Calends of August, i.e. the
'násadh' or commemoration of Lúgh,[416] (on which is now the feast of
St. Peter's chains). He fell by (the hand of) Mac Coll at
Caondruim.[417]

The Daghdha Mór, son of Ealatha, son of Dealbhaoth, son of Ned, held
the kingdom of Ireland seventy years. He died at Brugh of the bloody
missiles of a cast which Ceithleann flung at him in the battle of Magh
Tuireadh. Eochaidh Ollathar (was) the proper name of the Daghdha.

Dealbhaoth, son of Oghma Griain-eigis, son of Ealatha, son of
Dealbhaoth, son of Ned, held the kingship ten years till he fell by
Fiachaidh, son of Dealbhaoth.

Fiachaidh, son of Dealbhaoth, son of Ealatha, held the kingship ten
years, till he fell by Eoghan at Ard Breac.

The three sons of Cearmad Milbheol, son of the Daghdha, that is to say,
Mac Coll, Mac Céacht and Mac Greine their names, assumed the dominion
of Ireland thirty years; and some antiquaries say that it is a
tripartite division which they made on Ireland, as is said in this
verse

Though Éire had many thousands,
They divide the land in three;
Great nobles of glorious deeds,
Mac Coll, Mac Céacht, Mac Greine.

However, it is not a tripartite division which was among them, but the
permutation of the sovereignty, that is to say, each one of them had
it every succeeding year, by turns, as we have said above in
(enumerating) the names of this country, [and in the battle of Taillte
all three fell]. It is why these names were given to those three kings,
because Coll, Céacht and Grian[418] were gods of worship to them. Coll,
indeed, was god to Mac Cuill, and Eathúr was his proper name, and
Banbha his wife. Mac Céacht too, Céacht his god, Teathúr his name, and
Fódhla his wife, Mac Gréine lastly, Grian his god, Ceathúr his name,
and Éire his wife.

Oirbsean (was) the proper name of Manannán: it is from him Loch
Oirbsean[419] is named: for when his grave was being dug, it is then
the lake burst forth over the land. It is to make this matter clear
these verses following were composed:-

Eathúr tall, who obtained dignity, fierce the man,
Coll his god, grandson of the Daghdha not gloomy,
Banbha his wife: Teathúr stout, strong his contest, sharp his stroke
(?),
Fódhla his wife, great deeds he accomplished (?), in Céacht he trusted:
Ceathúr comely, fair his complexion, noble was he,
Éire his wife, generous woman she, Grian his divinity.
Manannán son of Lear. from the 'loch,'[420] he sought the
'sraith,'[421]
Oirbsean his (own) name, after a hundred conflicts he died the death.

According to the Saltair of Caiseal,[422] it is three years wanting of
two hundred (is) the length of the sovereignty of the Tuatha Dé Danann
over Ireland. This verse agrees with that:--
Seven years, ninety, and one hundred -- 
That reckoning is not false
For the Tuatha Dé Danann with might, 
Over Ireland in high sovereignty.[423]



SECTION XIII.
Of the origin of the children of Míleadh, of their proceedings, and of
their transactions, of their genealogy, and of every occurrence that
happened to them, from Fénius Farsaidh down to the invasion of Ireland
by them, here below (stated).

In order, truly, that we should be able to trace the origin of the
Scotic nation to its root, i.e. to Japheth (we find) the two most
distinguished sons Japheth had, that is to say, Gomer and Magog. Moses,
in the tenth chapter of Genesis, where he records the propagation of
the posterity of Japheth, sets down that Gomer had three sons, namely
Aschenez, Riphath, and Thogorma; however, he does not mention
specially the children of Magog according to their names. Nevertheless,
as it is on the antiquaries of the Scotic nation that it is incumbent
to follow up the ascertained genealogy of the nobles who sprang from
Magog, and particularly of the posterity of Fenius Farsaidh, we shall
here set down the genealogical account of the posterity of Magog,
according to the book of invasion which is called Cin Droma
Sneachta;[424] and that authority existed before Patrick came to
Ireland. What it says is, that Magog had three sons, namely, Beath,
Iobáth and Fáthachta. From Beath came Fénius Farsaidh, the ancestor of
the posterity of Gaedheal; from Iobáth came the Amazons, Bactrians,
and Parthians; from Fathachta came Partholón [he who first occupied
Ireland after the deluge] and (also) Neimheadh, son of Aghnoman, and,
accordingly, the Fir Bolg and Tuatha Dé Danann [as we have said above
in (the account of) their conquests]. It is from the posterity of this
Fathachta came the great Attila, who brought Pannonia under his sway,
and was a length of time perturbing the state of Rome, destroyed and
depopulated Aquileia, and made many raids on Germany. It is from
Scythia also, of the posterity of Magog by origin, Zeliorbes, king of
the Huns, who made war upon the emperor Justinian. It is from Scythia,
too, came the Lombards, Hungarians, and Goths [all]. It is from [the]
Scythia, likewise, came the Dauni, from whom is called Daunia in Italy,
and the name of that country now is Apulia. It is from Scythia also
that the Turks have come. But in short,[425] Buchanan,[426] an
investigator of the antiquity of the dissemination of the races of the
world, says, repeating Epiphanius, that the people of Scythia obtained
chief rule shortly after the deluge, and that their sovereignty
continued until the predominance of Babylon. The same authors say that
it is from Scythia the other countries used to receive institutes and
laws and ordinances, and, moreover, that it is they who were the first
race which commenced to be honoured after the deluge. Johannes
Boemus,[427] in the ninth chapter of the second book which he wrote on
the customs of every race, says that the Scythians were never subdued
by any dominion. Josephus says that the Greeks called the people of
Scythia, Magogai. Johannes Nauclerus says[428] that people have come
of the race of Scythia by whom very great deeds were done. Let
Herodotus bear witness to this in the fourth book where he says that
the people of Scythia repelled Darius king of Persia contemptuously
from Scythia. Let Justin likewise witness in his history, where he
treats of the gallantry of the exploits which the people of Scythia
performed: and here are the words of this author:-- 'The people of
Scythia, he says, were always without foreign power affecting them or
seizing their spoils: they drove back Darius, king of Persia, with
disgrace out of Scythia; they slew Cyrus with the entire of his army;
Zophyron, the leader of the army of Alexander the great, with his host,
was destroyed by them: they had heard of the power of the Romans, and
(yet) had never felt it.'[429] From these words it may be understood
that it was great was the bravery and the valour which was among the
people of Scythia to the time of this author.

The Polychronicon says in the thirty-seventh chapter of the first book,
that it is from this word Scythia, Scot is called to the posterity of
Gaedheal Glas, and, in my judgment, it is not more fit to give Gall
(for name) to the people who are now inhabiting Ireland who are called
Gall, that is to say, from Gallia or France as to their origin than to
give Scot (for name) to the Gael from Scythia whence they came
according to their origin: and it is therefore 'Greeks' of Scythia is
called to the posterity of Fáthachta, son of Magog, who obtained
dominion in Gothia, Thracia, and Achaia, viz. Partholón, son of Seara,
with his people; Neimheadh, son of Aghnoman, from whom the children of
Neimheadh are called; the Fir Bolg and the Tuatha Dé Danann, because
it is from Scythia they all came, according to their origin. And I
think that it is why Scot is more especially called to the posterity
of Gaedheal, son of Niul, son of Fenius Farsaidh, because it is to
Fenius Farsaidh the chief dominion of Scythia came, and to his
posterity after him; and that it was Niul was the younger son of
Fenius, and that he did not obtain any equal share of the territory,
as the kindred of Fenius had obtained districts from which they
themselves and their posterity were named. Wherefore Niul enjoined on
his posterity to denominate themselves from Scythia, and for ever to
call themselves Scots, because there was no land in their possession,
and that his father had left him as a portion, only the acquisition of
the sciences and of the several languages; having left the kingdom of
Scythia undivided to Neanual, the son who was older than Niul.



SECTION XIV.
Here below (we treat) definitely apart concerning the true origin from
which the the race of Gaedheal have sprung; and of their proceedings
till the arrival of the sons of Míleadh in Ireland.[430]

Some Latin authors say that Gaedheal was the son of Argus or of
Cecrops, who obtained the sovereignty of the Argives; but that cannot
be well-founded, because that St. Augustine says that the monarchy of
that people commenced at the time Jacob was born, i.e. about four
hundred and thirty-two years after the deluge; and, moreover,
according to the same author, [that] the dominion of his posterity was
maintained but two hundred and fifteen years: and, according to that,
that it is at the end of six hundred and three[431] score and seven
years after the deluge the rule of that line terminated. But truly, it
is not possible for that to be authentic, and to say (at the same
time) that it is from Argus or Cecrops Gaedheal should have come; for
Hector Boetius in his history of Scotland, and, moreover, all the
books of invasion of Ireland, state that Gaedheal was in Egypt during
the time of Moses being in the headship of the children of Israel in
Egypt. Indeed, the books of invasion say that it is at that time Scota,
daughter of Pharao Cingcris, bore Gaedheal to Niul, son of Fenius
Farsaidh, son of Báath, son of Magog: and it is the time when Moses
began to act as leader of the children of Israel in Egypt, seven
hundred and four score and seventeen years (from the deluge); so that
according to that reckoning of time, there were as a conjecture three
hundred years and two score and five besides, from the time of Argus
or Cecrops till Gaedheal was born, and, consequently, it was not
possible for him to be son to Argus or to Cecrops.

Whoever would say that it was from Greece Gaedheal proceeded to Egypt,
and that it is why it is said that it was from Scythia he went to
Egypt, because that it was from the land of 'Cetim'[432] (as a certain
author thinks), he journeyed, [and,] consequently [that he] says that
Scythia, and 'iath na sceach'[433] are equivalent: 'iath,' truly, when
it is understood in place of this word 'fearann' (land), has 'th' or
'dh' at the end, that is to say iath or iadh: however, when this word
'Scithia' is written, there is no 'c' in the middle, as should be in
such like compound word; and, moreover, there is no 'th' or 'dh' at
the end of it, and, consequently, it is but an unwarranted opinion to
suppose that, according to Gaelic etymology, 'Scithia' is equivalent
to 'land of thorns.'

The proof, likewise, is weak concerning Gaedheal[434] having come from
Greece according to his origin, to say that the posterity of Gaedheal
have a resemblance to the Greeks in (their) manners, customs, and
games, and that, therefore it must be said that they came from Greece.
For every invasion that came into Ireland after the deluge, except
only the race of Gaedheal and the children of Neimheadh, it is from
Greece they came, [that is to say, Partholón from 'Migdonia,' the Fir
Bolg from Thracia and the Tuatha Dé Danann from Achaia, where Beotia
is, and the city of Athens,] according as we have shown above in their
several conquests the name of every place in Greece from whence they
had set out.

Wherefore, although the race of the Gaedheal, on their arrival in
Ireland, had not the manners and customs of the Greeks, it was
possible for them to have learned them from the remnant of the Fir
Bolg and the Tuatha Dé Danann who were before them in Ireland, and to
have left them to be practised by their posterity after them, though
they themselves had never been in Greece, nor Gaedheal, nor any of
those who had come before them.



VOLUME 2
Preface to volumes 2 and 3

AN edition of Keating's Foras Feasa with translation and notes, was
undertaken for the Irish Texts Society some ten years ago, by the late
lamented Mr. David Comyn; and the first volume appeared in 1902. Mr.
Comyn, however, while engaged in the preparation of the second volume,
was overtaken by a serious illness, which made it necessary for him to
abandon the undertaking. In February, 1907, the present editor
reluctantly undertook the completion of the work, as far as text and
translation are concerned. Mr. Comyn's plan included a supplementary
volume of notes; and in the two volumes now issued, the lines of the
text are numbered continuously, and thus a system of reference is
secured for the purpose of future annotation. The plan of the work and
the size to which these volumes have grown made the insertion of notes
other than textual ones impracticable. The reasons which induced the
editor to follow a text differing considerably in style from that
mainly used by Mr. Comyn are given fully elsewhere in this volume.

The volume edited by Mr. Comyn contains the Dionbhrollach or
Introduction, together with a portion of Book I. of the Foras Feasa or
History, that portion amounting to almost an eighth of the entire
Foras Feasa. The first of the two volumes now issued gives Book I. of
the Foras Feasa from the point at which Mr. Comyn's volume left off to
the end. The second volume gives the whole of Book II. Thus the
present volumes contain rather more than seven-eighths of the entire
Foras Feasa, excluding the Introduction. There only remain the
Genealogies and Synchronisms, which, with indices, etc., must find a
place in the volume of notes without which the work cannot be regarded
as complete.

These volumes are issued at a time when the Irish text they contain
will have a far larger circle of readers than they would have had at
any time during the past hundred years. The work, too, is one of great
and many-sided interest. It is of interest to the historian, the
antiquarian, the ethnologist, the philologist, the littérateur. In
some of the byways of Irish history, it is our only source of
information. It is a storehouse of excellent Irish prose, almost
modern in style and language. The second book, which is contained in
the second of the volumes now issued, giving the History of Ireland
from the coming of St. Patrick to the Norman Invasion, is as
interesting as a fairy tale.

The Foras Feasa was finished probably in 1633 or 1634; and now, after
a lapse of nearly three centuries, it appears in print, in full, for
the first time. The annotation of the Foras Feasa -- a work scarcely
less important or less difficult than the annotation of the "Annals of
the Four Masters" -- will require years of patient labour and research.
Still it is no inconsiderable advantage to the student to have the
entire text in a convenient form accompanied by a translation, and to
have, moreover, a system of reference which will facilitate the work
of research.

The editor has to acknowledge gratefully the kindness he received from
authorities and assistants while using, in the preparation of this
work, the libraries of Trinity College, the Royal Irish Academy, the
Franciscan Convent, Merchants' Quay, and the King's Inns, as well as
the National Library. He has, moreover, to thank his friendsTadhg O
Donnchadha and Rlseard Ca Foghludha for help given in reading the
proof-sheets.
Pádraig ua Duinnín,
Baile Átha Cliath, Bealltaine, 1908



XV.
The doings of Feinius Farsaidh the grandfather of Gaedheal till his
return from
the Plain of Seanair, and till his death, as follows.

WHEN Feinius Farsaidh became king of Scythia, he determined to become
perfectly acquainted with the various languages which had sprung up
after the confusion of tongues that had taken place long before at the
tower of Babel, which was being erected through pride for the space of
forty years by Nimrod and his followers. For before that confusion of
tongues took place at the tower, the entire human race had but one
common language which had existed amongst them from the time of Adam.
And the name the Book of Invasions gives this language is Gortighern,
as the poet says:

Gortighern the name of the language
Used by the son of God of goodly science,
And by the race of Adam erst
Ere the building of Nimrod's tower.

And Latin authors call it lingua humana, that is, the human language.
But when Nimrod and his kinsfolk were building the tower, as the
confusion of tongues set in and prevented them from finishing a
structure they had begun through pride, the human language they
derived from Adam was taken from them, as many as were engaged in
building the tower. However, it remained with Eibhear son of Saile,
and with his tribe, so that it was named from him; for they called it
Hebrew from Eibhear. Now when Eibhear had learned the cause of their
erecting the tower, that it was with a view to protecting themselves
against the second flood which it was foretold would come upon the
people -- they imagined that the second flood would not be higher than
the first, and proposed to make the tower so high that the flood would
not reach its upper stories, and that accordingly their nobles could
be securely situated in these without fear of the flood -- and when
Eibhear learned that that was the cause of their building the tower,
he declared that he would not help them, and that it was sheer
idleness on their part to have recourse to ingenuity for the purpose
of resisting the fulfilment of God's will. Thereupon he separated from
them without taking any part whatever with them in the building of the
tower. Moreover, when the confusion came on all, God left to Eibhear
alone and to his tribe after him, as a mark of good will, that human
language of our ancestors.

The principal reason why Feinius Farsaidh went to the Plain of Seanair,
together with his school, was that he might be with the people whose
native language was Hebrew, and that it might thus come about that he
and his school would acquire a full and perfect knowledge of that
language.

Now, when Feinius, as we have said, had resolved to acquire the
various languages, he sent, at his own expense, seventy-two disciples
into the various countries of the three continents of the world that
were then inhabited, and charged them to remain abroad seven years, so
that each of them might learn the language of the country in which he
stayed during that time. And at the end of seven years they returned
to Feinius to Scythia; and Feinius went with them to the Plain of
Seanair, together with a large number of the youths of Scythia,
leaving his eldest son Neanual to rule Scythia in his stead, as a
certain poet says, in the poem which begins, "Let us relate the origin
of the Gaels":

Feinius went from Scythia
On the expedition,
A man renowned, wise, learned,
Ardent, triumphant;

There was but one tongue in the world
When they set out;
There were seventy-two tongues
When they parted;

Feinius had a great school learning
Each science,
A man renowned, wise, learned
In each language.

And some seanchas assert that there was a space of sixty years from
the building of the tower until Feinius and his school came southwards
from Scythia to the Plain of Seanair, as a certain poet says in this
stanza:

Thrice twenty years of renown,
So every seancha says,
Till Feinius came southwards,
From the building of Nimrod's tower.

Feinius established schools for the teaching of the various languages
on the Plain of Seanair in the city which Cin Droma Sneachta calls
Eathena, as the poet says in the following stanza:

In the Plain of Seanair after the tower,
The first school was assembled,
In the city of Eathena,
To learn the various tongues.

And they assembled the youths of the countries next them to learn the
various tongues from them; and the three sages who presided over this
school were Feinius Farsaidh himself from Scythia, and Gaedheal son of
Eathor of the race of Gomer from Greece, and Caoi Caoinbhreathach from
Judea, or Iar son of Neama, as the poet says:

Here are the names of the sages
I shall reveal them to you speedily --
Gaedheal son of Ethor of wisdom,
Iar son of Neama and Feinius.

Another poet speaks thus:

Feinius the eloquent sage,
Gaedheal and Caoi Caoinbhreathach,
Three of the writers of the schools
Who followed in the true track of the authors.

It was this trio who wrote on wooden tablets the alphabets of the
three chief languages, namely, Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, as
Ceannfaolaidh the Learned asserts in the Accidence which he wrote in
the time of Columcille. The same author states that Nion son of Beil,
son of Nimrod, was monarch of the world at that time. He also states
that it was about this time that Niul, the tanist son of Feinius
Farsaidh, was born, and that the same Feinius continued in charge of
the school for twenty years in order that this son who was born to him
might be acquainted with the several languages.

As some seanchas assert that it was when Nion son of Beil had reigned
forty-two years that Feinius Farsaidh established a school in the
Plain of Seanair, I am of opinion that he passed ten years of the
reign of Nion son of Beil, and ten years thereafter, in the Plain of
Seanair before he returned from the school to Scythia. For all the
seanchas say that he passed twenty years in charge of the school
before his return. I am also of opinion that it was two hundred and
forty-two years after the Deluge that Feinius established the school
in the Plain of Seanair, according to the computation Bellarminus
makes in his chronicle, where he says that the age of the world was
one thousand eight hundred and fifty-six years when Nion son of Beil
began his sovereignty.

This is the same, according to the Hebrew chronology which Bellarminus
follows, as to say that the reign of Nion began two hundred years
after the Deluge, since according to the Hebrews one thousand six
hundred and fifty-six years elapsed from the beginning of the world to
the Deluge. Add to this forty-two years of the reign of Nion that had
passed before Feinius began the school, and it thus appears that it
was two hundred and forty-two years after the Deluge he began it, and
that he passed twenty years directing it, namely, the ten years that
remained to him of the reign of Nion, and ten years thereafter.

Now after twenty years Feinius returned to Scythia, and established
schools there, and appointed Gaedheal son of Eathor to take charge of
them. Then did Feinius command Gaedheal to arrange and regulate the
Gaelic language as it is into five divisions, that is, Bearla na Feine,
Bearla na bhFileadh, Bearla an Eaderscartha, Bearla Teibidhe, and
Gnaithbhearla, and to name it precisely from himself; hence it is from
Gaedheal son of Eathor it is called Gaelic, and not from Gaedheal Glas,
as others assert. Moreover, it was through friendship for Gaedheal son
of Eathor that Niul son of Feinius Farsaidh gave the name Gaedheal to
the son whom Scota daughter of Pharao Cincris bore him, as
Ceannfaolaidh the Learned says in the Uraicheapt.

Now, it is disputed among authors whence is this word 'Gaedheal.'
Becanus says that it is from the word goedin, that is, goethin,
'noble,' and from the word 'all,' that is, uile, that Gaedheal is
named, that is, 'all noble'; or from the Hebrew word gadhal, meaning
'great,' because Gaedheal son of Eathor, the first who was called
Gaedheal, was great in learning, in wisdom, and in the languages.
However, the seanchas say that he is called Gaedheal from the two
words gaoith dhil, that is, 'lover of wisdom'; for gaoith means 'wise'
and dil 'loving,' as the Greeks call a sage philosophos, that is, 'a
lover of wisdom.'

As to Feinius Farsaidh we are not told that he had any children except
two sons, namely, Neanul and Niul, as the poet says in this stanza:

Two sons had Feinius, truth I tell,
Neanul and Niul, the valiant;
Niul was born at the tower in the east,
Neanul in shield-bright Scythia.

When Feinius had been twenty-two years sovereign of Scythia, after his
return from the Plain of Seanair, being at the point of death, he
bequeathed the sovereignty of Scythia to Neanul, his eldest son, and
left to Niul, his youngest son, only what profit he derived from the
sciences and the various languages which he used to teach in the
public schools of the country.



XVI.
Of the journeying of Niul to Egypt from Scythia, and of his doings
there until
his death as follows:

Before we speak of the journeying of Niul from Scythia to Egypt, we
may observe that Herodotus says that it was from Babylon the Greeks
derived the knowledge of the position of the north star, and the
division of the hours; and Solon asserts that the Greeks had not a
knowledge of history until they obtained it from the Egyptians.
Josephus says, in the first book of his History, that the Greeks had
not an alphabet till the time of Homer. From these authors it appears
that it was not from Greece, so named to-day, that Isis or anyone else
went to teach the sciences to the Egyptians; but it was Niul, the son
of Feinius Farsaidh, who went from Scythia to teach the sciences there.
And whoever should say that there was not learning in Scythia, from
whence Niul came, earlier than in Egypt, would not be stating truth,
according to Polydorus, in the first book he has written, "De rerum
inventoribus," where he says: "There was a long dispute between the
Egyptians and the Scythians; and, in that struggle, the Egyptians
having been overcome, it appeared that the Scythians were more ancient
than they were."[434] From this it may be inferred that the Scythians
possessed education and learning earlier than the Egyptians, and since,
according to the above authors, learning was earlier in Egypt than in
Greece, it was not Isis of Greece or any such person who went from
Greece to Egypt to conduct schools, but Niul son of Feinius Farsaidh
from Scythia, who was born in the Plain of Seanair, and was then
trained in learning in the first school that was established in the
country of Babylon; and this was the first school after the confusion
of the languages of the world, as we have stated above.

When Niul had been a long time conducting the public schools in
Scythia, his fame for knowledge and wisdom spread through the nations
generally, so that on account of his great reputation Pharao Cincris,
king of Egypt, sent envoys to him, inviting him to Egypt to teach the
sciences and the various languages to the youths of that country. Niul
accordingly proceeded to Egypt, as the poet says in this stanza, which
is taken from the poem beginning, "Let us relate the origin of the
Gaels":

Tidings reached Forann
With great acclaim
Of Niul son of Feinius knowing
The languages of the world.

Niul then went to Egypt with the envoys of Pharao; and the king gave
him the land called Capacyront (or Campus Circit) beside the Red Sea.
He also gave his own daughter Scota in marriage to Niul, as Giolla
Caomhain says in the poem beginning "Gaedheal Glas, from whom are the
Gaels ":

He then went into Egypt
And reached the mighty Forann,
And married Scota of charms not few,
The generous, clever daughter of Forann.

When Niul had married Scota, he established schools at Campus Circit
for teaching the sciences and the various languages to the youths of
Egypt. And it was there that Scota gave birth to Gaedheal son of Niul.
Perhaps some one might wonder how Niul, the fifth in descent from
Japhet, could be a contemporary of Moses, seeing that seven hundred
and ninety-seven years elapsed between the Deluge and the assuming by
Moses of the leadership of the children of Israel. My reply to that is
that it is not incredible that Niul should live several hundred years;
for people used to live a long time at that period; witness Eibear son
of Saile the fourth in descent from Seim who lived four hundred and
sixty-four years, and Seim who lived five hundred years after Arphaxad
was born to him, as we read in the eleventh chapter of Genesis; that
it is not to be doubted, therefore, that Niul might have lived from
the forty-second year of the reign of Nion son of Beil, as we have
said, to the time of Moses. And moreover, the length of life granted
to Niul and that he should have survived till the time of Moses in
Egypt is still less to be wondered at, if what Marianus Scotus states
be true; for he says that it was three hundred and thirty-one years
after the Deluge that the Confusion of Tongues took place at Babylon,
while, according to what we have stated above, it was long after the
Babylonian Confusion that Niul was born. From what we have said, we
should trust the authors of the seanchus of the Scotic race as regards
the age of Niul son of Feinius Farsaidh, and believe that he was a
contemporary of Moses in Egypt.

As to Niul, it was when he was sojourning at Capacyront beside the Red
Sea, and when Scota had given birth to Gaedheal, that the children of
Israel escaped from Pharao and marched to the shore of the Red Sea,
and made an encampment beside Capacyront where Niul dwelt. When Niul
heard of this, he went to meet them and discourse with them, and to
find out who they were. At the outposts of the host he met Aaron who
told him the story of the children of Israel and of Moses and the
witness-bearing miracles that God had wrought against Pharao and his
army, because of the bondage of the children of Israel. Now Niul and
Aaron entered into an alliance and friendship with one another; and
Niul inquired of Aaron whether they had food or provisions, and
further informed him that whatever corn and means he had would all be
at their service. For this Aaron was grateful to him. Then night came
on; and Aaron went to Moses and told him of the offers which Niul had
made to them; and Moses and Aaron were grateful to him accordingly.

Now Niul went to his own people after this, and told them that the
children of Israel were nigh unto them; and he told them all that had
befallen the children of Israel. And that same night a serpent came
upon Gaedheal as he was swimming, and wounded him so that he was at
the point of death; and others say that it was from the desert it came
and wounded him in bed. His people told Niul to take the lad to Moses;
and he took Gaedheal into the presence of Moses. Moses prayed to God,
and applied the rod he held in his hand to the wound, and thus healed
it. And Moses said that, in what place soever the stock of that youth
would settle, there no serpent would ever have venom, and this is
verified in Crete, an island in Greece, in which some of his posterity
are; it is without serpents as Ireland is. And although there were
serpents in Ireland up to the coming of Patrick, I do not think they
had venom; or I imagine it is the demons that are called serpents in
the life of Patrick.

Some seanchas state that Moses fastened with a lock around the neck of
Gaedheal the bracelet that he had on his own arm, and that it was from
this he was called Gaedheal Glas. At that time each chieftain wore a
bracelet on the arm as a mark of his tribal supremacy; and hence the
head of a company is now called a noble fleascach or 'bracelet-
bearer.' To set forth that it was from the trail of the serpent that
clung to Gaedheal's neck that he is called Gaedheal Glas, and to show
that it was Moses who healed him, we have the following stanzas:

Gaedheal Glas, why was the name given
To that brilliant, perfect man?
The event whence Gaedheal is Glas,
Few are those who know its history;

While bathed in the strong stream
Gaedheal son of Niul of good disposition,
A serpent bit his skin;
It was not easy to heal it;

The grey-blue mark did not leave him
Till Moses kindly healed it.
What the learned understand from this
Is that thence comes Gaedheal Glas.

Others assert that he was called Gaedheal Glas from the grey-blue
colour of his arms and armour. Hence someone has composed the
following stanza:

Scota bore a son to Niul the modest,
From whom sprang many noble tribes;
Gaedheal Glas was the name of the man,
From the grey-blue colour of his arms and armour.

And it is from this Gaedheal that all the Gaels are named. Hence the
poet composed this stanza:

The Feni are named from Feinius,
The meaning is not difficult;
The Gaels from comely Gaedheal Glas,
The Scots from Scota.

Others, however, say that the mother of Gaedheal was called Scota
because his father was of the Scotic race from Scythia, and that it
was their custom to call the women after their husbands. Understand
that this is not the Scota who was wife of Galamh, who is called
Milidh of Spain, and bore him six sons. For the mother of Gaedheal was
daughter to Pharao Cincris; and it was he who held the children of
Israel in bondage. But the Pharao whose daughter was wife of Milidh
was the fifteenth Pharao after him. He was called Pharao Nectonibus.

Now as to Niul, he told Moses that Pharao Cincris would be angry with
himself for having welcomed him. "In that case," said Moses, "come
along with us; and if we reach the land which God has fore-appointed
to us, thou shalt get a share of it; or, if thou wilt, we will deliver
the fleet of Pharao into thy hands, and do thou go on sea in it so
that thou mayest learn how we shall separate from Pharao." Niul
followed this latter counsel. A thousand armed men were sent with him
to the ships; and these were delivered over to him; and he embarked in
them, and beheld the events of the ensuing day, namely, the opening of
the sea before the children of Israel, and its dispersion after them
on Pharao and on his host, drowning them, as the poet says in this
stanza, which is taken from the poem beginning, "O thou who believest
not according to truth":

Sixty thousand of them on foot,
Fifty thousand on horseback,
A storm of the Red Sea of Romhar
Overwhelmed them all at once.

Sixty thousand foot, then, and fifty thousand horse was their number.
It was seven hundred and ninety-seven years after the Deluge that
Pharao was drowned, as we have stated above. And Niul having seen
Pharao and his host drown, remained in the same territory, as he was
not afraid after the drowning of Pharao; and his children and progeny
grew up until they were able to bear arms. Some time afterwards Niul
died; and Gaedheal and his mother took possession of his lands.
Thereafter a son was born to Gaedheal in Egypt, namely Easru son of
Gaedheal, and some time after that a son was born to him in turn, Sru
son of Easru, son of Gaedheal, and these possessed the same lands and
dwelt thereon. Now, as to the Egyptians, Pharao Intuir assumed
sovereignty over them after the drowning of Pharao Cincris. Pharao was
a name given to every king who ruled over Egypt from Pharao Cincris
who was drowned in the Red Sea to Pharao Nectonibus the fifteenth king
after Pharao Cincris.



XVII.
Of the expulsion by Pharao Intuir of the race of Gaedheal from Egypt
as follows:

As to Pharao Intuir and the Egyptians thereafter, when they had become
powerful in the country, they remembered their old enmity against the
children of Niul and the race of Gaedheal, that is, the friendship
into which they had entered with the children of Israel, and Niul's
having carried off the fleet of Pharao Cincris on the escape of the
children of Israel. They accordingly made war upon the race of
Gaedheal and banished them against their will from Egypt. Thomas
Walsingham agrees with this account in Upodigma, where he says: "When
the Egyptians had been drowned, the portion of the inhabitants who
lived after them expelled a certain Scythian nobleman who dwelt
amongst them, lest he might assume sovereignty over them. When he had
been expelled with his tribe, he came to Spain, where he resided many
years, and where his progeny multiplied exceedingly, and thence they
came to Ireland."[436]

Know, O reader, that this nobleman was Sru son of Easru, son of
Gaedheal, and not Gaedheal himself, notwithstanding Hector Boetius,
and notwithstanding also the opinion of the modern English authors who
have written on Ireland, and who imagine that it was Gaedheal himself
who came to Spain. Because, according to the truth of the seanchus of
Ireland, which one should believe in this matter, it was in Egypt that
Scota daughter of Pharao Cincris gave birth to Gaedheal, and it was
there that he lived till his death; and he did not come from Greece,
as others assert, but his father, who was called Niul, came from
Scythia. And although the author whom we have quoted states that it
was to Spain the nobleman to whom we have referred came, such is not
the fact; for it was to Scythia he went, and it was the fifteenth in
descent from him, called Bratha son of Deaghaidh, who first came to
Spain. Here is the seancha's statement of the fact that it was Sru son
of Easru who was the leader of this expedition on its setting out from
Egypt, as Giolla Caomhain says in the poem beginning, "Gaedheal Glas
from whom are the Gaels ":

Sru son of Easru son of Gaedheal,
Our ancestor of the joyous host,
It was he who went northwards from his house
Over the Red Sea of Romhar.

Four shipfuls were his host
Upon the Red Sea of Romhar;
Found room in each wooden dwelling, as was right,
Four and twenty wedded couples.

Know, as we have said, that it was Sru son of Easru who headed this
expedition till they reached the Island of Crete where he died, and
that his son Eibhear Scot assumed the supreme authority till they
arrived in Scythia. It is for this reason that a certain author says
that Eibhear Scot was their leader in this expedition, and that it was
from his cognomen, namely, Scot, that the Gaels are called the Scotic
race. For, according to a certain author, Scot means 'archer,' and
there was in his time no bowman superior to him; and from this
cognomen given him the name was given to his posterity; and they
practised the bow as a weapon in imitation of the ancients down to a
recent period within our own memory. However, we shall not adopt the
view of this author, since it is the common opinion of the seanchas
that the race of the Gaels were called the Scotic race from their
having come originally from Scythia.

Understand, O reader, that Gaedheal was a contemporary of Moses, and
that accordingly he was fourscore years of age when Pharao was drowned,
and that the fourth in descent from himself, namely, Eibhear Scot son
of Easru, son of Gaedheal, had been born before the children of Israel
passed through the Red Sea with Moses as leader over them. Certain
seanchas are of opinion that there were four hundred and forty years
from the drowning of Pharao in the Red Sea to the coming to Ireland of
the sons of Milidh. And in confirmation of this, one of these authors
thus speaks in this stanza:

Forty and four hundred
Years, it is not a falsehood,
From the going of the people of God, I assure you,
Over the surface of the sea of Romhar
Till sped across the sturrering sea
The sons of Milidh to the land of Erin.

However, according to the computation made by the Book of Invasions,
there were only three hundred years less by seventeen from the time
that Moses assumed the leadership of the children of Israel in Egypt
until the coming of the sons of Milidh to Ireland. For Moses assumed
the leadership of the children of Israel in Egypt seven hundred and
ninety-seven years after the Deluge; and according to the time Irish
history allows to the Invasions of Ireland, it was one thousand and
eighty years after the Deluge that the sons of Milidh took possession
of Ireland. Thus the Book of Invasions states that it was three
hundred years after the Deluge that Parthalon came, and that his
descendants remained in possession of Ireland three hundred years, and
that Ireland remained a waste for thirty years, till the descendants
of Neimhidh arrived there, and that these descendants ruled Ireland
two hundred and seventeen years, and that the Firbolg held the
sovereignty thirty-six years, and the Tuatha De Danann two hundred
years less by three; and, adding all these together, they make a total
of one thousand and eighty years from the Deluge to the coming of the
sons of Milidh to Ireland. And if this number be taken in connexion
with the seven hundred and ninety-seven years that elapsed from the
Deluge to the leadership of Moses over the children of Israel, it is
plain that there were only three hundred years less by seventeen from
that time till the coming of the sons of Milidh to Ireland; and hence
that the opinion above-mentioned is false which states that it was
four hundred and forty years after the children of Israel had passed
through the Red Sea that the sons of Milidh came to Ireland.

Some seanchas state that the route taken by Sru son of Easru and his
followers was through the Red Sea and south-eastward through the ocean,
having Taprobana on their right, and Asia on their left to the east,
and then turning northwards, having it still on the left, and thence
to the extremity of Sliabh Rife, in the north-west part of Asia, and
southward through the strait that separates Europe and Asia, and
thence to Scythia.

However, this was not the route Sru took as he proceeded from Egypt to
Scythia with the crews of four ships, and each ship containing thirty
men; but from the mouth of the Nile through the Torrian Sea to Crete,
which is now called Candia, where he dwelt for a time, and where he
died, and where he left succeeding generations of his descendants; and
hence, according to the authors of our records there are no serpents
in Crete as there are none in Ireland. And thence they proceeded to
Scythia, with Eibhear Scot for their leader; and whoever should state
that it was not possible to go from Egypt to Scythia by ship or vessel,
considering how Scythia was bounded at that time, would not be stating
a fact, since it is plain from every writer who has treated of
geography that the river called Tanais flows into the Mediterranean
Sea, and that that sea extends to Egypt, where the river Nile is; and
according to the limits of Scythia at that ime the river Tanais is
reckoned among the rivers of Scythia, according to Herodotus, an
ancient author of weight, in the fourth book, where he says: "The
river Tanais, which separates Asia from Europe, is reckoned among the
rivers of the Scythians."[437] And when they had arrived in Scythia,
war and strife arose between themselves and their kinsmen, namely, the
children of Neanul son of Feinius Farsaidh; and they contended with
one another for the mastery of the country until it happened that
Aghnon son of Tat, the fifth in descent from Eibhear Scot, slew his
own cousin, Reafloir son of Rifill, of the race of Neanul, who was
then king of Scythia, as Giolla Caomhain says in the poem beginning,
"Gaedheal Glas, from whom are the Gaels ":

Reafloir and Aghnon without fault
Were seven years contending for mastery,
Till Reafloir fell with glory
By the successful hand of Aghnon.

Of the expulsion of the race of Gaedheal from Scythia.

Now, as to the children of Reafloir son of Rifill, he had two sons, to
wit, Neanul and Rifill, and they collected an army against the
descendants of Gaedheal, to banish them completely from the country;
and the descendants of Gaedheal came together, and left the country in
a body, going through the land of the Breast-Seared, who are called
Amazons, to the border of the Caspian Sea. There they took ship and
went on sea, and landed on an island in the Caspian Sea, where they
remained a year; and their leaders in that expedition were Aghnon and
Eibhear, two sons of Tat son of Aghnaman, son of Beodhaman, son of
Eibhear Scot, son of Sru, son of Easru, son of Gaedheal.

Aghnon had three sons with him on that expedition, namely, Ealloit,
Laimhfhionn, and Lamhghlas. Eibhear son of Tat had two sons, namely
Caicher and Cing. And Aghnon died on that island. And at the end of a
year they all quitted the island, the crews of three ships, there
being sixty in each ship, and every third man having a wife with him.
They had six leaders in that expedition; and they made for the strait
that leads westward from the Caspian Sea to the narrow sea that comes
in from the northern ocean; and when they reached that sea, a storm
came upon them, and they were driven to an island called Caronia in
the Pontic Sea, where they abode for a year and a quarter; and it was
in that island Eibhear son of Tat and Lamhghlas son of Aghnon died.
Thence they set out, having four leaders, namely Ealloit, Laimhfhionn,
Cing, and Caicher; and mermaids came on the sea before them, and these
used to discourse music to the sailors as they passed them, so that
they might lull them to sleep, and then fall upon them and slay them;
and Caicher the Druid applied a remedy to this by melting wax in their
ears so that they could not hear the music lest it might put them to
sleep. They went on in this way till they put into port at the
extremity of Sliabh Rife in the north; and it was there that Caicher
foretold them that they would not find a dwelling-place anywhere till
they reached Ireland, and that it was not they themselves who would
reach it but their descendants. Thence they set out and reached
Gothia; and to Laimhfhionn was born a renowned son called Eibhear
Gluinfhionn, and the race of Gaedhael dwelt in that country thirty
years, and some of their progeny are there to this day. In proof of
this Giolla Caomhain composed this stanza:

The race of skilful, beloved Gaedheal
Were thirty years in that land;
Some of their tribe remain there ever since
Until the end of the world.

Other seanchas are of opinion that the race of Gaedheal dwelt in
Gothia a hundred and fifty years; and this is the most probable
opinion. For it is plain that the race of Gaedheal spent eight
generations in Gothia, namely, from Eibhear Gluinfhionn to Bratha.
These generations are as follows: Bratha son of Deaghaidh, son of
Earchaidh, son of Ealloit, son of Nuadha, son.of Neanul, son of Eibric,
son of Eibhear Gluinfhionn, who was born in Gothia itself, son of
Laimhfhionn, the first leader of the race of Gaedheal that came into
that country; and since so many generations could not come within
thirty years, I am convinced that the latter opinion is the true one.

Other seanchas assert that it was three hundred years the race of
Gaedheal dwelt in Gothia. But this cannot be true, since, according to
the times of the Invasions, as we have said above, there were not
three hundred years in full from the time Pharao was drowned in the
Red Sea until the coming of the sons of Milidh to Ireland. Hence this
opinion cannot be true, since within that period the race of Gaedheal
went through the whole of their wanderings from Egypt to Crete, and
from Crete to Scythia, and from Scythia to Gothia, from Gothia to
Spain, from Spain to Scythia, and from Scythia to Egypt, and from
Egypt to Thrace, from Thrace to Gothia, and from Gothia to Spain, and
from Spain to Ireland.



XVIII.
Of the journeying of the race of Gaedheal from Gothia to Spain as
follows.

Now Bratha son of Deaghaidh, the eighth in descent from Eibhear
Gluinfhionn, proceeded from Gothia by Crete and Sicily, having Europe
on the right, to Spain, there being with him the crews of four ships,
as Giolla Caomhain says in this stanza:

Bratha son of Deaghaidh the beloved
Came to Crete to Sicily;
The crews of four well-rigged ships safely came,
Having Europe on the right, to Spain.

From Bratha Braganza in Portugal is named, where lies the duchy of
Braganza. Here are the four leaders that came with Bratha to Spain on
that expedition: Oige and Uige, two sons of Ealloit son of Neanul,
Manntan and Caicher. There were fourteen wedded couples and six
servants in each of the ships; and they routed the natives thrice,
after they had come to land, that is, the race of Tubal son of Japhet.
However, a one-day's plague came afterwards upon the followers of the
son of Ealloit; and they died all but ten. But after this they
increased; and Breoghan son of Bratha was born.

The general chronicle of Spain, which was written by a French
gentleman called Lobhaois, as we read in Edward Grimston, page 3, says
that the first king who obtained sovereignty over all Spain was a
person called Brigus, who built many castles; and it is he who, in the
Book of Invasions, is called Breoghan, the grandfather of Milidh of
Spain; and it is from him the Brigantes are so called; and, according
to the same chronicle, it is from him that the country now called
Castile was given the name Brigia in olden times; and a castle was the
emblem on his shield, as is the case with the king of Spain now.

It was this Breoghan, too, who defeated Spain in many battles; and it
was he who erected or built Brigansia near Corunna, and the tower of
Breoghan in Corunna itself. Whence Giolla Caomhain composed this
stanza:

Many contests and battles
Over the proud host of Spain
Won Breoghan of conflicts and strifes,
Who built Brigansia.

This Breoghan had ten sons, namely, Breogha, Fuad, Muirtheimhne,
Cuailgne, Cuala, Bladh, Eibhle, Nar, Ioth, and Bile. And hereupon the
same author composed this stanza:

The ten sons of Breoghan without faltering;
Breogha, Fuad, and Muirtheimhne,
Cnailgne, Cuala, noble Bladh,
Eibhle, Nar, Ioth, and Bile.

Now Galamh, who is called Milidh of Spain, was a son of the Bile here
mentioned; and although Bile be the last-named of the sons of Breoghan
in the stanza given above, the authors of our records assert that he
was the eldest of Breoghan's sons.

And when the race of Breoghan had multiplied and had conquered the
greater part of Spain, a mighty son of renowned deeds called Galamh 
was born to Bile son of Breoghan; and it is he who is named Milidh of
Spain; and he was seized by a desire to go to Scythia with a fleetful
of the young men of Spain to visit his kinsmen and to serve under them.
Having resolved on this undertaking, he equipped thirty ships, placing
in them their complement of warriors, launched on the Torrian Sea, and
proceeded directly northeastward to Sicily and to Crete, until he
reached Scythia; and when he had landed there, he sent word to
Reafloir son of Neamain, who was king of Scythia at that time; and
this Reafloir son of Neamain was of the race of Reafloir son of Rifill,
whom we have mentioned above. Now when Milidh came into the presence
of Reafloir, the latter welcomed him; and shortly afterwards that king
made him commander of the forces of Scythia, and gave him in marriage
his own daughter, whose name was Seang daughter of Reafloir, and she
bore him two sons, namely, Donn and Airioch Feabhruadh.

And when Milidh had passed some time in Scythia, he had much success
against rebels and plunderers in that country, so that the inhabitants
loved him greatly. When Reafloir the king perceived this, he grew
afraid lest Milidh should oppose him and deprive him of the kingdom of
Scythia; and accordingly he conspired to kill him, notwithstanding
that he was his son-in-law. And when Milidh heard this, he sought an
opportunity and killed Reafloir the king; and he then assembled and
brought together his own followers and put to sea with the crews of
threescore ships, and proceeded by direct route through the Torrian
Sea till he reached the mouth of the Nile; and when he had landed
there, he sent messengers to Pharao Nectonibus, informing him that he
had arrived in the country; and that king sent messengers to Milidh;
and when the latter came into his presence, he bade him welcome, and
gave territory in that country to himself and his followers to abide
in. This expedition of Milidh from Scythia to Egypt is related by
Giolla Caomhain in this stanza:

Milidh, whose progeny was good,
Slew Reafloir, who was not weak;
Hastily did he fly from yon land
To the river Nile, where he obtained territory.

Understand, O reader, that the two sons whom Seang daughter of
Reafloir bore to Mileadh, that is, Donn and Airioch Feabhruadh, were
with him on his voyage to Egypt, their mother having died in Scythia.

At this time a great war took place between king Pharao and the king
of Aethiopia. Pharao, when he had satisfied himself as to the valour
and prowess of Milidh, made him commander of his army to oppose the
army of the Aethiopians, and he fought the Aethiopian army in many
battles and conflicts; and Milidh was most successful, so that his
fame and renown spread throughout the nations, so that, as a
consequence, Pharao gave him his own daughter to wife, who was called
Scota, from being the wife of Milidh, who was of the race of Scot. And
she bore him two sons in Egypt, namely, Eibhear Fionn and Aimhirgin;
and immediately on Milidh's reaching Egypt, he set twelve of the
youths who accompanied him to learn the principal crafts of Egypt, so
that each of them might become proficient in his own craft at the end
of the seven years that he dwelt in Egypt.

As for Milidh, he bethought him that Caicher the Druid had foretold,
long before, to his ancestor Laimhfhionn, that it was in Ireland his
descendants would obtain permanent sovereignty; and accordingly he
fitted out sixty ships, putting the full number of warriors into them,
and bade farewell to Pharao. Thereupon, he proceeded from the mouth of
the river Nile through the Torrian Sea till he landed on an island
close to Thrace, which is called Irena; and it was here that Ir son of
Milidh was born. Thence he proceeded to an island called Gothia, which
lies in the channel leading to the northern ocean; and he dwelt there
for some time, and it was there that Scota bore him a son called Colpa
of the Sword. Thence they proceeded into the narrow sea which
separates Asia from Europe on the north, and continued in a westerly
direction, having Europe on the left, till they came to Cruithentuaith,
which is called Alba. They plundered the coasts of that country, and
afterwards proceeded, having Great Britain on their right, and reached
the mouth of the river Rhine, and continued in a south-westerly
direction, having France on the left, and after that they landed in
Biscay.

Now, when they had arrived in that country, Milidh's kinsmen came to
bid him welcome; and they informed him that the Goths, and many other
foreign tribes, were harassing both that country and all Spain. Upon
hearing this, Milidh summoned his own supporters throughout Spain; and
when they had assembled in one place, he set out with them, and with
the fleetful that had come into the country with him, against the
Goths and the foreign tribes, and defeated them in fifty-four battles,
and banished them from Spain; and he himself and his kinsmen, that is,
the descendants of Breoghan son of Bratha, took possession of the
greater part of that country. At this time, Milidh had thirty-two sons,
as the poet says:

Thirty sons and two sons
Had Milidh of bright hands;
There came of these, we are certain,  
Only a single eight to Ireland.

Twenty-four of these were born to him in concubinage before he set out
from Spain for Scythia, and the other eight were borne to him by the
two wives he had in succession, namely, Seang daughter of Reafloir,
prince of Scythia, who gave birth to two of them in Scythia, namely
Donn and Aerioch Feabhruadh, and Scota, the daughter of Pharao
Nectonibus, who gave birth to the remaining six of them, to wit, two
in Egypt, Eibhear Fionn and Aimhirgin, Ir on the Thracian Sea, Colpa
of the Sword in Gothia, Arannan and Eireamhon in Galicia, as Conaing
the poet says in the following historical poem:

Eight sons of Galamh of the shouts,
Who was called Milidh of Spain, 
They hewed down a thousand fields;
In what countries were they born

Airioch Feabhruadh and Donn of conflicts
Were born in Scythia;
There were born in stream-filled Egypt
Eibhear Fionn and Aimhirgin;

Ir, no warrior was greater,
Was born beside Thrace;
Colpa of the Sword was born
In Colpa's Glen in Gaothlaidhe;

There were born at Breoghan's tower without grief
Arannan and Eireamhon,
The two youngest of the faultless warriors;
The Son of God subdued their strength. Eight.



XIX.

When the race of Breoghan son of Bratha had increased, they were
strong and numerous in Spain; and because of the greatness of their
exploits, they resolved to extend their sway in other directions. They
had another motive also. For, at that time, there was a scarcity of
food in Spain for the space of twenty-six years, on account of the
great drought that existed during that period, and also because of the
many conflicts that took place between them and the Goths, and the
other foreign races, with whom they were contending for the mastery of
Spain. They accordingly took counsel together as to what country they
should explore, and who should be sent to explore it. What they
resolved on was, to elect Ioth son of Breoghan, son of Bratha, who was
a valiant man, and also wise and learned in the sciences, for the
purpose of exploring the island of Ireland. And the place where they
adopted this counsel was at the tower of Breoghan in Galicia.

It was in this manner that they sent Ioth to Ireland, and not, as
others assert, that he had seen it in the clouds of heaven on a
winter's night from the summit of the tower of Breoghan. For there had
been familiarity and intercourse before then between Ireland and Spain
since the time when Eochaidh son of Earc, the last king of the Fir
Bolg, took Taillte daughter of Maghmhor, king of Spain, to wife. They
thus had been in the habit of trading with one another, and of
exchanging their wares and valuables, so that the Spaniards were
familiar with Ireland, and the Irish had a knowledge of Spain before
Ioth son of Breoghan was born. Hence it was not from a view obtained
in a single night from the summit of the tower of Breoghan that Ioth,
or the children of Breoghan, acquired a knowledge of Ireland, but from
there having been intercourse for a long time previously between Spain
and Ireland.

Now, Ioth equipped a ship and manned it with thrice fifty chosen
warriors, and put out to sea until they reached the northern part of
Ireland, and put into port at Breantracht Mhaighe Iotha. And when Ioth
landed there, he sacrificed-to Neptune, the god of the sea. and the
demons gave him bad omens. Thereupon, a company of the natives came
and spoke with him in Scoitbhearla, that is, in Gaelic: and he replied
to them in the same tongue, and said that it was from Magog he himself
was descended, as they were, and that Scoitbhearla was his native
language as it was theirs. Taking their cue from this passage in the
Book of Invasions, the seanchas state that Scoitbhearla, which is
called Gaelic, was the mother tongue of Neimhidh and his tribe, and
therefore also of the Fir Bolg and the Tuatha De Danann. For this may
be believed from what we have stated above, that it was Gaedheal son
of Eathor, at the command of Feinius Farsaidh, king of Scythia, who
regulated and set in order the Scoitbhearla; and it is from this
Gaedheal that it was called Gaelic as we have said above.

Now, this Gaedheal had been teaching the public schools in Scythia
before Neimhidh proceeded from Scythia on an expedition to Ireland;
and since Scoitbhearla was the common tongue of Scythia when Neimhidh
set out from that country, according to the seanchas, the Scoitbhearla
must have been the mother tongue ofNeimhidh and of his followers when
they came to Ireland, and accordingly of every colony sprung from him
or from his descendants who came to Ireland, not to mention the
descendants of Milidh, whose native language was the Scoitbhearla from
the time that Niul left Scythia to the present time. Richard Creagh,
primate of Ireland, supports this view in the book he has written on
the origin of Gaelic and of the race of Gaedheal. He speaks as
follows: "The Gaelic speech," he says, "has been in common use in
Ireland from the coming of Neimidh, six hundred and thirty years after
the Deluge, to this day."[438] From what we have said, it is not
improbable that it was in Scoitbhearla that Ioth and the Tuatha De
Danann conversed with one another.

As to Ioth, he proceeded to ask them the name of the country and who
held the sovereignty of it at that time. The company he had first
fallen in with explained that the name of the country was Inis Ealga,
and that the three sons of Cearmad Milbheoil son of the Daghaidh held
the sovereignty of it yearly, in succession, as we have said above,
that they were at that time at Oileach Neid, in the north of Ulster,
contending with one another about the valuables of their ancestors.
Upon hearing this, Ioth set out with two-thirds of the company who had
come with him in the ship, the full number manning the ship being
thrice fifty warriors. And when he had come into the presence of the
sons of Cearmad, they bade him welcome, and made known to him the
cause of their contention. He, on his part, informed them that it was
through stress of weather at sea he had landed in the country, and
that he did not intend to dwell there, but to return to his own
country. But as they deemed Ioth a learned man, they chose him as a
judge in the dispute that was between them, and his decision was that
the valuables be divided into three equal parts between them; and he
thereupon proceeded to praise Ireland, and said it was wrong for them
to dispute with one another, seeing that the island so abounded in
honey, in fruit, in fish, and in milk, in grain and corn, and that the
climate was so temperate as regards heat and cold. He further said
that, if a tripartite division were made of the country between them,
it would be sufficient for them all. Ioth then took his leave of them,
and with his hundred warriors set out for his ship.

As to the sons of Cearmad, they observed how highly Ioth had praised
Ireland; and they believed that, were he to reach his own country, he
would return with a large host to conquer Ireland; and they resolved
to send the son of Coll with thrice fifty warriors in pursuit of him.
These overtook him, and Ioth placed himself in the rear of his party,
and conducted them to northwards Magh Iotha; and a conflict took place
between them, and Ioth fell there; and his followers took him with
them in their ship, and he died at sea in their midst, and was buried
in Spain, his body having been previously exhibited to the sons of
Milidh in order to incite them to come to Ireland to avenge him on the
sons of Cearmad. Some seanchas are of opinion that it was at Druim
Lighean that Ioth was slain, and that he was buried at Magh Iotha. But
the above view is better established and more probable.

Of the invasion of Ireland by the sons of Milidh, and of their doings,
and from what country they came to Ireland.

Hector Boetius, in the third chapter of the History of Scotland,
states that Eibhear and Eireamhon were sons of Gaedheal. Now this
cannot be true, since, according to Cormac son of Cuileannan in his
chronicle, Gaedheal was a contemporary of Moses; and he says, moreover,
according to the Book of Invasions, that it was two hundred and
eighty-three years after the drowning of Pharao that the sons of
Milidh came to Ireland, and therefore Gaedheal could not have been the
father of Eibhear or of Eireamhon. It is plain also, according to
Cormac, in the enumeration of the generations he has made from Galamh,
called Milidh of Spain, who was father of Eibhear and of Eireamhon, to
Noe, that it was not Gaedheal who was their father. Here is the
pedigree to Noe, according to Cormac: Galamh son of Bile, son
of.Breoghan, son of Bratha, son of Deaghaidh, son of Earchaidh, son of
Ealloit, son of Nuadha, son of Neanul, son of Eibric Glas, son of
Eibhear Gluinfhionn, son of Laimhfionn, son of Aghnon, son of Tat, son
of Ogaman, son of Beodhaman, son of Eibhear Scot, son of Sru, son of
Easru, son of Gaedheal Glas, son of Niul, son of Feinius Farsaidh, son
of Baath, son of Magog, son of Japhet, son of Noe.

Whoever reads the History of Hector Boetius would imagine that he is
of opinion that the Gaels of Alba sprang from a different Gaedheal
from the Gaedheal whence the Irish sprang. However, I am content with
the opinion of a reputable Scotch author, Johannes Major, who asserts
that it is from the Gaels of Ireland the Gaels of Alba sprang. He
speaks in these terms: "For this reason, I assert," says he, "that
whatever stock the Irish be from, the Albanians are from the same
stock."[439] Beda agrees with this view in the first chapter of the
first book of the History of the Church of Sacsa, where he says: "In
the course of time," says he, "Britain received, after the Britons and
the Picts, a third race in the portion or division of the Picts, a
race that came from Ireland together with their chief Rheada, who
seized on a settlement for themselves among the Picts by friendship or
with arms, which they retain to the present time."[440]

From this it is to be inferred, in accordance with Beda, that it was
from Ireland the Scotic race, together with their chief Rheada, went
to Scotland, and that their descendants are there to this day, and
that it is they who are called Scots. Humphredus, a Welsh author,
speaks thus: "The Scots themselves, and all besides, know well that
they are the descendants of the Irish; and our countrymen (that is,
the Welsh) call them by the same name, that is, Gaels."[441] Moreover,
Cambrensis, in the sixteenth chapter of the third distinction of the
book he has written describing Ireland, points out that it was when
Niall Naoighiallach held the sovereignty of Ireland that the six sons
of Muiredhach, king of Ulster, went to Alba, that they acquired power
and supremacy there, and that it was at this time that the name Scotia
was first given to Alba, and that it is from these sons of the king of
Ulster that the Albanians are called the Scotic race. Of these sons he
speaks as follows: "And hence," says he, "it is from them that the
Gaels of Scotland are descended, and are specially called the Scotic
race to this day."[442]

According to what we have said the two opinions advanced by Hector
Boetius in the History of Scotland are false: the first in which he
imagines that Gaedheal was the father of the children of Milidh; and
the second in which he thinks that the Gaedheal from whom the Gaelic
race of Alba are descended was a different person from the Gaedheal
from whom sprang the sons of Milidh who conquered Ireland.

Buchanan, a Scotch author, in the History of Scotland which he has
written, asserts that it was from France the sons of Milidh came to
Ireland; and he advances, as he thinks, three reasons for this. The
first of these reasons is that in which he says that France was so
populous that the portion of it called Gallia Lugdunensis could supply
three hundred thousand fighting men, and hence that it is likely that
she sent out surplus forces to occupy other countries, and that
accordingly she sent forth a company to occupy Ireland, namely, the
tribe of Gaedheal. My reply to this reason is, that this author did
not know when the sons of Milidh came to Ireland, and accordingly did
not know whether France was populous or waste when the sons of Milidh
came to Ireland. Moreover, granted that France was as populous as he
represents it to have been when the sons of Milidh came to Ireland, it
does not necessarily follow from this that it was from France the sons
of Milidh came. For why should France be populous at that time rather
than Spain, whence the sons of Milidh came? It thus appears how
trifling is this reason that Buchanan advances to prove that it was
from France that the sons of Milidh originally came.

The second silly argument he gives for supposing that it was from
France the sons of Milidh came to Ireland is, that certain French and
Irish words are identical, such as dris and dun, which are identical
in Irish and in French, and a few others of a similar kind. My reply
to this reason is, that there are words from every language as loan-
words in the fourth division of Irish which is called Bearla Teibidhe
from the time of Fenius Farsaidh onwards. And thus as there are words
from French in it, so there are words in it from Spanish, from Italian,
from Greek, from Hebrew, from Latin, and from every other chief
language. And hence it is no proof of the Gaels having come from
France that a few words should be identical in Irish and in French;
and, moreover, I believe that the few words that are common to them
were taken from Ireland to France; and I hold this view all the more
because Cæsar says, in the sixth book of his History, that it was from
the islands of Britain that druids went to France, where they became
judges, and got termon lands and immunities and honour from the nobles
of that country.



XX.

It is probable that this island whence the druids went to France was
the island of Ireland, since Ireland was the fountain of druidism for
western Europe at that time, and that accordingly Gaelic was the
language of these druids. Or if it was from Manainn they went thither,
it is well known that Gaelic was the mother-tongue there, according to
Ortelius, who, treating of Manainn, says: "They use," he says, "the
Scotic language, or Gaelic, which is the same."[443]

Accordingly it is probable that, when these druids were teaching in
France, the youth of France, from their intercourse with the druids,
caught up a certain number of Irish words, and that these have ever
since been in use in the French language; and, moreover, Camden states
in the book called "Britannia Camdeni," that the druids taught in
their schools more from oral tradition than from writing.

Another reason why it should not seem strange that Irish words should
be embodied in French is, the great intercourse that existed between
the Irish and the French. For the Book of Invasions says that the wife
of Ughaine Mor, high king of Ireland, was a daughter of the king of
the French, and this Ughaine went to conquer France. In like manner
another high king of Ireland, Niall Naoighiallach, a long time after
Ughaine, went to conquer France, and was slain at the river Leor, in
France, by Eochaidh son of Eanna Cinnsealach, king of Leinster.
Criomhthann son of Fiodhach, king of Ireland, went to France before
Niall. Another high king of Ireland also, whose name was Dathi son of
Fiachraidh, went on an expedition of conquest to France; but he was
slain by lightning in the east of France, beside the Alp mountains.
Similarly, Cornelius Tacitus says that commercial exchange and
intercourse existed between Ireland and France. From what we have said,
it is not strange that there should have been a borrowing of words
from Irish into French and from French into Irish. However, it does
not necessarily follow from this that it was from France the race of
Gaedheal came to Ireland. Hence, the second argument that Buchanan
advances is trivial.

False again is the third argument that Buchanan gives in which he says
that the manners and customs of the French and of the Irish are the
same. Now, whoever reads Joannes Bohemus, in the book which he has
written on the manners and customs of all nations, will find plainly
there that neither the manners nor the customs of the French and the
Irish are the same at present, nor were they the same in the distant
past. Accordingly false is the third reason he alleges as a proof that
the race of Gaedheal came first to Ireland from France.

Some modern English writers treating of Ireland state that it was from
Great Britain that the sons of Milidh first came, and their reason for
that view is, that there are many words identical in Irish and Welsh.
My reply to this reason is, that it is not a proof of the race of
Gaedheal having first come from Great Britain. There are two reasons
for this. The first reason is, that Gaelic was the mother tongue of
Briotan son of Fearghus Leithdhearg, son of Neimhidh, and that it was
from him Britain was called Britannia, according to Cormac son of
Cuileannan and the Books of Invasion of Ireland, and that it was in
Britain he and his descendants after him dwelt; that Eireamhon son of
Milidh sent the Cruithnigh, who are called Picts, to share Alba with
them; and that Brutus son of Silvias, if we may believe some of their
r own chronicles, invaded them, and after him the Romans, and then the
Saxons and the Lochlonnaigh, and finally William the Conqueror and the
French, so that they suffered so much oppression from foreigners that
it was not strange that Scoitbhearla, which was the language of
Briotan and of his descendants after him, should fail. Still the
little of it that remains alive without being completely extinguished
is identical with Gaelic, as much of it as has remained from the time
of Briotan without change.

The second reason why it is not strange that many words are the same
in Irish and in Welsh, without supposing the sons of Milidh to have
come to Ireland from Britain, is that Ireland was a place of refuge
for Britons whenever they suffered persecution from the Romans or the
Saxons, or from any other races that oppressed them, so that large
companies of them, with their families and followers, and with their
wealth, used to fly for refuge to Ireland; and the Irish nobles used
to give them land during their stay; and the children they had during
their time of exile used to learn Irish, and there are townlands in
Ireland named from them, as Graig na mBreathnach, Baile na mBreathnach,
Dun na mBreathnach, etc.; and after they returned to Britain they
themselves, and their descendants after them, had many Irish words in
constant use. From what we have said it is not necessarily to be
inferred that it was from Britain the sons of Milidh first came,
notwithstanding that there are some words identical in Welsh and in
Irish. Furthermore, if anyone were to say that the Welsh and the Irish
are alike in their manners and customs, since as the Irishman is
hospitable in bestowing food without payment so is the Welshman; as,
moreover, the Irishman loves seanchas, poets and bards and harp-
players, the Welshman has a similar love for these classes, and in the
same way they resemble one another in several other customs; this is
not a proof that the Gaels came from Britain, but is rather a proof
that the Welsh were familiar with Ireland, as we have said above; and
hence it is not to be inferred from the forementioned reasons that it
was from Great Britain the sons of Milidh first came. It may, however,
be stated with truth that a company of the race of Breoghan went from
Ireland to settle in Great Britain, to wit, some of the descendants of
the chiefs of the race of Breoghan who came with the sons of Milidh to
Ireland.

The following are the names of those sons of Breoghan who came with
the sons of Milidh to Ireland, namely, Breagha, Fuad, Muirtheimhne,
Cuailgne, Cuala, Eibhle, Bladh, and Nar. It is precisely from the
progeny of these, according to the records of Ireland, that the race
called Brigantes are descended; and the truth of this should be the
more readily admitted, as Thomasius, in the Latin Dictionary which he
has written, says that the Brigantes, that is, the descendants of
Breoghan, were an Irish tribe.

A Spanish author named Florianus del Campo, agreeing with the Irish
records, says that the Brigantes were Spanish by origin, and that it
was from Spain they came to Ireland, and from Ireland they went to
Britain.

All that we have stated concerning the intercourse of the Britons with
the Irish, and Ireland's being a place of refuge for the Britons, is
the more probable, because Caradocus, a Welsh author, in his chronicle,
and Albion in his chronicle, and many other Welsh authors, state that
many British princes and nobles, with their families and followers,
used to come to Ireland, where they were received and kindly
entertained, and where they got land to settle down in, as we have
said above. Moreover, Doctor Hanmer, in his chronicle, makes special
mention of some of them. In the first place, he says that a king of
Wales named Cadualin was banished to Ireland by Edwin son of Athelfred
in the year of the Lord 635, and that he was kindly received there,
and got a reinforcement for his army, by means of which he recovered
his own kingdom. He also states that two princes from Britain, namely,
Haralt and Conan, came to Ireland in the year of the Lord 1050, and
that they were received and even treated in a friendly manner and
protected by the Irish. He says likewise that Aligor, Earl of Chester,
fled from Britain to Ireland for refuge, and that the Irish sent a
force with him by means of which he regained his own territory in the
year of the Lord 1054. There came also for refuge to Ireland another
Welsh prince whose name was Bleithin ap Conan in the year of the Lord
1087; and he was maintained during his visit there. Thus from age to
age did they cultivate alliance and intercourse with one another.

In Hanmer's chronicle, also, we read that Arnulfus, Earl of Pembroke,
married the daughter of Muircheartach O'Brien, King of Ireland, in the
year of the Lord 1101. And his second daughter was married to Maghnus
son of Aralt, king of the Isles. Moreover, when Henry the First was on
the throne of England, there was a prince over Wales whose name was
Griffin ap Conan, who used often boast that his mother was an
Irishwoman, and also his grandmother, and that it was in Ireland he
was born and educated in politeness. According to the same author
there was also another prince of Wales in the time of Henry the Second,
whose name was Biradus son of Guineth, who had an Irishwoman for his
mother. In this manner there used to be much intercourse of friendship
and of alliance between the Irish and Welsh, so that therefore it is
not to be wondered at that there are many words common to their
languages, and that they resemble one another in their manners and
customs, without supposing that the Gaels ever came originally from
Britain.

Camden says, in like manner, that the Brigantes settled in the
following territories of Great Britain, to wit, the district of York,
the district of Lancaster, the district of Durham, the district of
Westmoreland, and the district of Cumberland; and it is not strange,
from what we have said, that the Welsh and the Irish should resemble
one another in their manners and customs, and that there should be may
words common to both their languages without supposing the sons of
Milidh to have ever come from Britain originally, notwithstanding
Camden, who says that it was from Britain that the first inhabitants
came to Ireland. Now the seanchus of Ireland, whose function it is to
investigate and preserve an exact account of every event that ever
happened in Ireland, is more deserving of credit than the opinion of
Camden, to whom Irish history never gave up its secret from which he
could derive a knowlege of the affairs of Ireland.

Cambrensis, writing of Ireland, says that it was by permission of the
King of Great Britain that the sons of Milidh came from Biscay, and
that, moreover, it was at his inducement they came after him to the
Orcades, and that he sent a company with them to Ireland so that they
might settle down there on condition that themselves and their
descendants should be subject to him and to the kings of Great Britain
for ever; and Cambrensis gives the king's name as Gorguntius son of
Beilin. In the same way my reply to Cambrensis is, that it is plain
that his statement is false. For, whoever will read Stowe's Chronicle
will plainly find that there is little more than three hundred years
from the reign of that Gorguntius over Great Britain till the coming
of Julius Cæsar to conquer it, the eighth year of the reign of
Cassibellanus over Great Britain; and we read in the same author that
there were only about forty-two years from Julius Cæsar to the birth
of Christ, so that, according to the computation of Stowe, there were
not four hundred years in full from the time of Gorguntius to the
birth of Christ. Now Cormac son of Cuileannan and the Books of
Invasion of Ireland state that it was about thirteen hundred years
before the birth of Christ that the sons of Milidh came to Ireland.
And the Polychronicon agrees with them in the same computation where
it treats of Ireland. It thus speaks: "There are," it says, "one
thousand eight hundred years from the arrival of the Irish to the
death of Patrick." This is equivalent to saying that it was about
thirteen hundred years before Christ that the sons of Milidh came to
Ireland. For deduct the four hundred and ninety-two years from the
birth of Christ to the death of Patrick from the eighteen hundred
years the Polychronicon computes to be between the coming of the sons
of Milidh to Ireland and the death of Patrick, and there will be one
thousand three hundred and eight years from the coming of the sons of
Milidh to Ireland to the birth of Christ, so that the Polychronicon,
Cormac son of Cuileannan, and the Books of Invasion agree with one
another in computing the time from the invasion of the sons of Milidh
to the birth of Christ; and if we compare, according to the Chronicle
of Stowe, the space of time between Gorguntius and the birth of Christ,
and similarly the space of time the Polychronicon, and Cormac son of
Cuileannan, and the Books of Invasion compute to be from the coming of
the sons of Milidh to Ireland to the birth of Christ, we shall plainly
find that the sons of Milidh were in Ireland more than nine hundred
years before Gorguntius assumed the sovereignty of Great Britain. From
what we have said it is obvious that it is a baseless falsehood
Cambrensis states in his chronicle when he says that Gorguntius above-
mentioned brought after him the sons of Milidh to the Orcades, and
sent them thence to Ireland. For how could Gorguntius send them to
Ireland, seeing he was not himself born, according to authorities we
have cited here, until nine hundred years after the sons of Milidh had
come to Ireland?



XXI.
Of the coming of the sons of Milidh to Ireland as follows:

When the sons of Milidh and all the descendants of Breoghan heard that
the children of Cearmad had murdered Ioth son of Breoghan and his
followers, and when they saw his body mangled and lifeless, they
resolved to come to Ireland to avenge him on the children of Cearmad,
and they assembled an army to come to Ireland to wrest that country
from the Tuatha De Danann in retribution for the deed of treachery
they had done against Ioth son of Breoghan and his followers. Some
seanchas assert that it was from Biscay the sons of Milidh went to
Ireland from the place which is called Mondaca beside the river-mouth
of Verindo; and their reason for this opinion is that Milidh was king
of Biscay after he had been banished by the violence of many foreign
tribes from the very heart of Spain to Biscay, where there were many
woods, hills, and fastnesses protecting Biscay from the fury of
foreign races. This, however, is not the general opinion of the
seanchas. What they assert is that it was from the tower of Breoghan
in Galicia they came to Ireland, and this is the view I regard as the
most probable. For we read in the Book of Invasions that it was at
Breoghan's tower they resolved on sending Ioth son of Breoghan to
explore Ireland, and that it was to it Lughaidh son of Ioth came when
he returned from Ireland, and showed his father's dead body to the
sons of Milidh and to the sons of Breoghan; and accordingly I believe
that it was from the same place they proceeded to Ireland very soon
after the death of Milidh. And it was because of the death of Milidh
that Scota came to Ireland with her children, Spain being at that time
a bone of contention between the tribes who inhabited Spain itself and
the numerous foreign tribes who came from the north of Europe to
overcome them.

As to the sons of Milidh, they got together an army to come to Ireland
and avenge Ioth on the Tuatha De Danann and on the children of Cearmad,
and to wrest Ireland from them; and the full number of leaders they
had to rule the warriors was forty, as we read in the poem composed by
Eochaidh O'Floinn, beginning, "The Leaders of those over-sea ships":

The leaders of those over-sea ships
In which the sons of Milidh came,
I shall remember all my life
Their names and their fates:

Eibhle, Fuad, Breagha, excellent Bladh,
Lughaidh, Muirtheimhne from the lake,
Buas, Breas, Buaidhne of great vigour,
Donn, Ir, Eibhear, Eireamhon,

Aimhirgin, Colpa without annoyance,
Eibhear, Airioch, Arannan,
Cuala, Cuailgne, and generous Nay,
Muimhne, Luighne, and Laighne,

Fulman, Manntan, gentle Bile,
Er, Orba, Fearon, Feirghein,
En, Un, Eatan Goistean bright,
Seadgha, Sobhairce, Suirghe,

Palap son of noble Eireamhon,
And Caicher son of Manntan,
To avenge Ioth of the steeds
Ten and thirty leaders. The leaders.

Their fleet was thirty ships in all, with thirty warriors in each of
the ships, besides their women and camp-followers. The following are
their names: Breagha son of Breoghan, from whom Magh Breagh in Meath
is called; Cuala son of Breoghan, from whom Sliabh Cuala is called;
Cuailgne son of Breoghan, from whom Sliabh Cuailgne is called; Fuad
son of Breoghan, from whom Sliabh Fuaid is called; Muirtheimhne son of
Breoghan, from whom Magh Muirtheimhne is called; Lughaidh son of Ioth,
who came to Ireland to avenge his father, from him Corca Luighe in
West Munster is called; Eibhle son of Breoghan, from whom Sliabh
Eibhlinne in Munster is called; Buas, Breas, and Buaidhne, three sons
of Tighearnbhard son of Brighe; Nar from whom Ros Nair in Sliabh
Bladhma is called; Seadgha, Fulman, Manntan, Caicher, and Suirghe son
of Caicher; Er, Orba, Fearon, and Feargna, four sons of Eibhear; En,
Un, Eatan, and Goistean; Sobhairce, we do not know who was his father;
Bile son of Brighe, son of Breoghan; eight sons of Milidh of Spain, to
wit, Donn and Airioch Feabhruadh, Eibhear Fionn and Aimhirgin, Ir and
Colpa of the Sword, Eireamhon and Arannan the youngest, and four sons
of Eireamhon, to wit Muimhne, Luighne, and Laighne, and Palap, and one
son of Ir, that is Eibhear. These, then, are the forty leaders of the
sons of Milidh who came to Ireland. It was in Ireland itself that
Irial Faidh son of Eireamhon was born.

As regards the descendants of Milidh and their fleet there is no
account of them until they put into port at Innbhear Slainghe in the
lower part of Leinster, which place is called the harbour of Loch
Garman to-day. The Tuatha De Danann assembled and congregated round
them, and spread a magic mist above them, so that they imagined that
the island in front of them was a hog's back, and hence Ireland is
called Muicinis. Accordingly, the Tuatha De Danann, by means of magic,
drove the sons of Milidh out from the land, and so they went round
Ireland and put into port at Innbhear Sceine in West Munster; and when
they had landed, they proceeded to Sliabh Mis, where they met Banbha
with her women and her druids. Aimhirgin asked her her name. "Banbha
is my name," said she; "and it is from me that this island is called
Inis Banbha." Then they proceeded to Sliabh Eibhlinne where they met
Fodla, and Aimhirgin asked her her name. "Fodla is my name," said she;
"and it is from me that this land is called Fodla." They proceeded
thence to Uisneach in Meath, where they met Eire. The poet asked her
her name. "Eire is my name," said she, "and it is from me that this
island is called Eire." And as a record of the above events is this
stanza from the poem beginning, "Let us relate the origin of the Gaels
":

Banbha on Sliabh Mis, with hosts
Faint and wearied;
Fodla on Sliabh Eibhlinne, with groanings;
Eire on Uisneach.

These three queens were the wives of the three sons of Cearmad, and
some seanchas say that there was no division of Ireland into three
equal parts among the sons of Cearmad, but that each of the sons held
it for a year in turn; and the name the country bore each year was the
name of the wife of him who held the sovereignty that year. Here is a
proof of this alternation of sovereignty:

Every year by turns
The chiefs held the kingdom;
Eire, Fodla, and Banbha,
The three wives of the very strong warriors.

The sons of Milidh proceeded thence to Tara, where they met the three
sons of Cearmad, to wit, Eathur, Ceathur, Teathur, with their magic
host; and the sons of Milidh demanded battle or a right to the
sovereignty of the country from the sons of Cearmad, and these replied
that they would act towards them according to the judgment of
Aimhirgin, their own brother, and that if he delivered an unjust
judgment against them, they would kill him by magic. The judgment
Aimhirgin gave regarding his brothers and their host was that they
should return to Innbhear Sceine, and that they should embark with all
their host and go out the distance of nine waves on the high sea, and
if they succeeded in coming to land again in spite of the Tuatha De
Danann, they were to have sway over the country. And the Tuatha De
Danann were satisfied with this, for they thought that their own magic
would be able to prevent them from returning ever again to the country.



XXII.

As to the sons of Milidh, they returned to Innbhear Sceine, and went
out on the high sea, the space of nine waves, as Aimhirgin directed
them. When the druids of the Tuatha De Danann saw them on the sea,
they raised a terrific magic wind which caused a great storm at sea;
and Donn son of Milidh said that it was a druidical wind. "So it is,"
said Aimhirgin. Thereupon Arannan, the youngest of the sons of Milidh,
climbed the mainmast, and, by reason of a gust of wind, he fell to the
ship's deck, and thus was killed. And forthwith the rocking of the
tempest separated from the rest the ship in which Donn was, and soon
after he was himself drowned, and the ship's crew along with him,
twenty-four warriors in all, and five leaders, to wit, Bile son of
Brighe, Airioch Feabhruadh, Buan, Breas, and Buaidhne, with twelve
women and four servants, eight oarsmen, and fifty youths in fosterage;
and the place where they were drowned is Dumhacha, which is called
Teach Duinn, in west Munster. And it is from Donn son of Milidh, who
was drowned there, that it is called Teach Duinn. And it is the death
of Donn and of those nobles who were drowned with him that Eochaidh
O'Floinn narrates in the poem beginning, "The leaders of those over-
sea ships." Thus does he speak:

Donn and Bile and Buan, his wife, 
Dil and Airioch son of Milidh,
Buas, Breas, and Buaidhne, the renowned,
Were drowned at Dumhacha.

The ship in which was Ir son of Milidh was also separated from the
fleet by the storm; and it was driven ashore in the west of Desmond;
and there Ir was drowned, and he was buried at Sceilig Mhichil, as the
same author says:

Aimhirgin, poet of the men,
Was killed in the Battle of Bile Theineadh; 
Ir died in Sceilig of the warriors,
And Arannan died in the ship.

Eireamhon, accompanied by a division of the fleet, proceeded, having
Ireland on the left, to the mouth of Innbhear Colpa, which is called
Droichead Atha. Now, the river is called Innbhear Colpa, from Colpa of
the Sword, son of Milidh, having been drowned there as he was coming
ashore with Eireamhon son of Milidh. It is plain from this that five
of the sons of Milidh were drowned before they took possession of
Ireland from the Tuatha De Danann; hence some poet composed this 
stanza:

Five of these were drowned,
Of the swift sons of Milidh,
In the harbours of Ireland of the divisions,
Through the magic of the Tuatha De Danann:

these are Donn and Ir, Airioch Feabhruadh, Arannan, and Colpa of the
Sword; so that when these sons wrested Ireland from the Tuatha De
Danann, there were only three of them surviving, to wit, Eibhear,
Eireamhon, and Aimhirgin. As to the remainder of the descendants of
Milidh, to wit, Eibhear with his own division of the fleet, they
landed at Innbhear Sceine. They met Eire, wife of Mac Greine, on Sliab
Mis three days after they had landed, and there the Battle of Sliabh
Mis took place between them and the Tuatha De Danann, in which fell
Fas wife of Un son of Uige, and from her the name Gleann Fais is given
to the glen which is in Sliabh Mis, and is called at present Gleann
Fais; and it is to bear testimony to this that the poet composed this
stanza:

Gleann Fais, true is the derivation,
Without error or difficulty;
Fas the name of the woman I refer to
Who was killed in the great glen.

In the same battle fell Scota wife of Milidh; and it is in the north
side of that glen, beside the sea, she is buried; and as a proof of
her death and of her burial-place, we have the two following stanzas
from the same poem:

In this battle also, I will not deny,
Scota found death and extinction;
As she is not alive in fair form,
She met her death in this glen.

Whence there is in the north side
The tomb of Scota in the clear, cold glen,
Between the mountain and the sea;
Not far did she go from the conflict.

This was the first battle that took place between the sons of Milidh
and the Tuatha De Danann, as the same poem says:

The first battle of the famed sons of Milidh,
On their coming from Spain of renown,
At Sliabh Mis there was cause of woe;
It is certain history and true knowledge.

The two women we have mentioned, to wit, Scota and Fas and their two
most accomplished druids, that is, Uar and Eithiar, were the most
celebrated of the race of Gaedheal who fell in that battle. But though
three hundred of them were slain, still they slew ten hundred of the
Tuatha De Danann, and thus routed them; and Eire wife of Mac Greine
followed in their wake, and proceeded to Taillte, and related her
story to the sons of Cearmad. Now, the sons of Milidh remained on the
field of battle, burying those of their people who were slain, and in
particular burying the two druids. It is with reference to this that
the poet composed the following historical stanzas:

In the morning we left Sliabh Mis;
We met with aggression and defiance
From the sons of the noble Daghadh,
With strong battle-spears.

We stoutly won a battle
Over the sprites of the isle of Banbha,
Of which ten hundred fell together,
By us, of the Tuatha De Danann.

Six fifties of our company
Of the great army of Spain,
That number of our host fell,
With the loss of the two worthy druids:

Uar and Eithiar of the steeds,
Beloved were the two genuine poets;
A stone in bareness above their graves,
In their Fenian tombs we leave them.

Eight also of the leaders of the host fell at sea through the magic of
the Tuatha De Danann, as we have said above, namely, Ir at Sceilig
Mhichil; Arannan, from the mainmast; Donn with his five leaders, who
were drowned at Teach Duinn. Eight royal ladies also fell there, two
of them with Donn, namely, Buan wife of Bile, and Dil daughter of
Milidh of Spain, wife and kinswoman of Donn. There were also drowned
Sceine wife of Aimhirgin, in Innbhear Sceine, and from her the name
Innbhear Sceine is given to the river which is in Kerry. Fial wife of
Lughaidh son of Ioth died of shame on her husband seeing her naked as
she returned from swimming; and from her that river has ever since
been called Innbhear Feile; Scota and Fas were also slain in the
Battle of Sliab Mis, as we have said above. Two others of them also
died, namely, the wife of Ir and the wife of Muirtheimhne son of
Breoghan. These then are the eight princesses and the eight leaders
that perished out of the host of the descendants of Milidh from their
coming into Ireland up to the Battle of Taillte. Here are the names of
the seven principal women who came to Ireland with the sons of Milidh,
according to the Book of Invasions: Scota, Tea, Fial, Fas, Liobhra,
Odhbha, and Sceine. It is in the following manner the seancha sets
forth this, and states who was married to each of the women whose
husband was alive on their coming to Ireland:

The seven chief women who came thither
With all the sons of Milidh,
Tea, Fial, Fas, to our delight,
Liobhra, Odhbha, Scot, Sceine;

Tea wife of Eireamhon of the steeds,
And Fial too, the wife of Lughaidh, 
Fas wife of Un the son of Oige next,
And Sceine wife of Aimhirgin,

Liobhra wife of Fuad, noble her renown,
Scota the marriageable, and Odhbha
These were the women who were not giddy,
Who came with the sons of Milidh.

As to the descendants of Milidh, the company of them who landed with
Eibhear and fought the Battle of Sliab Mis went to meet Eireamhon to
the mouth of Innbhear Colpa; and when they came together there, they
gave warning of battle to the sons of Cearmad and to the Tuatha De
Danann in general. It was then that the Battle of Taillte took place
between them; and the sons of Cearmad were defeated by the sons of
Milidh, and there fell Mac Greine by Aimhirgin, Mac Cuill by Eibhear,
and Mac Ceacht by Eireamhon, as the seancha says:

The bright Mac Greine fell
In Taillte by Aimhirgin,
Mac Cuill by Eibhear of the gold,
Mac Ceacht by the hand of Eireamhon.

Their three queens also fell, namely,Eire, Fodla, and Banbha. Hence,
and to state by whom they fell, the seancha composed this stanza:

Fodla slain by Eatan the proud;
Banbha by Caicher the victorious;
Eire then slain by Suighre
These are the fates of this trio.

Now the greater part of the host of the Tuatha De Danann also fell;
and while the host of the sons of Milidh were in pursuit of them
towards the north, two leaders of the Milesian host were slain, namely,
Cuailgne son of Breoghan on Sliabh Cuailgne, and Fuad son of Breoghan
on Sliabh Fuaid.



XXIII.

When they had expelled the Tuatha De Danann, and brought Ireland under
their own sway, Eibhear and Eireamhon divided the country between
them; and, according to some historians, the division made between
them was this: Eireamhon to have the northern half from the Boyne and
from the Srubh Broin northwards, and Eibhear from the same boundary
southwards to Tonn Cliodhna. Thus does the seancha speak of this
division -- "Eireamhon and noble Eibhear" is the beginning of the
poem:

On the northern side, an event without sorrow, 
Eireamhon took sovereignty
From the Srubh Broin, noble the division,
Over every tribe to Boyne.

Eibhear, the prosperous son of Milidh,
Possessed the excellent southern half
He obtained from the Boyne, strong the division,
To the wave of Geanann's daughter.

Now, five of the principal leaders of the host of the sons of Milidh
went with Eireamhon to his division, and received territory from him;
and each of them built a stronghold in his own portion of the
territory. The five leaders who went with Eireamhon are Aimhirgin,
Goistean, Seadgha, Sobhairce, and Suirghe. Here follow the royal forts
that Were built by Eireamhon and by his five leaders. In the first
place he himself built Raith Beitheach in Airgeadros, on the brink of
the Feoir in Osruighe. Then Aimhirgin built Turloch of Innbhear Mor;
Sobhairce built Dun Sobhairce; Seadgha built Dun Deilginse in the
territory of Cuala; Gostean built Cathair Nair; Suirghe built Dun
Eadair.

The following are the five who went with Eibhear, namely, Caicher,
Manntan, En, Oige, and Fulman, and each of them similarly built a fort.
First, Eibhear himself built Raith Eoamhain, in Laigheanmhagh; Caicher
built Dun Inn, in the west of Ireland; Manntan built the stronghold of
Carraig Bladhruidhe; En son of Oige built the fort of Ard Suird, and
Fulman the fort of Carraig Feadha.

From Eibhear to Adam there were thirty-five generations, as the poet
says:

With good upbringing, fifteen
And twenty generations,
The tribe of brave men lavish of herds
Up from Eibhear to Adam.

Other seanchas are of opinion that the division of Ireland made by
Eibhear and Eireamhon was this: Eibhear to have the two provinces of
Munster; Eireamhon the province of Connaught and the province of
Leinster; and Eibhear son of Ir, son of Milidh, and others of the
leaders who came with the sons of Milidh, to have the province of
Ulster; and the cantred of Corca Laighdhe, in south Munster, they gave
to Lughaidh son of Ioth, the son of their grandfather's brother. This
opinion I am the more disposed to accept as true, as it was in
Leinster that Eireamhon's chief stronghold was situated, namely, Raith
Beitheach in Airgeadros beside the Feoir, and also because the
descendants of Eibhear originally settled in Munster, the descendants
of Eireamhon in Connaught and Leinster, and the descendants of
Rudhruidhe son of Sithrighe, who sprang from Eibhear son of Ir, son of
Milidh, in Ulster. It is from this Rudhruidhe that the name Clann
Rudhruidhe is given to the real Ultonians, and to every section of
their descendants who went into each other's provinces to seize upon
land and to make conquests, such as the coming of the children of
Rudhruidhe to Leinster to wit, the descendants of Conall Cearnach to
Laoighis, and the descendants of Fearghus son of Rogh to Conmhaicne of
Connaught, and to Corca Moruadh and Ciarraidhe in Munster and the
family of Duibhidhir of the race of Cairbre Cluitheachar son of
Cuchorb of the progeny of Labhraidh Loingseach, and the family of Rian
of the race of Cathaoir Mor, who came from Leinster to Munster. It was
long after this division which Eibhear and Eireamhon made of Ireland
that these tribes went from their own territories into other districts
in Ireland. It is also well known that it was in the time of
Muireadhach Tireach that the three Collas with their kinsmen left
Connaught to win conquests from the Ultonians, and wrested by force
from them a large portion of the province of Ulster, namely, Modhairn,
Ui Mac Uais and Ui Chriomhthainn; and many of their descendants hold
possession of these to-day, as Raghnall son of Samhairle, Earl of
Antrim, or Aondrom, descended from Colla Uais; Mag Uidhir, Mag
Mhathghamhna and O Hannluain descended from Colla Da Chrioch.

In the time of Cormac son of Art, also, the Deisigh, a tribe of the
race of Eireamhon, came to Munster and acquired territory there. And
it was while Fiachaidh Muilleathan son of Eoghan Mor, son of Oilill
Olum, was king of Munster, that Cairbre Musc, a nobleman of the race
of Eireamhon, brought a poem to Fiachaidh, and obtained all the land
that lies between Slighe Dhala, that is, Bealach Mor Osruighe and Cnoc
Aine Cliach, as a reward for his poem, as we read in the Book of Ard
Macha; and it is from this Cairbre Musc that the name Muscruidhe Tire
is given to the two Ormonds. And soon after this, some of the race of
Eibhear came to Connaught, namely, the descendants of Cormac Gaileang,
that is, the Gaileanga and the Luighni, of whom are O Headhra and O
Gadhra in the northern half. And so it was with every family and tribe
who migrated to another district in Ireland, it was not because of the
division made by Eibhear and Eireamhon they migrated; and hence I
consider the last-mentioned opinion correct; for it is not likely that
it was in the portion which fell to Eibhear in which Airgeadros is
situated that Eireamhon would build his first royal fort, that is,
Raith Beitheach in Airgeadros. Hence I think that it was in his own
portion he built it, and that therefore the province of Leinster
belonged to Eireamhon's portion, as the last opinion states.

A learned poet and a melodious harper, the name of the poet being Cir
son of Cis, and that of the harper Onaoi, were amongst those who came
with the sons of Milidh to Ireland. And Eibhear said that he should
have them, while Eireamhon maintained that they should be his. Now the
arrangement made between them was to share them with one another by
casting lots for them, and the musician fell by lot to Eibhear and the
poet to Eireamhon. And as a setting forth of this contest are the
following stanzas from the Psalter of Cashel:

They cast lots fairly
For the noble poetic pair,
So that to the man from the south fell
The correct dextrous harper;

To the man from the north fell, too,
The poet of great powers;
And hence came sway
Over honour and learning,

String-harmony of music, beauty, quickness,
In the south and lower part of Ireland:
Thus shall it be for evermore,
As is recorded in the seanchus.

There came to Ireland with the sons of Milidh twenty-four slaves who
cleared twenty-four plains from wood after they had come into the
country; and it is from themselves these plains are named. Here are
the names of these men: Aidhne, Ai, Asal, Meidhe, Morbha, Midhe, Cuibh,
Cliu, Ceara, Reir, Slan, Leighe, Lithfe, Line, Lighean, Trea, Dula,
Adhar, Airiu, Deise, Deala, Fea, Feimhean, and Seara; and these names 
are precisely the names of these plains in Ireland at this day.

Moreover, Tea daughter of Lughaidh son of Ioth, the wife of Eireamhon,
got a fortress built for herself in Liathdhruim which is now called
Teamhair; and it is from Tea daughter of Lughaidh that this hill is
called Teamhair, that is, the mur or house of Tea.

The sons of Milidh ruled Ireland jointly for a year, when a dispute
arose between them about the possession of the three best hills in
Ireland, namely, Druim Clasaigh in the territory of Maine, Druim
Beitheach in Maonmhaigh, and Druim Finghin in Connaught. On that
occasion a battle was fought between Eibhear and Eireamhon in Ui
Failghe at Bru Bhriodain, at a pass between two plains in the district
of Geisill. Eibhear was defeated in that battle; and he himself was
slain, together with three leaders of his followers, namely, Suirghe,
Sobhairce, and Goistean. The poet treats of this event, setting forth
the cause of the dispute, as follows:

Banbha without grief shared
Eibhear and Eireamhon,
Till pride seized their wives,
A year without foray, without war.

The wife of Eibhear of the battles said
That unless she owned the fair Druim Clasach,
Druim Beithech, Druim Finghin bright 
She would not remain a night in Erin.

Eibhear fell, great the man,
By Eireamhon son of Milidh;
He got his death-wound in the land of Geisill
In the morning on Magh Smearthoin.

The poet Tanuidhe, agreeing with the same statement, speaks thus:

Ye bards of renowned Banbha,
Know ye, or can ye tell,
Why the great battle was fought
Against Eibhear by Eireamhon?[445]

I myself will tell you that
The reason why he committed the fratricide,
Because of three low-lying hills,
The best that were in Erin:

Druim Finghin, fair Druim Clasaigh,
Druim Beitheach in Connaught;
In struggling for these, not bright the tale,
This slaughter was wrought, O bards.



XXIV.
Of the kings of the children of Milidh before the Faith and of the
length of their sovereignty in Ireland as follows.

Eireamhon, after being a year in the joint sovereignty of Ireland with
Eibhear, held the full sovereignty for fourteen years after Eibhear
was slain in the Battle of Airgeadros, according to some seanchas, as
this stanza says:

Fourteen years, I know it,
Did Eireamhon hold chief sovereignty
After the Battle of Airgeadros with valour,
Where Eibhear fell outright.

However, the common opinion of seanchas is, that it was not in the
Battle of Airgeadros that Eibhear was slain, but in the Battle of
Geisill, as we have stated above. It was in the time of Eireamhon that
the following events took place. The Battle of Cuil Caicheir, a year
after the death of Eibhear, it was there that Caicher, leader of the
followers of Eibhear, fell by Aimhirgin son of Milidh; a year after
that Aimhirgin was slain by Eireamhon in the Battle of Bile Theineadh
in Cuil Breagh; and in that year also the nine Brosnas of Eile and the
three Uinnses of Ui nOiliolla burst over land in Ireland. The third
year after that Fulman and Manntan, two leaders of the followers of
Eibhear, fell by Eireamhon in the Battle of Breoghan in Freamhainn.
Eight lakes burst over land in Ireland in the reign of Eireamhon,
namely, Loch Cime, Magh Sreing being the name of the plain over which
the lake burst, Loch Buadhaigh, Loch Bagha, Loch Rein, Loch
Fionnmhaighe, Loch Greine, Loch Riach, Magh Maoin being the name of
the plain over which it burst; Lough Da Chaoch in Leinster, and Loch
Laogh in Ulster. The fourth year after this, li n, En, and Eatan were
slain by Eireamhon in the Battle of Comhruire in Meath, and their
graves were made there. In the same year the three Sucas burst over
land in Connaught.

Some seanchas assert that it was Eireamhon who portioned the five
provinces of Ireland among some of the leaders who were with him after
the death of Eibhear. First he gave the province of Leinster to
Criomhthann Sciathbheal of the Domhnanncha, a noble of the relicts of
the Fir Bolg. He gave, moreover, the two provinces of Munster to the
four sons of Eibhear, to wit, Er, Orba, Fearon, and Feargna. He gave
besides the province of Connaught to Un son of Oige and to Eatan, two
leaders who had come with him from Spain. Similarly he left the
province of Ulster to Eibhear son of Ir, his own brother's son.

It was in the reign of Eireamhon also that the Cruithnigh, or Picts, a
tribe who came from Thrace, arrived in Ireland; and according to
Cormac son of Cuileannan, in his Psaltair, the reason of their leaving
Thrace was that Policornus, king of Thrace, designed to force a
beautiful marriageable daughter of Gud, chief of the Cruithnigh, while
these latter were at free quarters in the country. When, however, Gud
and his Cruithnigh suspected that the king was about to force the
maiden, they slew him, and accordingly quitted the country, and went
from country to country till they reached France, where they were
quartered and got lands from the king of the French, and there they
built a city called Pictavium, from the Picts or Cruithnigh who built
it. And when the king of the French heard of the fame of the maiden's
beauty, he sought to have her as a concubine. When Gud heard this, he
fled with all his people to Ireland with the maiden; and while they
were on the sea the maiden died in their midst; and they themselves
afterwards put into port at Innbhear Slainghe. Beda agrees with this,
except that he says that it was in the north of Ireland they landed,
in the first chapter of the first book of the History of the Saxon
Church, where he says: "The Pictish race came from Scythia, as is
stated, in a small fleet of long vessels over the ocean, and being
driven by the force or blowing of the winds outside all the boundaries
of Britain, came to Ireland; and on finding the Scotic race before
them, they asked for a place of abode there for themselves, but
obtained it not."[446] However, it was not in the north of Ireland
they landed, but at the mouth of Innbhear Slainghe in the harbour of
Loch Garman, as we have said. And Criomhthann Sciathbheal, who held
the sovereignty of Leinster from Eireamhon at that time, came to meet
them there, and entered into friendship with them.

The leaders of that fleet were Gud and his son Cathluan; and the
reason why Criomhthann entered into friendship with them was because
some British nobles, who were called Tuatha Fiodhgha, were making
conquests in the Fotharta on either side of the mouth of the Slaney.
Such were these people that the weapons of every one of them were
poisoned, so that, be the wound inflicted by them small or great, no
remedy whatever availed the wounded man, but he must die. Criomhthann
heard that there was a skilful druid called Trostan amongst the
Cruithnigh who could furnish himself and his people with an antidote
against the poison with which the weapons of the Tuatha Fiodhgha were
wont to be charged; and he asked Triostan what remedy he should use
against the poison of the weapons of those people we have mentioned.
"Get thrice fifty white hornless cows milked," said Trostan, "and let
the milk got from them be placed in a hollow in the middle of the
plain in which you are wont to meet them in battle, and offer them
battle on that same plain; and let each one of your followers who
shall have been wounded by them go to the hollow and bathe, and he
will be healed from the venom of the poison." Criomhthann did as the
druid had advised, and fought the Battle of Ard Leamhnachta against
the Tuatha Fiodhgha. He defeated and executed great slaughter on them
in that place. From this event, and from the battle which took place,
the battle has been called the Battle of Ard Leamhnachta ever since.
And in proof of this account the poet has composed the following
historic poem:[447]

Ard Leamhnachta in the southern country
Each noble and bard may inquire
Whence is derived the name of the land
Which it has borne from the time of Criomhthann;

Criomhthann Sciaithbheal it was who fought,
To prevent the slaughter of his warriors,
Protecting them from the sharp poison of the weapons
Of the hateful, horrid giants.

Six of the Cruithnigh, God so ordained,
Came from the land of Thrace,
Soilen, Ulpia, Neachtain the noble,
Aonghus, Leathan, and Trostan.

God granted them, through might
To heal them from the sharp poison of the wounds,
And to protect them from the bitter venom of the weapons
Of the powerful, very fierce giants.

The true knowledge obtained for them
By the druid of the Cruithnigh, at once, was
That thrice fifty hornless cows of the plain
Be milked in one deep hollow.

The battle was pressingly fought
Around the hollow where the new milk was,
And the battle went strongly against
The giants of high Banbha.

Now as to the Cruithnigh, that is, Gud and his son Cathluan, they
resolved to invade Leinster; and when Eireamhon heard this, he
assembled a numerous army, and went to meet them. When the Cruithnigh
saw that they were not strong enough to fight Eireamhon, they entered
into peace and friendship with him. Eireamhon told them that there was
a country to the north-east of Ireland, and bade them go and occupy it.
Then, according to Beda, in the first chapter of the first book of the
History of Sacsa, the Cruithnigh asked Eireamhon to give them some of
the noble marriageable ladies he had with him, some of the wives of
the leaders who had come with him from Spain, and whose husbands were
slain; and they bound themselves by the sun and moon that the
possession of the kingdom of Cruitheantuath, which is now called Alba,
should be held by right of the female rather than by that of the male
progeny to the end of the world. Upon these conditions Eireamhon gave
them three women, namely, the wife of Breas, the wife of Buas, and the
wife of Buaidhne; and Cathluan, who was their supreme leader, took one
of these women to wife; and after that they proceeded to
Cruitheantuath; and Cathluan conquered that country, and was the first
king of Alba of the race of the Cruithnigh. There were seventy kings
of the Cruithnigh or Picts on the throne of Alba after him, as we read
in the Psalter of Cashel in the poem beginning: "All ye learned of
Alba." Thus it speaks on this matter:[448]

The Cruithnigh seized it after that,
When they had come from the land of Erin;
Ten and sixty very noble kings
Of those ruled the land of the Cruithnigh.

Cathluan, the first of these kings,
I will tell you briefly;
The last king of them was
The stout champion Constantin.

But Trostan the Druid and the five other Cruithnigh mentioned in the
above poem, remained in Ireland after Cathluan, and got lands from
Eireamhon in the Plain of Breagh in Meath. The fourteenth year after
the death of Eibhear, Eireamhon died in Airgeadros at Raith Beitheach,
beside the Feoir, and there he was buried. The same year the river
called the Eithne burst over land in Ui Neill; and the river called
Freaghobhal burst over land between Dal nAruidhe and Dal Riada.



XXV.

The three sons of Eireamhon held the sovereignty of Ireland after him
three years. These were Muimhne, Luighne, and Laighne. They held the
sovereignty jointly for three years till the death of Muimhne in Magh
Cruachan, and till Luighne and Laighne were slain by the sons of
Eibhear in the Battle of Ard Ladhrann.

The four sons of Eibhear, Er, Orba, Fearon, and Feargna, held the
sovereignty of Ireland a part of a year, when they were slain by Irial
Faidh son of Eireamhon, to avenge his two brothers Luighne and Laighne.

Irial Faidh son of Eireamhon held the sovereignty of Ireland ten years,
for his three elder brothers had no issue. Besides, when Irial had
assumed the sovereignty and attained to greatness and power, he slew
Eibhear's four sons -- namely, Er, Orba, Fearon, Feargna -- to avenge
his two brothers who had been killed by them.

Sixteen plains were freed from wood in Ireland in the reign of Irial.
The following are their names:-- Magh Reichead in Laoighis; Magh
Neiliu in Leinster; Magh Comair, Magh Seiliu in Uibh Neill; Magh
Sanais in Connaught; Magh nlnis, in Ulster; Magh Midhe; Magh Luinge in
Ciannachta; Magh Teacht in Ui Mac Uais; Magh Fearnmhuighe in
Oirghialla; Magh Foithin in the west; Magh Cobha in Ui Eachach; Magh
Cuma in Ui Neill; Magh Cuile Feadha, Magh Riada, Magh nAirbhrioch, in
Fotharta Airhbrioch, in Leinster.

Irial Faidh son of Eireamhon built seven royal forts in Ireland in his
time, namely, Raith Ciombaoith in Eamhain; Raith Croichne in Magh
Inis; Raith Bachaill in Lotharna; Raith Coincheadha in Seimhne; Raith
Mothaigh in Deaghcharbad; Raith Buireach in Sleachta; Raith Lochaid in
Glascharn.

The year after that the three rivers called the three Fionns burst
over land in Ulster. The following year Irial won four battles. The
first battle was the Battle of Ard Ionmhaith in Teathbha, where Stirne
son of Dubh, son of Fomhor fell; the second battle was the Battle of
Teannmhagh, which Irial fought against the Fomoraigh, where the
Fomorian king, who was called Echtghe Ethcheann, fell; the third
battle was the Battle of Lochmhagh, where Lughroth son of Mogh Feibhis
fell; the fourth battle was the Battle of Cuil Marta, where he
defeated the four sons of Eibhear. Hence, and to narrate these events,
is the poem which begins with this stanza:

Irial, the youngest of the children,
Son of the king of Fodhla of curled hair,
King of Sliabh Mis, king of Macha, 
Won four hard battles.

The second next year after this Irial Faidh son of Eireamhon died at
Magh Muaidhe, and was buried there.

Eithrial son of Irial Faidh, son of Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of
Ireland for twenty years. In the time of this Eithrial seven plains
were cleared of wood in Ireland, namely, Teannmhagh in Connaught; Magh
Lioghat and Magh mBealaigh in Ui Tuirtre; Magh Geisill in Ui Failghe;
Magh Ochtair in Leinster; Lochmhagh in Connaught; Magh Rath in Ui
Eachach; and after he had been twenty years on the throne of Ireland
he was slain by Conmhaol son of Eibhear in the Battle of Raoire in
Leinster.

Conmhaol son of Eibhear held the sovereignty of Ireland thirty years;
and he was the first king of Ireland of the race of Eibhear. Now this
Conmhaol defeated the descendants of Eireamhon in twenty-five battles.
The following are nine of these battles: to wit, the Battle of Ucha;
the Battle of Cnucha; the Battle of Eile; the Battle of Sliabh Beatha;
and the Battle of Geisill, where Palap son of Eireamhon fell; the
Battle of Sliabh Modhairn, where Samhra son of Ionbhoth fell; the
Battle of Loch Lein, where Mughroth fell; the Battle of Beirre; and
the Battle of Aonach Macha, where Conmhaol himself fell by Eibhear son
of Tighearnmhas of the race of Eireamhon; and he was buried on the
south side of Aonach Macha in the place which is called Conmhaol's
Mound at this day.

Tighearnmhas son of Follach, son of Eithrial, son of Irial Faidh, son
of Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of Ireland fifty years, or
according to others sixty years; and this monarch won twenty-seven
battles over the descendants of Eibhear, namely, the Battle of Eille,
in which Rochorb son of Gollan fell, and the Battle of Cumar, the
Battle of Magh Teacht, the Battle of Lochmhagh, in which fell
Deighiarna son of Goll son of Gollan, the Battle of Cuil Ard in Magh
Inis, the Battle of Cuil Fraochain, the Battle of Athghart in Seimhne,
the Battle of Ard Niadh in Connaught, and the Battle of Cam
Fearadhaigh, in which Fearadhach son of Rochorb, son of Gollan, fell,
the Battle of Cluain Cuasa in Teathbha, the Battle of Comhnuidhe in
Tuath Eibhe, the Battle of Cluain Muirisc in the north of Breithfne,
the Battle of Cuil Fabhair on Earbhus, and seven battles in Lughlachta
on Loch Lughdhach in one day, and the two battles of Cuil in
Airgeadros, and the Battle of Reibh, where the greater part of the
descendants of Eibher were slain by Tighearnmhas.

The year after that nine lakes burst over land in Ireland, namely,
Loch Cé, and it was over Magh Sulchair it burst; Loch Aillinne in
Connaught; Loch nIairn, Loch nUair, Loch Saighlionn, Loch Gabhair in
Meath and in Breagh; Loch Feabhail in Tir Eoghain, over Feabhal of the
son of Lodan it burst, and Magh Fuinnsighe is the name of the plain
over which the lake came; Dubhloch of Ard Ciannachta and Loch Da
Bhaill in Oirghialla, and the three black rivers of Ireland, namely,
Fobhna, Toronn, and Callonn.

It is the same Tighearnmhas who first found a mine of gold in Ireland;
and Uchadan was the name of the artificer who used to refine the gold
for him; and it was in Fotharta east of Lithfe he used to smelt it. It
was in the time of Tighearnmhas that clothes were first dyed purple,
blue, and green in Ireland. It was also in his time that embroidery,
fringes, and filigree were first put on mantles in Ireland. It was he
in the same way that introduced into Ireland the custom of having but
one colour in the dress of a slave, two colours in the dress of a
peasant, three in the dress of a soldier or young lord, four in the
dress of a brughaidh, five in the dress of a district chief, six in
the dress of an ollamh and in the dress of a king or queen. And it was
at Magh Sleacht that Tighearnmhas himself died and three quarters of
the men of Ireland with him on the eve of Samhain while they were in
the act of worshipping Crom Cruaidh, the chief idol of Ireland. For it
was this Tighearnmhas who first instituted the worship of Crom Cruaidh
(as Zoroastres did in Greece) about a hundred years after they had
come to Ireland; and it was from the prostrations of the men of
Ireland before this idol that that plain in Breithfne is called Magh
Sleacht. Some seanchas state that Ireland was seven years without a
king after the death of Tighearnmhas at the convention of Magh Sleacht,
and that it was Eochaidh Faobharghlas son of Conmhaol who held the
sovereignty of Ireland after him. But they are in error in this; for
the Reim Rioghruidhe states that it was Eochaidh Eadghothach of the
race of Lughaidh son of Ioth who held it.

Eochaidh Eadghothach son of Daire, son of Conghal, son of Eadhaman,
son of Mal, son of Luighaidh, son of Ioth, son of Breoghan, son of
Bratha, held the sovereignty of Ireland four years, and he fell by
Cearmna son of Eibric.

Cearmna and Sobhairce, two sons of Eibric son of Eibhear, son of Ir,
son of Midlih of Spain, held the sovereignty of Ireland forty years,
and were the first Ultonian kings of Ireland; and they divided the
sovereignty of Ireland between them; and the boundary of this division
extended from Innbhear Colpa at Droichead Atha to Luimneach of Munster.
Sobhairce obtained the northern part, and built a dun on his own
division, namely, Dun Sobhairce. Cearmna obtained the southern
division, and built a dun beside the southern sea, namely, Dun
Cearmna; and it is now called Dun Mic Padraig in the Courcys' country.
Sobhairce fell by Eochaidh Meann, son of a Fomorian king. Cearmna fell
by Eochaidh Faobharghlas son of Conmhaol in the Battle of Dun Cearmna.

Eochaidh Faobharghlas son of Conmhaol, son of Eibhear Fionn, son of
Milidh of Spain, held the sovereignty of Ireland twenty years. He was
called Eochaidh Faobharghlas, for his two spears were bluish-green and
sharp-edged; and it was he who defeated the race of Eireamhon in the
following battles, namely, the Battle of Luachair Deaghaidh in
Desmond; the Battle of Fosadh Da Ghort; the Battle of Cumar na dTri
nUisce; the Battle of Tuaim Dreagan in Breithfne; and the Battle of
Drom Liathain. He cleared seven plains from wood in Ireland, namely,
Magh Smeathrach, in Ui Failghe; Magh Laighne and Magh Luirg in
Connaught; Magh Leamhna, Magh nIonair, Magh Fubhna, and Magh Da
Ghabhal, in Oirghialla. And this Eochaidh fell by Fiachaidh Labhruinne
son of Smiorghull, son of Eanbhoth, son of Tighearnmhas, in the Battle
of Carman.

Fiachaidh Labhruinne son of Smiorghull, son of Eanbhoth, son of
Tighearnmhas, son of Follach, son of Eithrial, son of Irial Faidh, son
of Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of Ireland twenty-four years, or,
according to others, thirty-seven years; and he was called Fiachaidh
Labhruinne, for in his time Innbhear Labhruinne burst over land in
Ireland; and it was in his time the three following rivers burst
forth; namely, Innbhear Fleisce, Innbhear Mainge, and Innbhear
Labhruinne, from which he is named Fiachaidh Labhruinne. It was in his
time also. that Loch Eirne burst over land, and Magh Geanainn is the
name of the plain over which it came.

It was the son of this Fiachaidh, namely, Aonghus Ollbhuadhach, who
defeated the Cruithnigh and the old Britons who were in Alba in
several battles, and who first placed Alba under the full sway of the
Gaels, though from the time of Eireamhon son of Milidh the Gaels
claimed a tribute from them (the Albanians). About two hundred and
fifty years after the sons of Milidh came to Ireland, Alba was brought
under sway and tribute by Aonghus Ollbhuadhach son of Fiachaidh
Labhruinne; and this Fiachaidh Labhruinne fought four battles against
the race of Eibhear, namely, the Battle of Fairrge, the Battle of
Gallach, the Battle of Sliabh Feimhion, and the Battle of Sliabh
Bealgadain, in which he himself fell by Eochaidh Mumho son of Mo
Febhis.

Eochaid Mumho son of Mo Febhis, son of Eochaid Faobharglas, son of
Conmhaol, son of Eibhear Fionn, son of Milidh of Spain, held the
sovereignty of Ireland twenty-one years; and he fell by Aonghus
Olmucaidh in the Battle of Cliu.



XXVI.

Aonghus Olmucaidh son of Fiachaidh Labhruinne, son of Smiorgull, son
of Eanbhoth, son of Tighearnmhas, son of Follach, son of Eithrial, son
of Irial Faidh, son of Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of Ireland
eighteen years, and according to others twenty-one years. He was
called Olmucaidh from the word oll, that is 'great,' and muca, 'hogs,'
since he had the largest hogs that were in Ireland in his time; and it
was he who fought the following battles: The Battle of Cleire; the
Battle of Sliabh Cailge, where Baiscionn fell; and the Battle of Magh
Einsciath in Connaught; and the Battle of Glaise Fraochain, where
Fraochan Faidh fell; and fifty battles against the Cruithnigh and the
Fir Bolg, and the inhabitants of the Orcades. Three lakes burst forth
in his time -- Loch Einbheithe in Oirghialla, Loch Sailgheadain, and
Loch Gasain in Magh Luirg. It was in his time that the following
plains were cleared of woods, namely: Magh Glinne Dearcon in Cineal
Conaill; Magh nEinsciath in Leinster; Magh Cuile Caol in Boghaine;
Aolmhagh in Callruidhe; Magh Mucruimhe in Connaught; Magh Luachra
Deaghaidh, and Magh Archaill in Ciarraidhe Luachra. And it was in the
Battle of Sliabh Cua that Aonghus Olmucaidh was slain by Eanna son of
Neachtain, a Munsterman; and others say that it was Eanna Airgthioch
who slew him in the Battle of Carman; and this latter opinion is the
more probable, according to the poem which begins, "Aonghus Olmucaidh
died." And moreover the Reim Rioghruidhe agrees with the same opinion.

Eanna Airgthioch son of Eochaidh Mumho, son of Mo Feibhis, son of
Eochaidh Faobharghlas, son of Conmhaol, son of Eibhear Fionn, son of
Milidh of Spain, held the sovereignty of Ireland twenty-seven years;
and it was he who, at Airgeadros, first made silver shields in
Ireland; and he bestowed them on the men of Ireland; and he fell in
the Battle of Raighne by Roitheachtaigh son of Maon, son of Aonghus
Olmucaidh.

Roitheachtaigh son of Maon, son of Aonghus Olmucaidh, son of Fiachaidh
Labhruinne, son of Smiorgholl, son of Eanbhoth, son of Tighearnmhas,
son of Follach, son of Eithrial, son of Irial Faidh, son of Eireamhon,
held the sovereignty of Ireland twenty-five years; and this
Roitheachtaigh fell by Seadna son of Art, son of Airtre, at Raith
Cruachan.
Seadna son of Art, son of Airtre, son of Eibric, son of Eibhear, son
of Ir, held the sovereignty of Ireland five years; and he was slain by
his own son on the coming of 'a black fleet'[449] to Cruachain.

Fiachaidh Fionscothach son of Seadna, son of Art, son of Airtre, son
of Eibric, son of Eibhear, son of Ir, son of Milidh of Spain, held the
sovereignty of Ireland twenty years; and he was called Fiachaidh
Fionscothach, for in his time there were wine flowers that used to be
pressed into goblets; and this Fiachaidh was slain by Muineamhon son
of Cas Clothach.

Muineamhon son of Cas Clothach, son of Fear Arda, son of 
Roitheachtaigh, son of Rossa, son of Glas, son of Nuadha, son of
Eochaidh Faobharghlas, son of Conmhaol, son of Eibhear Fionn, held the
sovereignty of Ireland five years; and this Muineamhon was the first
to decree that collars or chains of gold should be worn round the neck
by the nobles in Ireland; and he died of the plague at Magh Aidhne.

Ailldeargoid son of Muineamhon, son of Cas Clothach, son of Fear Arda,
son of Roitheachtaigh, son of Rossa, son of Glas, son of Nuadha
Deaghlaimh, son of Eochaidh Faobharghlas, son of Conmhaol, son of
Eibhear Fionn, son of Milidh, held the sovereignty of Ireland seven
years; and it was in his time that gold rings were first put on the
fingers of the nobles in Ireland; and he was slain by Ollamh Fodla in
the Battle of Tara.

Ollamh Fodla son of Fiachaidh Fionscothach, son of Seadna, son of Art,
son of Airtre, son of Eibric, son of Eibhear, son of Ir, son of Milidh
of Spain, held the sovereignty of Ireland thirty years, and died in
his house. He was called Ollamh Fodla, as he was an ollamh in wisdom
and in knowledge for the establishing of laws and regulations in
Ireland in his time; and it was he first established the Feis of Tara,
as the poet says:

Ollamh Fodla of furious valour
Built the hall of ollamhs;
The first noble king, happy his reign,
Who assembled the Feis of Tara.

Now the Feis of Tara was a great general assembly like a parliament,
in which the nobles and the ollamhs of Ireland used to meet at Tara
every third year at Samhain, where they were wont to lay down and to
renew rules and laws, and to approve the annals and records of Ireland.
There, too, it was arranged that each of the nobles of Ireland should
have a seat according to his rank and title. There, also, a seat was
arranged for every leader that commanded the soldiery who were in the
service of the kings and the lords of Ireland. It was also the custom
at the Feis of Tara to put to death anyone who committed violence or
robbery, who struck another or who assaulted another with arms, while
neither the king himself nor anyone else had power to pardon him such
a deed. It was also their custom to pass six days in feasting together
before the sitting of the assembly, namely, three days before Samhain
and three days after it, making peace and entering into friendly
alliances with each other. In the following historical poem Eochaidh
Eolach describes the customs that were in vogue at the Feis of Tara:

The Feis of Tara every third year,
For the fulfilment of laws and rules,
Was convened at that time mightily
By the noble kings of Erin.

Cathaoir of many alliances assembled
The beauteous Feis of Royal Tara;
There came to him, it was a pleasure,
The men of Ireland to one place.

Three days before Samhain, according to custom,
Three days thereafter, good the practice,
Did that high-spirited company
Pass in constant feasting, a week.

Robbery, personal wounding,
Were forbidden them all that time;
Assault at arms, cutting,
Proceedings by litigation:

Whoever did any of these things
Was a wicked culprit of much venom;
Redeeming gold would not be accepted from him,
But his life was at once forfeit.

Fionnachta son of Ollamh Fodla, son of Fiachaidh Fionscothach, son of
Seadna, son of Art, son of Airtre, son of Eibric, son of Eibhear, son
of Ir, son of Milidh, held the sovereignty of Ireland twenty years;
and he was called Fionnachta, that is, Finshneachta, because it rained
showers of wine-snow in his reign; and he died in Magh Inis.

Slanoll son of Ollamh Fodla, son of Fiachaidh Fionscothach, son of
Seadna, son of Art, son of Airtre, son of Eibric, son of Eibhear, son
of Ir, son of Milidh, held the sovereignty of Ireland fifteen years;
and he was called Slanoll, for oll means 'great,' and everyone in
Ireland had great health during his reign, for none of the men of
Ireland suffered from plague or disease in his reign. And it was in
the banqueting-hall at Tara that he died; and others say that the
disease that seized him is unknown.

Geidhe Ollghothach son of Ollamh Fodla, son of Fiachaidh Fionscothach,
son of Seadna, son of Art, son of Airtre, son of Eibric, son of
Eibhear, son of Ir, son of Milidh, held the sovereignty of Ireland
seventeen years; and he is called Ollghothach, for great was the voice
of everyone in Ireland in his reign. And he was slain by Fiachaidh son
of Fionnachta.

Fiachaidh son of Fionnachta, son of Ollamh Fodla, son of Fiachaidh
Fionscothach, son of Seadna, son of Art, son of Airtre, son of Eibric,
son of Eibhear, son of Ir, son of Milidh, held the sovereignty of
Ireland thirty years; and he fell by Bearnghal son of Geidhe
Ollghothach.

Bearnghal son of Geidhe Ollghothach, son of Ollamh Fodla, son of
Fiachaidh Fionscothach, son of Seadna, son of Art, son of Airtre, son
of Eibric, son of Ir, son of Milidh, held the sovereignty of Ireland
twelve years; and he fell by Oilill son of Slanoll.

Oilill son of Slanoll, son of Ollamh Fodla, son of Fiachaidh
Fionscothach, son of Seadna, son of Art, son of Airtre, son of Eibric,
son of Eibhear, son of Milidh, held the sovereignty of Ireland sixteen
years, and he fell by Siorna son of Dian.

Siorna Saoghlach son of Dian, son of Roitheachtaigh, son of Maon, son
of Aonghus Olmucaidh, son of Fiachaidh Labhruinne, son of Smiorghull,
son of Eanbhoth, son of Tighearnmhas, son of Follach, son of Eithrial,
son of Irial Faidh, son of Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of Ireland
twenty-one years; and he was called Siorna Saoghlach, from the length
of life granted to him above his contemporaries; and he fell by
Roitheachtaigh son of Roan, in Aillinn, as says the poem beginning,
"Noble Eire, island of kings ":

Siorna passed in government 
The length of thrice seven noble years;
The cutting off of Siorna with slaughter
Was in Aillinn by Roitheachtaigh.

Roitheachtaigh son of Roan, son of Failbhe, son of Cas Ceadchaingneach,
son of Ailldeargoid, son of Muineamhon, son of Cas Clothach, son of
Fear Arda, son of Roitheachtaigh, son of Rossa, son of Glas, son of
Nuadha Deaghlaimh, son of Eochaidh Faobharghlas, son of Conmhaol, son
of Eibhear Fionn, son of Milidh of Spain, held the sovereignty of
Ireland seven years; and he was burned by a flash of lightning in Dun
Sobhairce.

Eilim son of Roitheachtaigh, son of Roan, son of Failbhe, son of Cas
Ceadchaingneach, son of Ailldeargoid, son of Muineamhon, son of Cas
Clothach, son of Fear Arda, son of Roitheachtaigh, son of Rossa, son
of Glas, son of Nuadha Deaghlaimh, son of Eochaidh Faobharghlas, son
of Conmhaol, son of Eibhear Fionn, son of Milidh, held the sovereignty
of Ireland one year, till he fell by Giallchaidh son of Oilill
Olchaoin.

Giallchaidh son of Oilill Olchaoin, son of Siorna Saoghlach, son of
Dian, son of Roitheachtaigh, son of Maon, son of Aonghus Olmucaidh,
son of Fiachaidh Labhruinne, son of Smiorghull, son of Eanbhoth, son
of Tighearnmhas, son of Follach, son of Eithrial, son of Irial Faidh,
son of Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of Ireland nine years; and he
fell in Magh Muaidhe by Art Imleach.

Art Imleach son of Eilim, son of Roitheachtaigh, son of Roan, son of
Failbhe, son of Cas Ceadchaingneach, son of Ailldeargoid, son of
Muinemhon, son of Cas Clothach, son of Fear Arda, son of
Roitheachtaigh, son of Rossa, son of Glas, son of Nuadha Deaghlaimh,
son of Eochaidh Faobharghlas, son of Conmhaol, son of Eibhear Fionn,
son of Milidh, held the sovereignty of Ireland twenty-two years; and
he fell by Nuadha Fionn Fail.

Nuadha Fionn Fail son of Giallchaidh, son of Oilill Olchaoin, son of
Siorna Saoghlach of the race of Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of
Ireland twenty years, or according to others sixty years, till he fell
by Breisrigh son of Art Imleach.

Breisrigh son of Art Imleach, son of Eilim, son of Roitheachtaigh, son
of Roan, son of Failbhe, son of Cas Ceadchaingneach, son of
Ailldeargoid, son of Muineamhon of the race of Eibhear, held the
sovereignty of Ireland nine years; and in that time he defeated the
Fomorians in several battles; and he himself fell at last by Eochaidh
Apthach at Carn Connluain.

Eochaidh Apthach son of Fionn, son of Oilill, son of Flann Ruadh, son
of Rothlan, son of Mairtine, son of Sithcheann, son of Riaghlan, son
of Eoinbhric, son of Lughaidh, son of Ioth, son of Breoghan, held the
sovereignty of Ireland one year; and he was called Eochaidh Apthach
because of the number who died in Ireland in his time; for the plague
or other disease seized upon the men of Ireland each month, from which
many of them died; hence the name Eochaidh Apthach clung to him; for
apthach means 'fatal'; and he himself fell by Fionn son of Bratha.

Fionn son of Bratha, son of Labhraidh, son of Cairbre, son of Ollamh
Fodla, son of Fiachaidh Fionscothach, son of Seadna, son of Art, son
of Airtre, son of Eibric, son of Eibhear, son of Ir, son of Milidh,
held the sovereignty of Ireland twenty years, or according to others
thirty years; and he fell by Seadna Ionnarraidh.

Seadna Ionnarraidh son of Breisrigh, son of Art Imleach of the race of
Eibhear, held the sovereignty of Ireland twenty years; and he is
called Seadna Ionnarraidh, that is, Seadna of the Wages, for he is the
first king who gave pay to fighting men in Ireland; for ionnarraidh
means 'wages.' And his limbs were torn asunder by Simeon Breac, and so
he died.

Simeon Breac son of Aodhan Glas, son of Nuadha Fionn Fail, son of
Giallchaidh, son of Oilill Olchaoin, son of Siorna Saoghlach of the
race of Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of Ireland six years, till he
fell by Duach Fionn to avenge his father, and the tearing asunder of
him which he had done.

Duach Fionn son of Seadna Ionnarraidh, son of Breisrigh, son of Art
Imlioch of the race of Eibhear, held the sovereignty of Ireland five
years; and he fell by Muiredhach Bolgrach.

Muiredhach Bolgrach son of Simeon Breac, son of Aodhan Glas, son of
Nuadha Fionn Fail, son of Giallchadh, son of Oilill Olchaoin, son of
Siorna Saoghalach, of the race of Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of
Ireland four years; and he fell by Eanna Dearg son of Duach Fionn.

Eanna Dearg son of Duach Fionn, son of Seadna Ionnarraidh, son of
Breisrigh, son of Art Imleach of the race of Eibhear, held the
sovereignty of Ireland twelve years; he was called Eanna Dearg, for
his oineach, that is his countenance, was red. It was in his time that,
at Airgeadros, money was first coined in Ireland. And he died of the
plague on Sliab Mis, and a large multitude with him.



XXVII.

Lughaidh Iardhonn son of Eanna Dearg, son of Duach Fionn, son of
Seadna Ionnarraidh, son of Breisrigh, son of Art Imleach of the race
of Eibhear, held the sovereignty of Ireland nine years. He was called
Lughaidh Iardhonn, for iardhonn means 'dark-brown'; hence through his
dark-brown locks he got the name Lughaidh Iardhonn; and he was slain
by Siorlamh at Raith Clochair.

Siorlamh son of Fionn, son of Bratha, son of Labhraidh, son of Cairbre,
son of Ollamh Fodla of the race of Ir, son of Milidh, held the
sovereignty of Ireland sixteen years. He is called Siorlamh, for sior
means 'long'; and he had long hands, for when in a standing posture
his hands reached the ground; and he was slain by Eochaidh Uaircheas.
Eochaidh Uaircheas son of Lughaidh Iardhonn, son of Eanna Dearg, son
of Duach Fionn, son of Seadna Ionnarraidh, son of Breisrigh, son of
Art Imleach of the race of Eibhear, held the sovereignty of Ireland
twelve years. He was called Eochaidh Uaircheas, for he used to have
bare canoes for a fleet, and ceasa means 'canoes' or 'coctaoi'; and as
he was two years on sea in exile from Ireland, he used to put a party
of his followers in these canoes to plunder the borders of every
country he passed by, and to bring the booty in these canoes to the
fleet; and it was from these canoes that the name Eochaidh Uaircheas
clung to him; and he fell by Eochaidh Fiadhmhuine and by Conuing
Beigeaglach.

Eochaidh Fiadhmhuine and Conuing Beigeaglach, two sons of Duach
Teamhrach son of Muireadhach Bolgrach, son of Simeon Breac, son of
Aodhan Glas, son of Nuadha Fionn Fail, son of Giallchaidh, son of
Oilill Olchaoin, son of Siorna Saoghlach of the race of Eireamhon,
held conjointly the sovereignty of Ireland five years. Eochaidh
Fiadhmhuine was so called, for he used to hunt and chase amidst
thickets or in woods; and this Eochaidh fell by Lughaidh Laimhdheargh
son of Eochaidh Uaircheas.

Lughaidh Laimhdhearg son of Eochaidh Uaircheas, son 	of Lughaidh
Iardhonn, son of Eanna Dearg, son of Duach Fionn, son of Seadna
Ionnarraidh, son of Breisrigh, son of Art Imleach of the race of
Eibhear, held the sovereignty of Ireland seven years. He was called
Lughaidh Laimhdhearg, as there was a red ti or spot on his hand; and
he fell by Conuing Beigeaglach.

Conuing Beigeaglach son of Duach Teamhrach, son of Muireadhach
Bolgrach, son of Simeon Breac, son of Aodhan Glas, son of Nuadha Fionn
Fail, son of Giallchaidh, son of Oilill Olchaoin son of Siorna
Saoghlach of the race of Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of Ireland
ten years. He is called Conuing Beigeaglach, for he never felt a qualm
of fear in battle or contest, and, moreover, he was a brave man in an 
onslaught; and hence the poet composed this stanza:

Conuing of the fights of the bright spears, 
Who never quailed before wight,
Passed a decade ruling over each Half
Till Art son of Lughaidh slew him.

Art son of Lughaidh Laimhdhearg, son of Eochaidh Uaircheas, son of
Lughaidh Iardhonn, son of Eanna Dearg, son of Duach Fionn, son of
Seadna Ionnarraidh, of Breisrigh, son of Art Imleach of the race of
Eibhear, held the sovereignty of Ireland six years; and he fell by
Duach Laghrach son of Fiachaidh Tolgrach and by Fiachaidh himself.

Fiachaidh Tolgrach son of Muireadhach Bolgrach, son of Simeon Breac,
son of Aodhan Glas, son of Nuadha Fionn Fail, son of Giallchaidh, son
of Oilill Olchaoin, son of Siorna Saoghlach of the race of Eireamhon,
held the sovereignty of Ireland seven years; and he fell by Oilill
Fionn.

Oilill Fionn son of Art, son of Lughaidh Laimhdhearg, son of Eochaidh
Uaircheas, son of Lughaidh Iardhonn, son of Eanna Dearg, son of Duach
Fionn, son of Seadna Ionnarraidh, son of Breisrigh, son of Art Imleach
of the race of Eibhear, held the sovereignty of Ireland nine years;
and he fell by Argeadmhar and by Fiachaidh and by Duach son of
Fiachaidh.

Eochaidh son of Oilill Fionn, son of Art, son of Lughaidh Laimhdhearg,
son of Eochaidh Uaircheas of the race of Eibhear, held the sovereignty
of Ireland seven years; and he did not yield the kingdom to Argeadmhar,
but made peace with Duach Lagrach; and Duach slew him at a meeting.

Airgeadmhar, son of Siorlamh, son of Fionn, son of Bratha, son of
Labhraidh, son of Cairbre, son of Ollamh Fodla of the race of Ir son
of Milidh, held the sovereignty of Ireland twenty-three years, or
according to others thirty-eight years; and he fell by Duach Laghrach
and by Lughaidh Laighdhe.

Duach Laghrach, son of Fiachaidh Tolgrach, son of Muireadhach Bolgrach,
son of Simeon Breac, son of Aodhan Glas, son of Nuadha Fionn Fail, son
of Giallchaidh of the race of Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of
Ireland ten years. He was called Duach Laghrach, for ladhgra is the
same as luathagra, 'swift retribution'; and he used to give respite to
no one who had committed injustice, but exacted retribution from such
on the spot, and hence he was called by the name of Duach Laghrach.

Lughaidh Laighdhe son of Eochaidh, son of Oilill Fionn, son of Art,
son of Lughaidh Laimhdhearg, son of Eochaidh Uaircheas of the race of
Eibhear, held the sovereignty of Ireland seven years; and he fell by
Aodh Ruadh, son of Badharn. The Coir Anmann states that this Lughaidh
was one of the five Lughaidhs, the children of Daire Doimhtheach. The
same book relates that a certain druid revealed prophetically to Daire
Doimhtheach that he would have a son who would be called Lughaidh who
would obtain the sovereignty of Ireland; and after this five sons were
born to him in succession, and he called each of them Lughaidh. When
the sons grew up, Daire had recourse to the same druid, and asked him
which of the five Lughaidhs would get the sovereignty of Ireland. "Go
to-morrow to Taillte," said the druid, "with thy five sons, and there
will come to-morrow a beautiful fawn into the fair, and everyone, and
thy children with the rest, will run in pursuit of it, and whichever
of thy children shall outrun the fawn and kill it will be king of
Ireland." The fawn came into the fair on the morrow; and the men of
Ireland and the children of Daire pursued it till they reached Beann
Eadair. A druidical mist separated the sons of Daire from the men of
Ireland. The sons of Daire proceeded to hunt the fawn from thence to
Dal Maschorb of Leinster, and Lughaidh Laighdhe overtook and slew it;
and it was from that fawn that he was called Lughaidh Laighdhe, that
is, Lughaidh Laoghdha.

Of this Lughaidh there is a curious romantic story, in which it is
said that, when he was engaged in hunting in a desert place, he met a
hideous hag who wore a magic mask; that he went into her bed, and took
off her magic mask, and dreamt that she would be a beautiful young
lady thereafter; and by this hag, with whom Lughaidh lay, Ireland is
allegorically meant; for at first he endured toil and torment on her
account, but afterwards enjoyed pleasure and delight. 	Although
the Coir Anmann states that Lughaidh Laighdhe was a son of Daire
Doimhtheach, I do not think that this is the Lughaidh Laighdhe the
Coir Anmann refers to who was king of Ireland, notwithstanding that
the druids foretold that Lughaid Laighdhe son of Daire Doimhtheach
would become king of Ireland.

Aodh Ruadh son of Badharn, son of Airgeadmhar, son of Siorlamh, son of
Fionn, son of Bratha, son of Labhraidh, son of Cairbre, son of Ollamh
Fodla of the race of Ir son of Milidh, held the sovereignty of Ireland
twenty-one years; and he was drowned at Eas Ruaidh.

Diothorba son of Deaman, son of Airgeadmhar, son of Siorlamh, son of
Fionn, son of Bratha, son of Labhraidh son of Cairbre, son of Ollamh
Fodla of the race of Ir son of Milidh, held the sovereignty of Ireland
twenty-one years; and he fell in Corann by the Cuans, that is Cuan
Mara, Cuan Muighe, and Cuan Sleibhe.

Ciombaoth son of Fionntan, son of Airgeadmhar, son of Siorlamh, son of
Fionn, son of Bratha, son of Labhraidh, son of Cairbre, son of Ollamh
Fodla of the race of Ir son of Milidh, held the sovereignty of Ireland
twenty years, or according to others twenty-eight years; and he died
of the plague in Eamhain Mhacha.



XXVIII.

Macha Mhongruadh, daughter of Aodh Ruadh son of Badharn, son of
Airgedmhar, son of Siorlamh, son of Fionn, son of Bratha, son of
Labhraidh, son of Cairbre, son of Ollamh Fodla, held the sovereignty
of Ireland seven years, till Reachtaidh Righdhearg slew her. And it
was in her time that Eamhain Mhacha was built. Now the reason why it
is called Eamhain Mhacha is this: three kings out of Ulster held the
sovereignty of Ireland, namely, Aodh Ruadh son of Badharn, from whom
is named Eas Ruaidh, and Diothorba son of Deaman of Uisneach in Meath,
and Ciombaoth son of Fionntan from Fionnabhair; and it was with this
Ciombaoth that Ughaine Mor son of Eochaidh Buadhach was brought up.
And each of these kings reigned seven years in succession, until each
had held the sovereignty of Ireland thrice. And the first of them to
die was Aodh Ruadh; and he left no issue but one daughter named Macha.
Macha demanded the sovereignty in her turn after her father's death;
and Diothorba and his children said that they would not cede
sovereignty to a woman; and a battle was fought between themselves and
Macha; and Macha triumphed over them in that battle, and held the
sovereignty of Ireland seven years; and Diothorba died and left five
sons, namely, Baoth, Bedach, Bras, Uallach, and Borbchas. These
demanded the sovereignty of Ireland for themselves, as it was held by
their ancestors before them. Macha said she would only give them
battle for the sovereignty. A battle was fought between them, and
Macha defeated them. The children of Diothorba fled for safety to dark
and intricate woods; and Macha took Ciombaoth son of Fionntan as her
husband, and made him leader of her warriors, and went herself in
pursuit of the sons of Diothorba in the guise of a leper, having
rubbed her body with the dough of rye, and found them in an intricate
forest in Burenn, cooking a wild boar. The sons of Diothorba asked
news of her, and gave her a portion of the meat. She told them all the
news she had.

And then one of the men said that the leper had a beautiful eye, and
that he desired to lie with her. Thereupon he and Macha retired into
the recesses of the wood, and Macha bound this man and left him there,
and returned to the rest. And they questioned her, "Where didst thou
leave the man who went with thee?" said they. "I know not," said she;
"but I think he feels ashamed to come into your presence after
embracing a leper." "It is not a shame," said they, "since we will do
the same thing." Thus she went into the wood with each of them in
turn; and she bound them all, and so took them bound together before
the men of Ulster at Eamhain; and she asked the Ulster nobles what she
should do with them. They all said with one accord that they should be
put to death. "That is not just," said Macha, "for that would be
contrary to law; but let them be made slaves of, and let the task be
imposed on them of building a fort for me which shall be the capital
of the province for ever." Thereupon Macha undid the gold bodkin that
was in the mantle on her breast, and with it measured the site of the
fort which the sons of Diothorba were obliged to build. Now, the fort
is called Eamhain eo being a word for 'a bodkin,' while muin means the
neck,' and hence the fort is called Eamhain, that is, eo mhuin. Or, it
is called Eamhain from Eamhain Mhacha, that is, the wife of Cronn son
of Adhnaman. Now this woman was forced against her will to run with
the horses of Conchubhar, king of Ulster; and she, though pregnant,
outran them; and at the end of the race she gave birth to a son and a
daughter; and she cursed the men of Ulster, whence they were visited
with the pangs of labour; and these pangs continued to afflict them
during nine reigns, that is, from Conchubhar to the reign of Mal son
of Rodhruidhe. Eamhain accordingly is the same as amhaon, amh denying
that it was but one, it being two, Macha gave birth to on that
occasion. And hence it was called Eamhain Mhacha, according to this
opinion. After this, Macha Mhongruadh was slain by Reachtaidh
Righdhearg.

Reachtaidh Righdhearg son of Lughaidh Laighdhe, son of Eochaidh, son
of Oilill Fionn, son of Art, son of Lughaidh Laimhdhearg, son of
Eochaidh Uaircheas of the race of Eibhear, held the sovereignty of
Ireland twenty years. He was called Reachtaidh Righdhearg from his
having a red fore-arm, that is, the end of a red fore-arm; and he was
slain by Ughaine Mor to avenge his foster-mother.

Ughaine Mor son of Eochaidh Buadhach, son of Duach Laghrach, son of
Fiachaidh Tolgrach, son of Muireadhach Bolgrach, son of Simeon Breac,
son of Aodhan Glas, son of Nuadha Fionn Fail, son of Giallchaidh, son
of Oilill Olchaoin, son of Siorna Saoghlach of the race of Eireamhon,
held the sovereignty of Ireland thirty years, or according to others
forty years. He was called Ughaine Mor, as his reign was great, since
he held sway over the islands of western Europe; and this Ughaine had
twenty-five children, namely twenty-two sons and three daughters. When
these children grew up, each of them had a special retinue; and when
they went on free circuit round Ireland, where one of the sons stayed
at night, another son stayed on the morrow. Thus they went on in
succession, so that wherever they directed their steps they exhausted
all the food and provisions in the district. And when the men of
Ireland observed this, they went to complain of this injury to Ughaine,
the king. And it was mutually agreed on to divide Ireland into twenty-
five parts, and to give each of these children his own part, and not
to permit any one of them to be a burden to another's portion. Hence
some poet composed this stanza:

Ughaine the proud, the noble,
Whose victorious dwelling was Banbha
His children divided rightly
Erin into twenty-five portions.

And it was according to these divisions that rents and duties used to
be paid to every king who reigned in Ireland for three hundred years,
that is, from the time of Ughaine to the time of the provincials who
lived when Eochaidh Feidlioch was king of Ireland, as the poet says in
this quatrain:

Three hundred years lasting the reproach,
Until the provincials arose,
Five without faith in their hearts,
Shared between them Ughaine's Erin.

It was Eochaidh Feidhlioch who divided the provinces of Ireland
amongst the following. He gave the province of Ulster to Fearghus son
of Leide; he gave the province of Leinster to Rossa son of Fearghus
Fairrge; he gave the two provinces of Munster to Tighearnach
Teidbheannach son of Luchta, and to Deaghaidh son of Sin; similarly he
gave the province of Connaught to three, namely, to Fidhic son of Feig,
to Eochaidh Allad, and to Tinne son of Connraidh, as we shall
hereafter set forth when we are treating of Eochaidh Feidhleach's own
reign. Still this division of Ireland among the children of Ughaine
held good until the children of Ughaine had died without issue, except
two, namely, Cobhthach Caol mBreagh and Laoghaire Lorc, from whom come
all that survive of the race of Eireamhon. And Ughaine Mor himself was
slain by Badhbhchaidh son of Eachaidh Buadhach his own brother in
Tealach an Choscair. But Badhbhchaidh held the sovereignty of Ireland
only a day and a half when he was slain by Laoghaire Lorc to avenge
his father.



XXIX.

Laoghaire Lorc son of Ughaine Mor, son of Eochaidh Buadhach, son of
Duach Laghrach, son of Fiachaidh Tolgrach, son of Muireadhach Bolgrach,
son of Simeon Breac, son of Aodan Glas, son of Nuadha Fionn Fail, son
of Giallchaidh, son of Oilill Olchaoin, son of Siorna Saoghalach of
the race of Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of Ireland two years,
Ceasair Chruthach, daughter of the king of the French, wife of Ughaine
Mor, was the mother of Laoghaire Lorc and Cobhthach Caol mBreagh. And
he was called Laoghaire Lorc, for lorc means 'murder of a kinsman';
and Laoghaire treacherously slew Badhbhchaid, son of Eachaidh Buadhach,
whence he got the name Laoghaire Lorc. Cobhthach Caol mBreagh, his own
brother, slew Laoghaire Lorc at Dionn Riogh on the brink of the
Bearbha.

It happened that Cobhthach Caol mBreagh had been pining through envy
of Laoghaire Lorc on account of his holding the sovereignty of
Ireland; and when Laoghaire heard that he was sick, he came with an
armed force to visit him. When Cobhthach saw him, he said it was sad
that his brother always had a suspicion of him and would not come into
his presence without an escort. "Not so," said Laoghaire; "I will come
peacefully into thy presence the next time unattended by an armed
escort." Thereupon, Laoghaire bade farewell to Cobhthach. Now
Cobhthach took the advice of a druid who was with him as to how he
could lay hold on his kinsman to kill him. "What thou hast to do,"
said the druid, "is to feign death, and go into a bier as a corpse,
and to send word of this to Laoghaire; and he will come to thee with
only a small escort; and when he will come into thy presence, he will
lie on thy body lamenting thee, and do thou stab him in the abdomen
with a dirk, and thus kill him." When Cobhthach had in this manner
finished the killing of Laoghaire, he slew also Oilill Aine son of
Laoghaire; and he recovered his health after he had done these deeds.
He also commanded a young lad whose name was Maon, the son of Oilill
Aine, to be brought into his presence, and made him eat a portion of
his father's and grandfather's hearts, and to swallow a mouse with her
young. But the child lost his speech from the disgust he felt, and
when he became speechless Cobhthach let him go. The child proceeded to
Corca Dhuibhne, where he resided for a time with Scoiriath, who was
king of that country, and thence went to France with a party of nine,
though some seanchas say that it was to the country of Armenia he went.
And the party who accompanied him declared that he was heir to the
kingdom of Ireland; and from this it came to pass that the king of the
French made him leader of his household guards; and he became very
successful, and so was much talked about, and his fame was great in
Ireland; and consequently many Irishmen followed him to France. And he
remained there a long time of his life.

Cobhthach Caol mBreagh son of Ughaine Mor, son of Eachaidh Buadhach of
the race of Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of Ireland thirty years,
or, according to others, fifty years. Ceasair Chruthach, daughter of
the king of the French, was his mother. He was called Cobhthach Caol
mBreagh, for a severe disease afflicted him through envying his 
brother Laoghaire Lorc, who was king of Ireland before him, so that he
got into decline, and his blood and flesh melted away, so that he was
thin; and Magh Breagh is the name of the place in which he lay sick,
and hence he was called Caol mBreagh; and this Cobhthach was slain by
Labhraidh Loingseach, son of Oilill Aine, at Dionn Riogh, on the eve
of greater Christmas, to avenge his father and grandfather whom he had
slain. On this some poet composed this stanza:

Labhraidh Loinseach, sufficient his army,
He slew Cobhthach in Dionn Riogh;
With the lance-armed host beyond the sea-water,
It was from these that the Lagenians were named.

Labhraidh Loingseach son of Oilill Aine, son of Laoghaire Lorc, son of
Ughaine Mor of the race of Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of Ireland
ten years; and he fell by Meilge son of Cobhthach Caol mBreagh. And
the way in which he was allured from France to Ireland was that
Moiriath daughter of Scoiriath, king of the territory of Feara Morc in
west Munster, conceived a violent passion for him on account of the
greatness of his name and fame. She equipped Craiftine the harper, a
musician who was in Ireland at the time, that he might go after him to
France with many love-presents, together with a love-lay in which she
set forth the intensity of her passion for Maon; and when Craiftine
arrived in France, he played a very sweet tune on his harp when he
came to where Maon was, and sang the love-lay which Moiriath daughter
of Scoiriath had composed for Maon. He was so delighted with
Craiftine's playing that he said he considered the song and the tune
melodious; and when his followers and Craiftine had heard this, they
besought the king of the French to give him an auxiliary force so that
he might go and regain his own territory; and the king gave him a
fleetful, that is, two thousand two hundred, and they put out to sea;
and no tidings whatever are given of them till they put into harbour
at Loch Garman; and when they came ashore, they learned that Cobhthach
Caol mBreagh was in Dionn Riogh and many of the Irish nobles with him,
and thereupon they. marched day and night, and attacked his fortress,
and slew Cobhthach together with these nobles. It was then that a
druid who was in the fortress inquired who had executed that slaughter.
"The mariner" (An loingseach), replied the man outside. "Does the
mariner speak?" asked the druid. "He speaks" (Labhraidh), said the
other. And hence the name Labhraidh Loingseach clung to Maon ever
since. And it was he who first made in Ireland spears with broad
greenish blue heads; for laighne means spears having wide green-blue
iron heads; and from these spears the name Laighin is given to the
people of the province of Gailian, which is now called the province of
Leinster. And the poet proves this, and sets forth the number of the
host which came with Labhraidh Loingseach from France, in the
following stanza:

Two hundred and twenty hundred foreigners,
With broad spears they came over;
From these spears without flaw
The Leinstermen are called Laighin.

Now when Labhraidh Loingseach had slain Cobhthach Caol mBreagh, and
had taken possession of Ireland, he went along with Craiftine to visit
Moiriath daughter of Scoiriath, king of the territory of Feara Morc,
the lady-love who sent Craiftine to France to visit him. Labhraidh
married her, and she was his queen during life.

Now the reason why Maon who was called Labhraidh Loingseach went to
France was his relation to the king of the French. For a daughter of
the king of the French called Ceasair Chruthach was the wife of
Ughaine Mor and mother of his children, namely, Laoghaire Lorc and
Cobhthach Caol mBreagh; and Labhradh Loingseach is a son's son to that
Laoghaire Lorc. And it was on account of his relation to the French
that he sought their protection.

Another reason why he went to France rather than to another country is
that there was a special friendly understanding between the
Leinstermen and the French. Indeed every province in Ireland had
formed a special friendly alliance beyond the sea, as the alliance
between clann Neill and the Albanians, between the Munstermen and the
Saxons, between the Ultonians and the Spanish, between the people of
Connaught and the Welsh, as John son of Torna O Maolchonaire, chief
professor of seanchus in Ireland, says in the following stanzas:

Each is allied to its like,
Though they be not of the same stock;
The Ui Neill and the Albanians;
The Saxons and the Munstermen;

The Ultonians and the Spaniards,
The battle-stay of every district;
The Connaughtmen and the Welsh;
The Leinstermen allied to the French.

From this alliance between the provinces and the above-named countries
they became mutually assimilated in manners according to their
friendship and affection for one another.

Know, O reader, that all true Leinstermen that survive of the race of
Eireamhon are descended from this Labhraidh Loingseach, except O
Nuallain who sprang from Cobhthach Caol mBreagh. The following are the
principal families that sprang from the Leinstermen, namely, O
Conchubhar Failghe with his family branches, O Caomhanaigh, O
Tuathalaigh, O Branaigh, Mac Giolla Phadraig, O Duinn, O Diomasaigh, O
Duibhidhir, muinntear Riain, and every branch that sprang from these
families. It was from Cathaoir Mor that most of the Leinster families
sprang. But it was not from him that Mac Giolla Phadraig sprang, since
Mac Giolla Phadraig and himself separated in pedigree from one another
at Breasal Breac son of Fiachaidh Foibhric, the fourteenth ancestor
from Cathaoir upwards. Now this Breasal had two sons, namely, Lughaidh
Loithfhionn and Connla: and the province of Leinster was divided
between these two: thus Lughaidh and his descendants obtained from the
Bearbha eastward, and Connla and his descendants from the Bearbha
westwards. These sons and these divisions are set forth in the
following stanza from the poem which begins, 'The sacred history of
the saints of Inis Fail':

Lughaidh and Connla without vexation,
Two sons of Breasal Breac the noble;
The Ossorians sprang from Connla of the wounds,
Lughaidh is ancestor of the Lagenians.

From Lughaidh also sprang O Duibhidhir; and they separated from
Cathaoir in pedigree at the fifth ancestor from Cathaoir upwards. Now,
Cathaoir Mor was son of Feidhlimidh Fiorurghlas, son of Cormac Gealta
Gaoth, son of Nia Corb, son of Cu Chorb. And a son of this Cu Chorb
was Cairbre Cluithiochair, from whom is O Dubhidhir; and from Nathi
son of Criomhthann, son of Eanna Cinnsealach, the seventh in descent
from Cathaoir Mor, came muinntear Riain.

Now, the second son of Ughaine Mor who had issue was Cobhthach Caol
mBreagh. From him sprang all the race of Conn, both the descendants of
Fiachaidh Sraibhtheine and of Eochaidh Doimhlen. and every other
branch that sprang from Conn, as we shall set down hereafter in the
genealogy of the sons of Milidh.



XXX.

We read of Labhraidh Loingseach that his ears were like those of a
horse; and hence he used to kill on the spot everyone who cut his hair,
lest he or anyone else might be aware of this blemish. Now he was wont
to have his hair cropped every year, that is, to have cut off the part
of his hair that grew below his ears. It was necessary to cast lots to
determine who should crop the king each year, since it was his wont to
put to death everyone who cropped him. Now it happened that the lot
fell on the only son of a widow who approached the close of her life,
and who lived near the king's stronghold. And when she heard that the
lot had fallen on her son, she came and besought the king not to put
her only son to death, seeing he was her sole offspring. The king
promised her that he would not put her son to death, provided he kept
secret what he should see, and made it known to no one till death. And
when the youth had cropped the king, the burden of that secret so
oppressed his body that he was obliged to lie in the bed of sickness,
and that no medicine availed him. When he had lain long in a wasting
condition, a skilful druid came to visit him, and told his mother that
the cause of his sickness was the burden of a secret, and that he
would not be well till he revealed his secret to some thing; and he
directed him, since he was bound not to tell his secret to a person,
to go to a place where four roads met, and to turn to his right and to
address the first tree he met, and to tell his secret to it. The first
tree he met was a large willow, and he disclosed his secret to it.
Thereupon the burden of pain that was on his body vanished; and he was
healed instantly as he returned to his mother's house. Soon after this,
however, it happened that Craiftine's harp got broken, and he went to
seek the material for a harp, and came upon the very willow to which
the widow's son had revealed the secret, and from it he took the
material for his harp; and when the harp was made and set to tune, as
Craiftine played upon it all who listened imagined that it sang, 'Da o
phill ar Labhraidh Lorc,' that is, Labraidh Loingseach, meaning, 'Two
horse's ears on Labhraidh Lorc'; and as often as he played on that
harp, it was understood to sing the same thing. And when the king
heard this story, he repented of having put so many people to death to
conceal that deformity of his, and openly exhibited his ears to the
household, and never afterwards concealed them. I think this part of
the story is a romantic tale rather than history. This Labhraidh fell
by Meilge son of Cobhthach Caol mBreagh.

Meilge Molbhthach son of Cobhthach Caol mBreagh, son of Ughaine Mor of
the race of Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of Ireland seven years;
and he fell by Mogh Corb son of Cobhthach Caomh.

Mogh Corb son of Cobhthach Caomh, son of Reachthaidh Ridhearg, son of
Lughaidh Laighdhe, son of Eochaidh, son of Oilill Fionn, son of Art,
son of Lugaidh Lamhdhearg, son of Eochaidh Uaircheas of the race of 
Eibhear, held the sovereignty of Ireland seven years. He was called
Mogh Corb, because, as his son was one day in a chariot, a portion of
the chariot got broken, and Mogh Corb repaired it, and through having
done this service for his son whose name was Corb he was called Mogh
Corb. He fell by Aonghus Ollamh.

Aonghus Ollamh son of Oilill, son of Labhraidh Loingseach, son of
Oilill Aine, son of Laoghaire Lorc, son of Ughaine Mor of the race of
Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of Ireland eighteen years, and fell by
Iarainnghleo son of Meilge.

Iarainnghleo Fathach son of Meilge Molbhthach, son of Cobhthach Caol
mBreagh, son of Ughaine Mor of the race of Eireamhon, held the
sovereignty of Ireland seven years; and he was called Iarainnghleo
Fathach because he was wise, skilful, accomplished; and at length he
fell by Fear Corb son of Mogh Corb.

Fear Corb son of Mogh Corb, son of Cobhthach Caomh, son of Reachtaidh
Righdhearg of the race of Eibhear, held the sovereignty of Ireland
eleven years; and he fell by Connla son of Iarainnghleo Fathach.

Connla Cruaidhchealgach son of Iarainnghleo Fathach, son of Meilge
Molbhthach, son of Cobhthach Caol mBreagh, son of Ughaine Mor of the
race of Eireamhon, held the sovereignty four years; and he fell at
Tara.

Oilill Caisfhiaclach son of Connla Cruaidhchealgach, son of
Iarainnghleo Fathach, son of Meilge Molbhthach, son of Cobhthach Caol
mBreagh, son of Ughaine Mor of the race of Eireamhon, held the
sovereignty of Ireland twenty-five years, till he fell by Adhamair
Foltchaoin.

Adhamair Foltchaoin son of Fear Corb, son of Mogh Corb, son of
Cobhthach Caomh, son of Reachtaidh Righdhearg of the race of Eibhear,
held the sovereignty of Ireland five years; and fell by Eochadh
Foiltleathan.

Eochaidh Foiltleathan son of Oilill Caisfhiaclach, son of Connla
Cruaidhchealgach, son of Iarainnghleo Fathach, son of Meilge
Molbhthach, son of Cobhthach Caol, son of Ughaine Mor of the race of
Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of Ireland eleven years, and fell by
Fearghus Fortamhail.

Fearghus Fortamhail son of Breasal Breac, son of Aonghus Gaileann, son
of Oilill Bracan, son of Labhraidh Loingseach, son of Oilill Aine, son
of Laoghaire Lorc, son of Ughaine Mor of the race of Eireamhon, held
the sovereignty of Ireland twelve years; and he was called Fearghus
Fortamhail, for he was warlike, strong, vigorous in his own time; and
he fell by Aonghus Tuirbheach.

Aonghus Tuirbheach son of Eochaidh Foiltleathan, son of Oilill
Caisfhiaclach, son of Connla Cruaidhchealgach, son of Iarainnghleo
Fathach, son of Meilge Molbhthach, son of Cobhthach Caol mBreagh, son
of Ughaine Mor of the race of Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of
Ireland thirty years, or, according to others, sixty years; and he was
called Aonghus Tuirbheach, for he felt ashamed (tuirbheach) of the son
he had by his own daughter through drunkenness. This son was called
Fiachaidh Fear Mara; and he was called Fiachaidh Fear Mara because he
was abandoned, being put on the sea in a canoe with precious valuables
around him, such as befitted the son of a king; and fishermen came
upon him and brought him ashore, and put him to nurse. Aonghus
Tuirbheach had also a son by his wedded wife, and his name was Eanna
Aighneach, and from him came the entire race of Conn; and Aonghus
Tuirbheach himself was slain at Tara; and it is from his having been
slain at Tara that he is called Aonghus Tuirbheach Teamhrach.

Conall Collamhrach son of Eidirsceol Teamhrach, son of Eochaidh
Foiltleathan, son of Oilill Caisfhiaclach, son of Connla
Cruaidhchealgach, son of Iarainnghleo Fathach, son of Meilge
Molbhthach, son of Cobhthach Caol mBreagh, son of Ughaine Mor, held
the sovereignty of Ireland five years, and fell by Nia Seaghamain.

Nia Seaghamain son of Adhamair Foltchaoin, son of Fear Corb, son of
Mogh Corb, son of Cobhthach Caomh, son of Reachtaidh Righdhearg of the
race of Eibhear, held the sovereignty of Ireland seven years; and he
was called Nia Seaghamain, that is, seachmhaoineach 'surpassing in
wealth,' as his wealth far exceeded that of all others, for the wild
does used to come and yield their milk kindly like any cow in his
reign in Ireland through the magic of his mother, whose name was
Fliodhais; and this Nia Seaghamain fell by Eanna Aighneach.

Eanna Aighneach son of Aonghus Tuirbheach Teamhrach, son of Eochaidh
Foiltleathan, son of Oilill Caisfhiaclach, son of Connla
Cruaidhchealgach, son of Iarainnghleo Fathach, son of Meilge
Molbhthach, son of Cobhthach Caol mBreagh, son of Ughaine Mor of the
race of Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of Ireland twenty-eight years.
He was called Eanna Aighneach, for aghneach is the same as ogh oineach,
that is, 'perfect generosity,' for he used to give away whatever came
to his hand; and he fell by Criomhthann Coscrach.

Criomhthann Coscrach son of Feidhlimidh Foirthriun, son of Fearghus
Fortamhail, son of Breasal Breac, son of Aonghus Gaileann, son of
Oilill Bracan, son of Labhraidh Loingseach, son of Oilill Aine, son of
Laoghaire Lorc, son of Ughaine Mor of the race of Eireamhon, held the
sovereignty of Ireland seven years. He is called Criomhthann Coscrach
from the frequency with which he was victorious in slaughter and
contest in every battle in which he was engaged; and he fell by
Rudhruighe son of Sithrighe.

Rudruighe son of Sithrighe, son of Dubh, son of Fomhor, son of
Airgheadmhar, son of Siorlamh, son of Fionn, son of Bratha, son of
Labhraidh, son of Cairbre, son of Ollamh Fodla of the race of Ir son
of Mileadh, held the sovereignty of Ireland thirty years, or,
according to others, seventy years; and he died of the plague at
Airgeadros.

Ionnadmhar son of Nia Seaghamain, son of Adhamair Foltchaoin, son of
Fear Corb, son of Mogh Corb, son of Cobhthach Caomh, son of Reachtaidh
Righdhearg of the race of Eibhear, held the sovereignty of Ireland
three years; and he fell by Breasal Boidhiobhadh.

Breasal Boidhiobhadh son of Rudhruighe, son of Sithrighe, son of Dubh,
son of Fomhor, son of Airgeadmhar, son of Siorlamh of the race of Ir
son of Milidh, held the sovereignty of Ireland eleven years. He was
called Breasal Boidhiobhadh, for a great cow-plague occurred in
Ireland in his time. This Breasal fell by Lughaidh Luaighne.

Lughaidh Luaighne sin of Ionnadmhar, son of Nia Seaghamain, son of
Adhamair Foltchaoin, son of Fear Corb, son of Mogh Corb, son of
Cobhthach Caomh, son of Reachtaidh Righdhearg of the race of Eibhear,
held the sovereignty of Ireland five years, and fell by Conghal
Clairingneach.

Conghal Clairingneach son of Rudhruighe, son of Sithrighe, son of Dubh,
son of Fomhor, son of Airgeadmhar, son of Siorlamh of the race of Ir
son of Milidh, held the sovereignty of Ireland fifteen years, and fell
by Duach Dallta Deaghaidh.



XXXI.

Duach Dallta Deaghaidh son of Cairbre Lusc, son of Lughaidh Luaighne,
son of Ionnadmhar, son of Nia Seaghamain, son of Adhamair Foltchaoin,
son of Fear Corb, son of Mogh Corb, son of Cobhthach Caomh, son of
Reachtaidh Righdhearg of the race of Eibhear, held the sovereignty of
Ireland ten years. He was called Duach Dallta Deaghaidh, for Cairbre
Lusc had two sons, namely Duach and Deaghaidh, and they disputed the
sovereignty of Ireland with one another, for each of these sons was a
fit person for the kingship as regards shape, make, action, and valour.
But Deaghaidh, the youngest of the sons, sought to supplant his elder
brother Duach. When Duach perceived this, he sent messengers for his
brother Deaghaidh; and Deaghaidh came to the place where Duach was;
and when he came into his presence, Duach seized him, and took out his
eyes, so that he was really a blind man; hence the name Duach Dallta
Deaghaidh, 'Duach who blinded Deaghaidh,' clung to him. To set forth
this deed some poet composed this stanza:

Deaghaidh was seized in his house
By Duach, by his brother;
And blinded by violence was
This Deaghaidh, though sorry was the deed.

This Duach fell by Fachtna Fathach son of Cas.

Fachtna Fathach son of Cas, son of Rudhruighe, son of Sithrighe, son
of Dubh, son of Fomhor, son of Airgeadmhar, son of Siorlamh of the
race of Ir son of Milidh, held the sovereignty of Ireland sixteen
years; and he fell by Eochaidh Feidhlioch.

Eochaidh Feidhlioch son of Fionn, son of Fionnlogh, son of Roighnen
Ruadh, son of Easaman Eamhna, son of Blathacht, son of Labhraidh Lorc,
son of Eanna Aighneach, son of Aonghus Tuirbheach Teamhrach, son of
Eochaidh Foiltleathan, son of Oilill Caisfhiaclach, son of Connla
Cruaidhchealgach, son of Iarainnghleo Fathach, son of Meilge
Molbhthach, son of Cobhthach Caol mBreagh, son of Ughaine Mor of the
race of Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of Ireland twelve years. Benia
daughter of Criomhthann was mother of Eochaidh Feidhlioch. He was
called Eochaidh Feidhlioch, for he suffered long from sighing, for
feidhil means 'long,' and uch means 'a sigh,' hence Feidhlioch means
'a long sigh.' For his heart was never without a sigh since he slew
his sons in the Battle of Drom Criaidh until his own death. These
three sons were called the three Finneamhnas. And they were called
Eamhna, from the word amhaon, denying that any one of them was born
alone, they being all born together. And Cloithfhionn daughter of
Eochaidh Uichtleathan, wife of Eochaidh Feidhlioch, was their mother,
and she gave birth to them together. Their names were Breas and Nar
and Lothar. And this Eochaidh Feidhlioch it was who first divided
Ireland into provinces and instituted provincials. For he divided the
province of Connaught into three parts, between three, namely, Fidheac
son of Feig, Eochaidh Allad, Tirane son of Connraidh. He gave to
Fidheac Fir na Craoibhe, from Fidheac to Luimneach; he gave to
Eochaidh Allad Iorrus Domhnann, from Gaillimh to Dubh, and to
Drobhaois; he gave to Tinne son of Connraidh, Magh Sainbh and Sean-
tuatha Taidhean, from Fidheac to Teamhair Bhrogha Niadh; he gave,
moreover, the province of Ulster to Fearghus son of Leide; he gave the
province of Leinster to Rossa son of Fearghus Fairrge; he gave the two
provinces of Munster to Tighearnach Teadbhannach and to Deaghaidh; so
that he brought all Ireland under his own sway and rule during his
reign.

After this, however, Eochaidh went into Connaught; and the three kings
and the people of the three divisions of Connaught came to meet him.
Eochaidh asked of them the site of a royal fortress for himself in
Connaught. Eochaidh Allad and Fidheac said they would not grant him
this, and that they preferred to send him his rent and dues to Tara.
Tinne son of Connraidh, however, the third king, consented to
Eochaidh's having the site of a fortress. Eochaidh gave his own
daughter Meadhbh to wife to Tinne; and they formed a friendly alliance
with one another. Eochaidh Feidhlioch inquired of his druids where he
should build the fortress; and they told him to build it at Druim na
nDruadh, which is called Cruachain. The fort was then begun by the
Gamhanruidh from Iorrus Domhnann; and they made the rampart of that
fort of Eochaidh in one day, as the poet says:

He enjoined on the tribe of Domhnann, in one day
To make and shape the rampart;
The king of Fail of the feasts gave not
Pay to the men for the work.

A residence was then built within it; and Eochaidh gave the kingdom of
Connaught to Tinne son of Connraidh, and gave him his own daughter,
Meadhbh, in marriage. After this Tinne slew Eochaidh Allad, and gave
the kingdom of Domhnann to Oilill Fionn. Now Meadhbh gave the
government of Raith Eochach to Crochain Croidhearg, her own mother;
and it is from this Crochain that the name Cruachain is now given to
Raith Cruachan, as the poet says in this quatrain:

Druim na nDruadh and Tulach Oichne,
And then Raith Eochach was it called;
Raith Cruachan from Crochain Croidhearg,
Who sped great wrath on the plain.

Meadhbh continued for a long time afterwards to be the wife of Tinne
son of Connraidh, till he fell at Tara by the hand of Monuidhir, who
was called;Mac Ceacht. Now Meadhbh held for ten years the sovereignty
of Connaught after Tinne without living with any man publicly, but
living privately with whatever man pleased her fancy. After this
Meadhbh took for her husband Oilill Mor son of Rossa Ruadh, a
Leinsterman. Mada Muirisc, a Connaughtwoman, was his mother. And
Meadbh bore to Oilill seven sons, namely, the seven Maines. And it was
Conall Cearnach who when at Cruachain, in his old age, slew Oilill by
a cast of a javelin; and the men of Connaught followed and slew him to
avenge that deed.

There were war and strife for a long time between the people of
Connaught and those of Ulster while Meadhbh held sway over Connaught,
and Conchubhar was king of Ulster. And in order that thou mayest know,
O reader, the cause of the enmity that existed between them, I shall
set down here how the children of Uisneach were slain in violation of
the guarantee or protection of Fearghus son of Rogh, of Cormac
Conluingeas, and of Dubthach Daol Uladh. The pith of the story is
briefly as follows.



XXXII.

One day Conchubhar, king of Ulster, went to partake of a feast to the
house of Feidhlimidh son of Dall, storyteller to Conchubhar. In the
course of that feast the wife of Feidhlimidh gave birth to a beautiful
daughter; and Cathbhadh the druid, who was present at the assembly on
that occasion, foreboded and foretold of this daughter that great
misfortune and mischief would befall the province on her account. When
the warriors heard this, they sought to put her to death on the spot.
"By no means," said Conchubhar; "but I will take her and put her to
nurse so that she may become my wife." Deirdre was the name that
Cathbhadh the druid gave her. Conchubhar placed her in a dwelling
apart, with a tutor and a nurse to bring her up; and no one in the
province was permitted to go into her presence but her tutor, her
nurse, and Conchubhar's censorious woman, who was called Leabharcham.
She continued under these regulations until she was marriageable, and
until she excelled the women of her time in beauty. One snowy day it
chanced that her tutor killed a calf to prepare food for her; and when
the calf's blood was shed on the snow, a raven began to drink it. And
when Deirdre observed this, she said to Leabharcham that she would
like to have a husband having the three colours she beheld, namely,
his hair of the colour of the raven, his cheek of the colour of the
calf's blood, and his skin of the colour of the snow, "Such a man is
in the household with Conchubhar; he is called Naoise, son of
Uisneach." "Then," said she, "I beseech thee, O Leabharcham, send him
to speak to me in secret"; and Leabharcham informed Naoise of this.
Thereupon Naoise came secretly to visit Deirdre, who revealed to him
how greatly she loved him, and besought him to elope with her from
Conchubhar. Naoise consented to this with reluctance, as he feared
Conchubhar. Himself and his two brothers Ainle and Ardan, having
Deirdre and thrice fifty warriors with them, proceeded to Alba, where
they were maintained in service by the king of Alba till he was
informed of Deirdre's beauty, and asked her for his wife. Naoise and
his brothers became enraged at this, and fled with Deirdre from Alba
to an island in the sea, having previously had many conflicts with the
king's party. Now when the story ran in Ulster that the sons of
Uisneach were in this sad plight, many of the nobles of the province
said to Conchubhar that it was a pity that the sons of Uisneach should
be in exile on account of a wicked woman, and that they should be sent
for and brought back to the country. Conchubhar consented to this at
the request of the nobles; and he gave Fearghus son of Rogh, Dubhthach
Daol Uladh, and Cormac Conluingeas as sureties that he would act
towards them in good faith. Upon these conditions, Fearghus son of
Rogh sent his own son Fiachaidh to the children of Uisneach; and he
brought them and their followers to Ireland, and Deirdre with them;
and no tidings whatever of them are related till they reached the
green of Eamhain.

On the green they were met by Eoghan son of Durrthacht, prince of
Fearnmhagh, accompanied by a large host with intent to deal
treacherously with the children of Uisneach at the direction of
Conchubhar; and when the children of Uisneach arrived, Eoghan went to
bid Naoise welcome, and in welcoming him thrust a spear through him.
When Fiachaidh son of Fearghus saw this, he sprang between Eoghan and
Naoise; and Eoghan dealt his second thrust at Fiachaidh, and slew him,
together with Naoise; and forthwith Eoghan and his host fell upon the
children of Uisneach, and slew them, and made dreadful slaughter upon
their followers.

Now when Fearghus and Dubhthach heard that the children of Uisneach
had been slain in violation of their guarantee, they proceeded to
Eamhain, and came into conflict with the party of Conchubhar, and they
slew Maine son of warriors of his followers. They burned and plundered
Eamhain, and put Conchubhar's women to death; and they and Cormac
Conluingeas assembled their supporters from all sides; and their host
at that time numbered three thousand warriors; and they thence marched
into Connaught to Meadhbh and to Oilill, where they found welcome and
were taken into service. When they had arrived there, there was no
night that they did not send parties of plunderers to ravage and burn
Ulster. They continued to act thus till they ravaged the district of
Cuailgne -- a deed from which sprang much mischief and contention
between the two provinces; and in this manner they passed seven years
without an hour's truce between them. Within that time Fearghus knew
Meadhbh, and she conceived of him, and bore him three sons at one
birth, namely, Ciar, and Corc, and Conmhac, as the poet says:

Meadhbh conceived in fair Cruachain
Of Fearghus, who deserved not reproach,
And brought forth triplets faultless, strong,
Ciar and Corc and Conmhac.

From this Ciar is named Ciarraidhe in Munster, and O Conchubhair
Ciarraidhe is of his progeny. From Corc is named Corca Moruadh; and
from Conmhac is named every Conmhaicne in Connaught; and whoever reads
the poem composed by Lughair, Oilill's poet, beginning, "The children
of Fearghus, children beyond all," he will plainly find that these
three sons of Meadhbh wielded great power and authority in Connaught
and in Munster. This is proved by the territories that are named from
them in these two provinces.

Now as to Deirdre, who gave rise to the events we have narrated, she
remained with Conchubhar a year after the slaying of the children of
Uisneach; and little though it be to raise her head or let a smile
cross her lips, she did not do it during that time. When Conchubhar
saw that neither sport nor kindness had any effect on her, and neither
merriment nor pleasure raised her spirits, he sent for Eoghan son of
Durrthacht, prince of Fearnmhagh; and when Eoghan had come into his
presence, he said to Deirdre that, since he himself was unable to turn
away her mind from her sorrow, she must pass another space of time
with Eoghan; and she was thereupon placed behind Eoghan in his chariot.
Conchubhar went to accompany them; and as they went along, she cast
glances of rage at Eoghan in front of her and at Conchubhar behind
her; for there were no two on earth she hated more than these. And
when Conchubhar perceived her glancing by turns at himself and Eoghan,
he said to her in jest, "Deirdre," said he, "thy glancing at me and at
Eoghan is the glancing of a sheep between two rams." When Deirdre
heard this, she started at the words, and sprang lightly from the
chariot; and her head struck against a ledge of rock that stood before
her on the ground. Her head was broken into fragments, and her brain
straightway issued forth. Thus was brought about the banishment of
Fearghus son of Rogh, and of Cormac Conluingeas son of Conchubhar, of
Dubhthach Daol Uladh, and the death of Deirdre.

As it was in the time of Conchubhar and the heroes that Meadhbh held
the sovereignty of Connaught, and as she lived ten years after the
death of Tinne son of Connraidh, her first husband, and for eighty
years after that was the wife of Oilill Mor, and lived eight years
unmarried after the death of Oilill till she was slain by Forbhuidhe
son of Conchubhar, we shall briefly set down here the manner of death
and some account of the more celebrated of the heroes who lived in the
time of Meadhbh.



XXXIII.
Here follows first a brief summary of the adventure which led to the
death of Conchubhar.

Now at that time, in order to incite champions to be brave in conflict,
it was customary to give a champion's prize as a token of victory to
him who proved the stronger in single combat, and who vanquished his
adversary in the field of valour. From this custom there arose a
contest for the champion's prize between Conall Cearnach, and
Cuchulainn and Laoghaire Buadhach in Eamhain. And Conall asked for the
brain of Meisceadhra, a stout Leinster champion whom he had himself
slain in single combat; and when the brain of that valiant man was
exhibited, Laoghaire and Cuchulainn ceased from their contest with
Conall, as they judged that neither of them had ever done so great a
deed of bravery or valour. It was the custom at that time that when
any champion slew in battle another champion of great fame, he took
the brain out of his head and mixed it with lime, so that he had it in
the shape of a hard round ball to show at meetings and public
assemblies as a trophy of valour. And when two jesters whom Conchubhar
kept noticed how highly everyone prized the brain, they stole it the
next day from Conchubhar's Craobhdhearg. Now there were three
dwellings in Eamhain in Conchubhar's time, namely, Broin Bhearg and
Craobh Dhearg and Craobh Ruaidh. In the first house were their
wounded; and it was called Broin Bhearg, because the wounded who were
in it felt sorrow and distress from the piercing pain of the wounds,
and of the distempers from which they suffered therein. In the second
house, which was called Craobh Dhearg, were kept in safety the arms
and precious valuables; and accordingly Meisceadhra's brain was placed
there for security as any other precious valuable. The third house
that Conchubhar had was called the Craobh Ruaidh. It was in it himself
and all his warriors used to be served.

As to the two jesters, having carried off the brain of Meisceadhra
from the Craobh Dhearg as we have said, they went on the green of
Eamhain, and set to bandying the brain from hand to hand like a ball,
when a fierce wolf of evil to the Ultonians, to wit, Ceat son of Magha,
a valiant Connaughtman, came and coaxed the brain of Meisceadhra from
the jesters, and took it with him to Connaught; and as often as he
went to battle or contend against the Ultonians he was wont to have
the brain of Meisceadhra at his girdle in the hope of bringing
disaster on the Ultonians. For it was foretold that Meisceadhra would
avenge himself on the Ultonians after his death; and he thought it was
by means of the brain this prophecy would be fulfilled. Whence Ceat
was wont to carry the brain of Meisceadhra about with him in the hope
of slaying some one of the nobles of Ulster with it. Now Ceat,
accompanied by a large host, went to plunder Ulster, and carried off a
large herd of cattle from Feara Rois in Ulster; and he was pursued by
a large force of Ultonians; and the men of Connaught flocked eastward
to assist Ceat, and Conchubhar went westward to help the Ultonians.
And when Ceat heard that Conchubhar was in pursuit, he sent word to
the women of Connnaght who were on a hill watching the two hosts
asking them to entice Conchubhar to visit them, as he was a jovial,
affable man, for the Ultonians would not permit him to take part in
the battle against the men of Connaught.

Now when Conchubhar heard that the women wished to see him, he set out
alone from the height on which he was to visit them; while Ceat, on
the other hand, went secretly and got into the midst of the women
waiting in readiness to kill Conchubhar. When, therefore, Conchubhar
was approaching the women, Ceat arose and arranged the brain of
Meisceadhra in his sling to slay Conchubhar. But when the latter saw
Ceat, he retreated to the midst of his own people; and as he was
proceeding to Doire Da Bhaoth, Ceat hurled the brain of Meisceadhra
after him from his sling, and struck him on the crown; and his brain-
pan was broken by that cast, and the brain of Meisceadhra clung to his
skull; and thereupon his followers came up to protect him against Ceat.
They then sent for Finghin Faithliaigh; and when he arrived, he said
that if that ball were extracted from his head he would instantly die.
"We had rather," said they all, "that our king should have a blemish
than that he should die." Finghin cured him, and then told him not to
get into a passion, to avoid sexual intercourse, to avoid riding on
horseback, to abstain from violent exertion -- otherwise, that by the
repelling motion of his own brain, he would hurl the ball from his
head and die.

He was seven years in this state up to the Friday on which Christ was
crucified, according to some seanchas. And when he saw the unwonted
transformation of the elements and the darkening of the sun with the
moon full, he inquired of Bacrach, a Leinster druid who was with him,
what was the cause of that unwonted change in the luminaries of heaven
and earth. "It is that Jesus Christ the Son of God is being put to
death now by the Jews," replied the druid. "That is a pity," said
Conchubhar; "and if I were present, I would slay all that are around
my King putting Him to death." And with that he drew forth his sword,
and went into an oak-wood hard by, and set to cutting and felling it,
saying that, if he were amongst the Jews, he would treat them in the
same way; and through the strength of the fury that seized him the
ball bounded from his head, and a portion of his brain followed it,
and with that he died. Coill Lamhruidhe in Feara Rois is the name of
that wood-thicket.

After Conchubhar's death, the kingdom of Ulster was offered to whoever
should carry his body to Eamhain without resting. A servant of
Conchubhar's named Ceann Bearroide was present, and in the hope of
obtaining the kingdom, took up the body stoutly and carried it to
Ardachadh, in Sliabh Fuaid, but there his heart broke and he died. And
this event has given rise to the saw which says that one seeks the
kingdom of Ceann Bearroide when one aspires ambitiously to a rank
which it is beyond his power to attain.

But though authors relate this story of Conchubhar, alleging that he
was a contemporary of Christ, still, according to the truth of history,
Christ was not born for a long time after Conchubhar; and the truth of
this story is that Bacrach, a Leinster druid, foretold through
prophecy that Christ the Prophesied One, the Son of God, would be
conceived, that He would assume a body, and that the Jews would put
Him to death; and through Him the human race would be delivered from
the tyranny of the evil one. And when Conchubhar heard this, he became
enraged as we have said; and through sympathy with Christ, he set to
cut down the wood of Lamhruidhe as if the trees were the Jews; and he
died of that effort. And if anyone should deem it strange that Bacrach
or any other druid, being Pagan, should foretell the death of Christ,
how was it more fitting for the Sybils, who were Pagans, to have
foretold Christ before His birth than for Bacrach or any of his kind?
Hence the story is not to be thus discredited.



XXXIV.
Of the death of Ceat son of Magha, as follows.

This Ceat was a valiant man and during his life he was an enemy and
constant plunderer of the Ultonians. On a certain day this Ceat
proceeded to Ulster to wreak vengeance as was his wont; and there was
heavy snow at that time; and as he was returning with the heads of
three warriors whom he had slain on that expedition, Conall Cearnach
pursued him and seized him at Ath Ceit. They fought; and Ceat fell in
the conflict; and Conall was severely wounded, and lapsed into a
trance on the spot after he had lost a large quantity of blood.
Thereupon Bealchu of Breithfne, a Connaught champion, came up to the
place of conflict, where he found Ceat dead and Conall on the point of
death, and said that it was well these two wolves who had caused the
ruin of Ireland were in so sad a plight. "That is true," said Conall;
and in retribution for all the injury I have inflicted on Connaught do
thou kill me." Now he said this because he would give the kingdom of
Ireland that some other warrior should wound him so that a single
Connaught warrior should not have the renown of slaying him. "I will
not slay thee," said Bealchu, "since the plight thou art in is almost
as bad as death. However, I will take thee with me and apply remedies
to thee; and if thou recoverest from thy wounds, I will fight thee in
single combat, so that I may avenge on thee all the injury and
affliction thou hast brought on Connaught." Thereupon he placed him in
a litter and took him to his own house, and there applied remedies to
him, until his wounds were healed.

But when Bealchu saw that Conall was recovering and his natural
strength growing in him once more, he became afraid of him, and
arranged for three warriors, his own sons, to slay him treacherously
in bed by night. But Conall got a hint of this treacherous conspiracy;
and on the night for which it was arranged that the sons should come
to commit the murder, Conall said to Bealchu that he must exchange
beds with him, else he would kill him. And accordingly Bealchu lay
against his will in Conall's bed, and Conall lay in Bealchu's bed. And
those three warriors, the sons of Bealchu, came to the bed in which
Conall used to be and slew their father in mistake for Conall. Now
when Conall observed that they had slain their father in mistake for
himself, he sprang upon them and killed all three, and beheaded them
and their father; and on the following day he took their heads to
Eamhain in triumph, and in commemoration of this deed is the following
quatrain from the seanchus:

Among the feats of Conall Cearnach
Was the sack of Manainn, the spoiling of slaves,
And the slaying of the three sons of Bealchu of Breithfne, 
After he had slain Lughaidh son of three hounds.

So far the murder of Ceat son of Magha and of Bealchu of Breithfne and
his three sons. And there are many great deeds besides this that might
be laid to the credit of Conall which we shall leave untold on this 
occasion.

Of the event which led to the death of Fearghus son of Rogh, as
follows.

When Fearghus was in banishment in Connaught, it happened that he was
with Oilill and Meadhbh in Magh Ai, where they had a dwelling-
fortress; and one day, when they went out to the shore of a lake that
was near the lios, Oilill asked Fearghus to go and swim in the lake,
and Fearghus did so. Now, while Fearghus was swimming, Meadhbh was
seized by a desire of swimming with him; and when she had gone into
the lake with Fearghus, Oilill grew jealous; and he ordered a kinsman
of his called Lughaidh Dalleigheas who was, with him to cast a spear
at Fearghus which pierced him through the breast; and Fearghus came
ashore on account of the wound caused by that cast, and extracted the
spear from his body, and cast it in the direction of Oilill; and it
pierced a greyhound that was near his chariot, and thereupon Fearghus
fell and died, and was buried on the shore of the same lake. It was
this Fearghus who slew Fiachna son of Conchubhar, and the champion
Geirrgheann son of Mollaidh, and Eoghan son of Durrthacht, king of
Fearnmhuighe, and many heroes and warriors besides whom we shall not
mention here. It was he also who carried off the great spoil from
Ulster which caused much mischief and discord between Connaughtmen and
Ulstermen, so that the dubhloingeas that went with Fearghus into exile
from Ulster remained seven years in Connaught, or according to others
ten years, spoiling and plundering Ulster on account of the death of
the sons of Uisneach, while the Ulstermen were in the same way making
an onslaught on them and on the men of Connaught on account of the
spoil that Fearghus took from them, as well as every other injury
which the dubhloingeas -- that is, the exile host who went with
Fearghus to Connaught -- and the men of Connaught themselves had done
them; so that the injury and damage they inflicted on one another were
so great that books have been written about them which it would be
tedious to mention, and would take too long to describe here.

The cause which led to the death of Laoghaire Buadhach, as follows.

Conchubhar had a poet called Aodh son of Ainneann, who carried on an
intrigue with Maghain, Conchubhar's wife; and when Conchubhar
discovered this, the judgment he passed on the poet was that he be
drowned in Loch Laoghaire; and at the king's command a company went
with him to drown him. And when Laoghaire Buadhach's steward saw this,
he went to Laoghaire and said that there was no place in Ireland where
the poet could be drowned but at his own door.

Thereupon Laoghaire leaped out, and his poll struck against the upper
door-post of the house, and his skull was broken; after this he made a
sudden onslaught on the company, and slew them, and rescued the poet;
and he himself died on the spot. Such was the end of Laoghaire
Buadhach.



XXXV.
The cause of the death of Meadhbh of Cruachain, as follows.

When Oilill had been slain by Conall Cearnach, Meadhbh went to Inis
Clothrann on Lough Ribh to live; and while she resided there, she was
under an obligation to bathe every morning in the well which was at
the entrance to the island. And when Forbuidhe son of Conchubhar heard
this, he visited the well one day alone, and with a line measured from
the brink of the well to the other side of the lake, and took the
measure with him to Ulster, and practised thus: he inserted two poles
in the ground, and tied an end of the line to each pole, and placed an
apple on one of the poles, and stood himself at the other pole, and
kept constantly firing from his sling at the apple that was on the top
of the pole till he struck it. This exercise he practised until he had
grown so dexterous that he would miss no aim at the apple. Soon after
this there was a meeting of the people of Ulster and Connaught at both
sides of the Shannon at Inis Clothrann; and Forbuidhe came there from
the east with the Ulster gathering. And one morning while he was there,
he saw Meadhbh bathing, as was her wont, in the fore-mentioned well;
and with that he fixed a stone in his sling and hurled it at her, and
struck her in the forehead, so that she died on the spot, having been
ninety-eight years on the throne of Connaught, as we have said above.

Thus far we have digressed into accounts of the heroes who were
contemporaries of Meadhbh. We shall now return to Eochaidh Feidhlioch.
Now, Eochaidh had three sons and three daughters, namely, Breas and
Nar and Lothar, the three sons, and Eithne Uathach, Clothra, and
Meadhbh Cruachan, the three daughters, as the poet says in this
quatrain:

Three daughters had Eochaidh Feidhlioch,
Fame on a lofty seat:
Eithne Uathach, fair Meadhbh of Cruachain,
And Clothra.

We shall come back again to Conchubhar, and set down here part of his
story. His mother was the daughter of Eochaidh Salbhuidhe of Connaught,
who was called Neasa, and he was named from her. And his father was
Fachtna Fathach son of Cas, son of Rudhruighe of the race of Ir son of
Milidh; and when the provincial kings were demanding to have the
boundaries of each separate province fixed, Cairbre Nia Fear, king of
Leinster, in consideration of getting Conchubhar's daughter in
marriage, ceded to Ulster the tract of land that extends from Loch an
Chuighidh in Breagh and from Tara to the sea; and this tract consists
of three cantons, as the poet says:

In the division of Erin into fifths,
Between two seas, great the permission,
Three cantons with his portion
Took Conchubhar, no small, narrow tract.

The lady through whom he gained this increase was named Feidhlim
Nuachrothach; and through force of passion she eloped with Conall
Cearnach from the king of Leinster.

As to Conchubhar he had twenty-one sons; and in a fit of drunkenness
he committed incest with his own mother, and she bore him Cormac
Conluingeas. Now, Cormac is the same as Corbmac, an incestuous son;
for it was through corbadh or incest that Cormac was the offspring of
Conchubhar by his own mother, whose name was Neasa. And in punishment
of this misdeed all his sons died without issue except three, namely,
Beanna, from whom Beanntraighe is named; Lanna, from whom Lannraidhe
is named; and Glaisne, from whom Glasraidhe is named. But there is no
one to-day in Ireland descended from these.

It was this Conchubhar son of Fachtna Fathach and his kinsmen that
fought the Battle of Aonach Macha against Dabhall Dianbhuilleach son
of the monarch of Lochloinn. An innumerable host accompanied the son
of the king of Lochlainn on that occasion on an expedition to invade
Ireland. It was in the province of Ulster they landed, and after that
they proceeded to Magh Macha. The clan Rudhruighe rallied round
Conchubhar against the foreigners, and gave them battle. Then Geanann
Gruadhsholus son of Cathbhadh said to his followers: "Your host is
small, O men of Ulster," he said, "and ye are all young and
beardless." "What shall we do, then?" said they all. "Well," said
Geanann, "bring with you a large quantity of grey wool, and bind fast
the wool to your faces, so that the foreigners may hate and fear you
all the more for this, as if you were chosen warriors." All those who
were amhulchach, that is, those who had not beards, followed the
advice of Geanann. The battle was afterwards fought, and the
foreigners were defeated, and they were slaughtered there; and it was
from this Battle of Aonach Macha that they were called Ulaidh or
Ulstermen.

The death of Conlach son of Cuchulainn, as follows.

It was thus his death was brought about: Cuchulainn went to learn
feats of valour to Scathach, a female champion that lived in Alba; and
there was a fair lady in Scotland at that time called Aoife daughter
of Airdgheim, who cherished a longing affection for Cuchulainn because
of his great fame; and she came to visit him; and they had intercourse
with one another, and she conceived a son. Now, when Cuchulainn was
proceeding to Ireland after having learned the feats of agility from
Scathach, he paid a farewell isit to Aoife, and gave her an ornasc,
that is, a chain of gold, and told her to keep it till her son should
be fit for service; and when he would be fit for service, to send the
chain with him to himself, as a sure token by which to know him; or,
according to others, it was a gold ring, and he told her to send his
son to visit him to Ireland as soon as he should be so strong that his
finger would fill the ring. Furthermore he imposed three restrictions
on the son before his coming to Ireland. The first restriction was
that he should not give way to any hero or champion in the world; the
second restriction that he should not give his name through fear to
any warrior in the world; the third restriction that he should not
refuse single combat to any man on earth, however strong. Now, when
this youth grew up and waxed strong, and when he had learned exercises
of valour and championship from Scathach, the instructress of
champions, he set out for Ireland to visit Cuchulainn, his father; and
when the youth reached land, Conchubhar and the nobles of Ulster were
before him at Tracht Eise; and Conchubhar sent a champion called
Cuinnire to get an account of himself from him; and when he came into
the youth's presence, he asked his name. "I tell my name to no warrior
on earth," said Conlaoch. Then Cuinnire went back to Conchubhar, and
made known to him this answer. Thereupon Cuchulainn went to get an
account from him, but received only the same answer from Conlaoch; and
they engaged in a bloody encounter, and Conlaoch was overpowering
Cuchulainn, great as had been his valour and strength in every battle
up to that time, so that he was forced to go to the nearest ford and
direct Laogh son of Rian Gabhra to get ready the ga bolg for him,
which he sent through Conlaoch's body; and it was thus he died.



XXXVI.

Know, O reader, that if I were to relate here how Cuchulainn fell by 
the sons of Cailitin, and Fear Diadh son of Damhan by Cuchulainn, and
the death of the seven Maines sons of Oilill Mor and of Meadhbh, and
of many other stout heroes who are not mentioned here, a long
narrative would be needed concerning them. But if thou wishest to get
a lengthy account of them, read Brisleach Mhuighe Muirtheimhne;
Oidhidh na gCuradh; or Tain Bo Cuailgne; or Tain Bo Reaghamain; or
Deargruathar Chonaill Chearnaigh; or Feis Eamhnan; or Tain Bo
Fliodhais; or similar tales which are now to be seen in Ireland; and
thou shalt find therein a copious account of the above-mentioned
persons and of many other champions and warriors -- of their history
and adventures.

Nevertheless, I think I should not omit mention of Curaoi son of Daire
here, but should set down the cause of his death, as he was a valiant
man, and a contemporary of Conchubhar and of the heroes. Morann
Mhanannach was mother of Curaoi son of Daire, as the poet says in this
quatrain:

Morann Mhanannach of honour pure,
Daughter of Ir son of Uinnseach,
Sister of Eochaidh Eachbheoil was she,
Mother of Curaoi son of Daire.

There were three orders of champions in Ireland at the same time; and
there lived neither before their time nor ever since a body of the
sons of Milidh who were bigger, stronger, braver, more skilled, more
intrepid on the field of battle, and in exercises of valour and
bravery than they; for the Fian of Leinster were not to be compared
with them. The first order of these were the champions of the Craobh
Ruadh under Conchubhar; the second order the Gamhanruidh of Iorras
Domhnonn under Oilill Fionn; and the third order clanna Deaghaidh
under Curaoi son of Daire in west Munster.

It was thus that the death of Curaoi came about. The champions of the
Craobh Ruadh went to pillage an island in the ocean near Alba called
Manainn, where there was much gold and silver and wealth of various
kinds, and many precious valuables besides; and the lord of the island
had a comely, marriageable daughter who surpassed the women of her
time in form and beauty. Her name was Blanaid. And when Curaoi heard
that the champions were setting out on that expedition, he put on a
disguise by magic, and went with the party; and when they were about
to plunder the island in the guise of jugglers, they apprehended great
difficulty in seizing on the dun which was in the island in which was
Blanaid, and all the precious valuables of the island, both on account
of its strength and of the great skill in magic of those who were
defending it. Then Curaoi, who was disguised as a man with a grey
cloak, said that if he got his choice of the valuables in the dun he
would capture it for them. Cuchulainn promised him this; and thereupon 
they attacked the dun with the man in the grey cloak at their head. He
stopped the magic wheel that was in motion at the door of the fortress,
and enabled all to enter; and they plundered the dun, and took from it
Blanaid and all the precious valuables it contained. They thence set
out for Ireland and reached Eamhain; and as they were dividing the
valuables, the man in the grey cloak asked for the valuable he should
choose as was promised to him. "Thou shalt have it," said Cuchulainn.
"Well, then," said he, "Blanaid is my choice of the valuables." "Thou
mayst have thy choice of the other valuables excepting only Blanaid."
"I will not accept any but her," said the man of the grey coat.
Thereupon Curaoi sought an opportunity of carrying off Blanaid, and,
seizing her unperceived, he bore her off in an enchanted mask. When
Cuchulainn noticed that the lady was missing, he concluded that it was
Curaoi who carried her off, and he pursued them by direct route to
Munster, and overtook them at Solchoid; and the champions grappled
with one another and engaged in strong, valorous wrestling; and
Cuchulainn was brought to the ground by Curaoi, who inflicted on him
the binding of the five smalls[450], and left him there a bound
captive, having cut off his hair with his sword; and, leaving
Cuchulainn bound as we have said, he took Blanaid with him to west
Munster. But after this Laogh son of Rian of Gabhra came and unbound
Cuchulainn; and they proceeded thence to the north of Ulster, and
settled down beside Beanna Boirche for a year without coming to a
meeting of the men of Ulster until Cuchulainn's hair grew; and at the
end of that year Cuchulainn happened to be on Beanna Boirche, and he
saw a large flock of black birds coming southwards from the surface of
the ocean; and when they reached land he pursued them, and slew with
his sling, by the exercise called taithbheim or 'return-stroke,' a
bird out of each country, till he killed the last black bird of them
at Sruibh Broin in west Munster; and as he was returning eastwards, he
found Blanaid alone beside the Fionnghlaise in Ciarraidhe, where
Curaoi's dwelling-fortress stood at that time. A conversation then
took place between them; and she made known to him that there was not
on the face of the earth a man she loved more than him, and asked him
to come on the following Samhain with a full host and carry her off by
fraud or force; and that he might the more easily do this, she would
bring about that Curaoi should at that time have but few warriors and
attendants. Cuchulainn promised to come to fetch her at that time.
Thereupon he bade her farewell, and proceeded to Ulster, and gave
Conchubhar an account of the incident.

As to Blanaid, she told Curaoi that he ought to build a stone fortress
for himself which would excel all the royal fortresses of Ireland, and
that the way in which that could be done was to send the clanna
Deaghaidh to collect and bring together all the large stones that were
standing in Ireland for the purpose of making a stone fortress for
himself. And Blanaid's object in this was that clanna Deaghaidh might
be scattered through the distant regions of Ireland far from Curaoi
when Cuchulainn should come to carry her off. Now when Cuchulainn
heard that clanna Deaghaidh were thus dispersed throughout Ireland, he
set out secretly from Ulster with an army, and no tidings are recorded
of him till he reached the oak wood that lay beside Curaoi's fortress;
and when he arrived there, he sent word privately to Blanaid that he
was there with an army; and the sign she sent him was that she would
steal Curaoi's sword, and would thereupon pour a vat of new milk that
was in the lios into the stream which was flowing from the homestead
through the wood in which Cuchulainn was. Not long after he was
informed of this token he saw the stream become white from the milk;
and with that they attacked the fortress and sprang upon Curaoi in the
lios and slew him alone and unarmed as he was. And the river referred
to was called Fionnghlaise, through its having become white from the
milk.

Curaoi's poet, who was called Feircheirtne, went after Blanaid to
Ulster in the hope of getting an opportunity of slaying her to avenge
Curaoi; and on reaching Ulster he found Conchubhar and Cuchulainn and
Blanaid, with a large assembly round them, at Ceann Beara point; and
when the poet saw Blanaid standing there on the brink of a precipice,
he went towards her and twined his arms round her, and cast himself
and herself suddenly down the precipice, and thus they were both
killed.



XXXVII.

Eochaidh Airiomh son of Fionn, son of Fionnlogha, son of Roighnen
Ruadh, son of Easamhan Eamhna, son of Blathacht, son of Labhraidh Lorc,
son of Eanna Aighneach, son of Aonghus Tuirbheach Teamhrach, son of
Eochaidh Foiltleathan, son of Oilill Caisfhiaclach, son of Connla
Cruaidhchealgach, son of Iarainnghleo Fathach, son of Meilge Molbthach,
son of Cobhthach Caol mBreagh, son of Ughaine Mor of the race of
Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of Ireland twelve years. He was called
Eochaidh Airiomh because it was he who first dug a cave in Ireland.
Now Airiomh is the same as ar uaimhe, that is, 'the ploughing or
digging of a cave'; and finally this Eochaidh fell by Siodhmall in
Freamhainn Teathbha.

Eidirsceol son of Eoghan, son of Oilill, son of Iar, son of Deaghaidh,
son of Sin, son of Roisin, son of Triun, son of Roithriun, son of
Airndil, son of Maine, son of Forga, son of Fearadhach, son of Oilill
Erann, son of Fiachaidh Fear Mara, son of Aonghus Tuirbheach Teamhrach,
son of Eochaidh Foiltleathan, son of Oilill Caisfhiaclach, son of
Connla Cruaidhchealgach, son of Iarannghleo Fathach, son of Meilge
Molbhthach, son of Cobhthach Caol mBreagh, son of Ughaine Mor of the
race of Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of Ireland six years. and he
fell by Nuadha Neacht in Aillinn.

Nuadha Neacht son of Seadna Siothbhac, son of Lughaidh Loithfhionn,
son of Breasal Breac, son of Fiachaidh Foibhric, son of Oilill Glas,
son of Fearadhach Foghlas, son of Nuadha Fullon, son of Ealloit, son
of Art, son of Mogh Art, son of Criomhthann Coscrach, son of
Fearadhach Fionn, son of Feilimidh Foirthriun, son of Fearghus
Fortamhail, son of Breasal Breoghaman, son of Aonghus Ollamh, son of
Oilill Bracan, son of Labhraidh Loingseach, son of Oilill Aine, son of
Laoghaire Lorc, son of Ughaine Mor of the race of Eireamhon, held the
sovereignty of Ireland half a year. He was called Nuadha Neacht, from
the word nix, that is, 'snow'; for the whiteness of his skin was
likened to snow. And this Nuadha fell by Conaire Mor son of Eidirsceol.

Conaire Mor son of Eidirsceol, son of Eoghan, son of Oilill, son of
Iar, son of Deaghaidh, son of Sin, son of Roisin, son of Triun, son of
Roithriun, son of Airndil, son of Maine, son of Forga, son of
Fearadhach, son of Oilill Erann, son of Fiachaidh Fear Mara, son of
Aonghus Tuirbheach Teamhrach of the race of Eireamhon, held the
sovereignty of Ireland thirty years, or, according to others, seventy
years.

This Conaire Mor was the first who exacted from the Leinstermen the
eiric of his father, Eidirsceol. The following exacted the same eiric
from the Leinstermen, namely, Oilill Olom, Eoghan son of Oilill,
Fiachaidh Muilleathan, Oilill Flann Beag, Lughaidh son of Oilill Flann
Beag, and Corc son of Lughaidh. The amount of this eiric was three
hundred white cows, three hundred mantles, three hundred hogs, and
three hundred golden swords; and they joined Osruighe with Munster,
that is, from Gabhran to Grian Airbh beside Moin Eile; and they gave
all the elements as guarantee that they would pay that eiric for ever,
as the seancha says in this stanza:

Osruighe from Gabhran to Grian
Was joined, on account of Eidirsceol's eiric,
With Munster, select her choice,
It was Conaire who made the agreement.

Understand, O reader, that the Earna of Munster, and the Dal Riada of
Alba, are descendants of this Conaire, and that it was in the time of
Duach Dallta Deaghaidh that the Earna came to Munster; and according
to Cormac, in his Psalter, it was the clanna Rudhruighe who banished
them to Munster after they had defeated them in eight battles; and
they acquired great power in Munster after that from the time of Duach
Dallta Deaghaidh to the time of Mogh Nuadhat; so that, according to
the Book of Munster, they drove the race of Eibhear back to the
territory of Ui Rathach to the borders and the islands of west Munster,
having acquired the sovereignty of the region for themselves, which
they held up to the time of Mogh Nuadhat, by whom they were expelled;
and finally this Conaire Mor fell in Bruighean Da Bhearg by Aingceal
Caoch son of the king of Britain.

Lughaidh Riabh nDearg son of the three Finneamhnas, son of Eochaidh
Feidhlioch, son of Fionn, son of Fionnlogha, son of Roighnen Ruadh,
son of Easamhan Eamhna, son of Blathacht, son of Labhraidh Lorc, son
of Eanna Aighneach, son of Aonghus Tuirbheach Teamhrach of the race of
Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of Ireland twenty years, or, according
to others, twenty-six years. Dearbhorgaill daughter of Fargall, king
of Lochloinn, was wife of Lughaidh Riabh nDearg. He was called
Lughaidh Riabh nDearg because there was a red circle round his neck,
and another circle round his waist; for he was the offspring, in their
drunkenness, of the three Fionns by their sister who was called
Clothra daughter of Eochaidh Feidhlioch; and as a setting forth of
this deed is the following historical stanza from which it will be
understood that it was this Clothra who bore Lughaidh Riabh nDearg to
her brothers that also bore Criomhthann Nia Nar to this same Lughaidh
who was her own son. Here is the stanza:

Lughaidh Riabh nDearg to fair Criomhthann
Was father and was brother;
And Clothra of the comely form
Was grandmother to her son.

At that time it was believed that what was above the upper circle of
Lughaidh Riabh nDearg resembled the one of the youths who was called
Nar, and that what was between the two circles resembled Breas, and
that what was below the waist resembled Lotar. This Lughaidh died by
falling on his sword, which cut him through.

Conchubhar Abhradhruadh son of Fionn File, son of Rossa Ruadh, son of
Fearghus Fairrge, son of Nuadha Neacht, son of Seadna Siothbhac, son
of Lughaidh Loithfhionn, son of Breasal Breac, son of Fiachaidh
Foibhric, son of Oilill Glas, son of Fearadhach Foghlas, son of Nuadha
Fullon, son of Ealloit, son of Art, son of Mogh Airt, son of
Criomhthann Coscrach, son of Feilimidh Foirthriun, son of Fearghus
Fortamhail, son of Breasal Breoghaman, son of Aonghus Ollamh, son of
Oilill Bracan, son of Labhraidh Loingseach, son of Oilill Aine, son of
Laoghaire Lorc, son of Ughaine Mor of the race of Eireamhon, held the
sovereignty of Ireland one year. And he was called Conchubhar
Abhradhruadh because he had red eyelashes; and in the end he fell by
Criomhthann Nia Nar.



XXXVIII.

Criomhthann Nia Nar son of Lughaidh Riabh nDearg, son of the three
Finneamhnas, son of Eochaidh Feidhlioch, son of Fionn, son of
Fionnlogha, son of Roighnen Ruadh, son of Easamhan Eamhna, son of
Blathacht, son of Laoghaire Lorc, son of Eanna Aighneach, son of
Aonghus Tuirbheach Teamhrach of the race of Eireamhon, held the
sovereignty of Ireland sixteen years. He was called Criomhthann Nia
Nar, for nia is the same as 'champion' or 'brave man'; and he was
called Nar, 'ashamed,' for he felt ashamed of being the offspring of
his brother and mother. It was in the twelfth year of the reign of
Criomhthann Nia Nar that Christ was born. This Criomhthann met his
death by a fall from his horse, soon after which he expired.

Fearadhach Fionn Feachtnach son of Criomhthann Nia Nar, son of
Lughaidh Riabh nDearg, son of the three Finneamhnas, son of Eochaidh
Feidhlioch of the race of Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of Ireland
twenty years. Nar Tuathchuach daughter of Loch son of Daire of
Cruitheantuaith was the mother of Fearadhach Feachtnach. He was called
Fearadhach Feachtnach because justice and truth were maintained in
Ireland in his time. For feachtnach means 'truthful.' It was in his
reign that Morann son of Maon lived, the just judge who possessed the
Morann collar; and one of the virtues of this collar was that whoever
wore it round his neck while delivering an unjust judgment the collar
would close in tightly on his neck till he delivered a just judgment.
It behaved similarly as regards one who came to give false testimony
until he had confessed the truth. From this collar comes the old saw,
that is, when one orders that Morann's collar be round the neck of one
giving evidence so that he might tell the truth; and Fearadhach
Feachtnach died in Liath Druim.

Fiatach Fionn, a quo the Dal bhFiatach, son of Daire, son of Dluthach,
son of Deitsin, son of Eochaidh, son of Sin, son of Roisin, son of
Triun, son of Roithriun, son of Airndil, son of Maine, son of Forga,
son of Fearadhach, son of Oilill Earann, son of Fiachaidh Fear Mara,
son of Aonghus Tuirbheach Teamhrach of the race of Eireamhon, held the
sovereignty of Ireland three years; and he fell by Fiachaidh
Fionnoladh.

Fiachaidh Fionnoladh son of Fearadhach Fionn Feachtnach, son of
Criomhthann Nia Nar, son of Lughaidh Riabh nDearg, son of the three
Finneamhnas, son of Eochaidh Feidhlioch of the race of Eireamhon, held
the sovereignty of Ireland twenty-seven years. He is called Fiachaidh
Fionnoladh, for oladh is a name for a cow, and most of the cows of
Ireland were white (fionn) in his time; hence he was called Fiachaidh
Fionnoladh. Know that, according to Stowe's Chronicle, there were
Scots residing in Alba in the year of the Lord 73, very soon after
Fiachaidh Fionnoladh held the sovereignty of Ireland, and that was
before Cairbre Riada lived. And this Fiachaidh was treacherously slain
by the rustic tribes of Ireland.

Cairbre Chinn Chait son of Dubhthach, son of Rudhruighe, son of
Diochun Uairiodhnach, son of Tat Teadhmannach, son of Luaighne
Laidhcinn, son of Oiris Eachlonnach, son of Earndolbh, son of Rionnal
Dagharmagh, son of the king of Lochloinn, who came with Labhraidh
Loingseach to the fortress of Tuaim Teannbhaoth, and others say that
he was of the Fir Bolg, assumed the sovereignty of Ireland; he reigned
five years, and died of the plague. And he was called Cairbre Chinn
Chait because his ears were like the ears of a cat, as the poet says
in this stanza:

Thus was Cairbre the hardy,
Who ruled Ireland south and north:
Two cat's ears on his fair head,
Cat's fur upon his ears.

Cairbre obtained the sovereignty of Ireland in this manner. The serfs
or rustic tribes of all Ireland devised a treacherous plot against the
king and the nobles of the country; and they resolved to carry out
this plot by getting ready a feast to be given to the kings and the
nobles of Ireland; and the place in which that feast was given was
Magh Cru in Connaught; and they were three years preparing it, and
during that time they set apart a third of their crops with a view to
the feast; and the free tribes of Ireland came to partake of it; and
with them came three kings, namely, Fiachaidh Fionnoladh, king of
Ireland, whose wife was Eithne daughter of the king of Alba; Feig son
of Fidheic Caoch, king of Munster, whose wife was Beartha daughter of
Goirtniad, king of Britain; Breasal son of Firb, king of Ulster, whose
wife was the daughter of the king of Sacsa; her name was Aine, and her
father's name was Cainneall. The rustic tribes had three chiefs,
namely, Monach, Buan, and Cairbre Gaitcheann; and this Cairbre was
chief of them all. They had been partaking of the feast for nine days
when at length the rustic tribes sprang upon the free tribes of
Ireland and slew them, so that they all fell by them on the spot,
except the three unborn children who were in the wombs of the three
wives of the three kings we have mentioned. Now
 the women fled to Alba, and there gave birth to three sons, namely,
Tuathal Teachtmhar, Tiobraide Tireach, and Corb Olom. As to Ireland
great famine and failure of crops and much adversity came upon that
country. And this continued to be her lot till the three sons of the
three kings they had treacherously slain were able to bear arms. And
when the men of Ireland heard that the three sons of these kings were
living, they sent envoys to them asking them to assume the sovereignty
which their ancestors had held before them; and they gave the sun and
moon as surety or guarantee that they would yield them obedience and
be faithful to them evermore. Upon this the youths came, and accepted
the inheritance of their fathers; and this brought back again her 
usual prosperity to Ireland. And Cairbre Chinn Chait died of the
plague.

Eilim son of Connra, son of Rossa Ruadh, son of Rudhruighe, son of
Sithrighe, son of Dubh, son of Fomhor, son of Airgeadmhar, son of
Siorlamh, son of Fionn, son of Bratha, son of Labhraidh, son of
Cairbre, son of Ollamh Fodla of the race of Ir son of Milidh, held the
sovereignty of Ireland twenty years; and he fell by Tuathal Teachtmhar
in the Battle of Aichill.



XXXIX.

Tuathal Teachtmhar son of Fiachaidh Fionnoladh, son of Fearadhach
Fionn Feachtnach, son of Criomhthann Nia Nar, son of Lughaidh Riabh
nDearg, son of the three Finneamhnas, son of Eochaidh Feidhlioch of
the race of Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of Ireland thirty years.
He was called Tuathal Teachtmhar, as every good came in his time. Now
Fiachaidh Fionnoladh left no issue but one son, who was called Tuathal
Teachtmhar; and that son was in the womb of Eithne daughter of the
king of Alba, who escaped by flight from the destruction of Magh Cru
in Connaught, when the Athachthuaith slew Fiachaidh Fionnoladh and the
free tribes of Ireland. And after the birth of Tuathal in Alba he was
brought up and educated in politeness there till he had reached the
age of twenty-five years; and during that time Ireland had been in
adversity; and the Athachthuaith being in a great difficulty went and
consulted their druids as to the cause and origin of the adversity in
which Ireland was at that time, and as to the way in which she might
be freed from it. The druids replied that the cause of her adversity
was that they had acted treacherously towards the kings and the free
tribes of Ireland, and added that her wonted prosperity would not come
back to Ireland until some one of the descendants of those kings who
were slain assumed the sovereignty of the country; And it was about
this time that the Athachthuaith heard that there was in Scotland a
son of Fiachaidh Fionnoladh, whose name was Tuathal Teachtmhar; and a
large party of the Athachthuaith took counsel together, and they
agreed to send envoys to Tuathal to Alba. There were also companies of
the remnant of the free races of Ireland, namely, clann an Duinn Deasa
of Leinster, Fiachaidh Casan and Fionnbhall his brother, and six
hundred pirates with them, devastating Ireland to avenge the treachery
of the Athachthuaith towards the kings and free tribes of Ireland.

When Tuathal Teachtmhar heard these tidings, he set out for Ireland
with his mother, Eithne daughter of the king of Alba, accompanied by a
large host. Tuathal was twenty-five years of age at that time. And
they put into port at Iorrus Domhnann, where they met Fiachaidh Casan
with his brother. Thence they proceeded to Tara, and there assembled
their supporters from all parts of Ireland to meet Tuathal, and they
proclaimed him king of Ireland. Eilim son of Connra, who at that time
held the sovereignty of Ireland, having been elected by the
Athachthuaith after the death of Cairbre Chinn Chait, came and fought
the Battle of Aichill against Tuathal. In that battle Eilim and the
Athachthuaith were defeated, and himself and the greater part of his
army slain. Then Tuathal and his supporters went against the
Athachthuaith throughout Ireland, and defeated them in twenty-five
battles in Ulster, and twenty-five battles in Leinster, and twenty-
five battles in Connaught, and thirty-five battles in Munster.

When Tuathal had won these battles, and rescued the free races of
Ireland from the tyranny of the Athachthuaith, he convened the Feis of
Tara; as it is customary for every king in the beginning of his reign
to convene and bring together a great general assembly to regulate the
laws and customs of the country. Then the nobles of the Gael from
every province in Ireland came to him, and accepted him as their king,
as he had delivered them from the slavery of the serfs and the
Athachthuaith; and they pledged themselves by the elements, that they
would leave the sovereignty of Ireland to himself, and to his children,
as had formerly been promised to Ughaine Mor.

It was then, too, that he was given four portions of the provinces,
out of which he made the present Meath, as the peculiar territory of
the successive high kings of Ireland. For, although Meath was the name
of the territory which is beside Uisneach from the time of the
children of Neimhidh to the time of Tuathal, still Meath was not the
name of the portions that were taken from the provinces until the time
of Tuathal, and he made it into a territory distinct from the
provinces.

Now, when Tuathal had put these four parts together and made them into
one territory called Meath, he built therein four chief fortresses,
that is, a fortress in each of the portions. Accordingly he built
Tlachtgha in the portion of Munster which goes with Meath; and it was
there the Fire of Tlachtgha was instituted, at which it was their
custom to assemble and bring together the druids of Ireland on the eve
of Samhain to offer sacrifice to all the gods. It was at that fire
they used to burn their victims; and it was of obligation under
penalty of fine to quench the fires of Ireland on that night, and the
men of Ireland were forbidden to kindle fires except from that fire;
and for each fire that was kindled from it in Ireland the king of
Munster received a tax of a screaball, or three-pence, since the land
on which Tlachtgha is belongs to the part of Munster given to Meath.

On the portion he had acquired from the province of Connaught he built
the second fortress, namely Uisneach, where a general meeting of the
men of Ireland used to be held, which was called the Convention of
Uisneach, and it was at Bealltaine that this fair took place, at which
it was their custom to exchange with one another their goods, their
wares, and their valuables. They also used to offer sacrifice to the
chief god they adored, who was called Beil; and it was their wont to
light two fires in honour of Beil in every district in Ireland, and to
drive a weakling of each species of cattle that were in the district
between the two fires as a preservative to shield them from all
diseases during that year; and it is from that fire that was made in
honour of Beil that the name of Bealltaine is given to the noble
festival on which falls the day of the two Apostles, namely, Philip
and James; Bealltaine, that is Beilteine, or the fire of Beil. The
horse and the trappings of every chieftain who came to the great
meeting of Uisneach were to be given as a tax to the king of Connaught,
as the place in which Uisneach is belongs to the part of the province
of Connaught given to Meath.

The third fortress which Tuathal built, called Taillte, is in the
portion of the province of Ulster joined to Meath; and it was here the
fair of Taillte was held, in which the men of Ireland were wont to
form alliances of marriage and friendship with one another. And a most
becoming custom was observed in that assembly, namely, the men kept
apart by themselves on one side, and the women apart by themselves on
the other side, while their fathers and mothers were making the
contract between them; and every couple who entered into treaty and
contract with one another were married, as the poet says:

The men must not approach the women,
Nor the women approach the fair bright men,
But every one modestly biding apart
In the dwelling of the great fair.

Although it was Lughaidh Lamhfhada that first instituted the fair of
Taillte as a yearly commemoration of his own foster-mother, Taillte
daughter of Maghmor, king of Spain, who was the wife of Eochaidh son
of Earc, the last king of the Fir Bolg, as we have said above -- now
when Taillte had been buried by Lughaidh in that mound he inaugurated
the fair of Taillte as a nasadh or commemoration of her; it was for
that reason that the name of Lughnasa, that is the gracious nasadh or
commemoration, was given to the first day of August, on which is now
held the feast of the Chains of Peter -- although the mound and fair
of Taillte existed from the time of Lughaidh Lamhfhada, still Taillte
was not .a royal fortress till the time of Tuathal Teachtmhar. Now
since the place in which Taillte is belongs to the part that was taken
from the province of Ulster, the tax on the fair of Taillte went to
the king of Ulster. This was the amount of that tax, namely, an ounce
of silver for each couple that got married there.

The fourth royal fortress, Tara, is situated in the part of Leinster
given to Meath, and there the Feis of Tara was held every third year
after the sacrifice had been offered to all the gods at Tlachtgha (as
we have said) as a prelude to that royal assembly called the Feis of
Tara, at which they were wont to institute laws and customs, and to
confirm the annals and the records of Ireland, so that the ardollamhs
might inscribe all that was approved of them in the Roll of the kings,
which was called the Psalter of Tara; and every custom and record that
was in Ireland that did not agree with that chief book were not
regarded as genuine. We shall not give here in detail the laws or the
customs that were severally ordained at the Feis of Tara, for the
books of the Breithemhnas Tuaithe are full of them. I shall only give
here the custom that was instituted at the Feis of Tara regarding the
placing of the nobles and warriors for meals in the banquet-halls when
they met for a feast.

There was indeed no doctor of seanchus in Ireland who did not write in
the Roll of Tara the names of the nobles who were lords of territories,
each according to his rank and title as regulated at the Feis of Tara,
and every leader of those bands of warriors who had free quartering
for the defence and protection of the lands of Ireland, had his name
similarly inscribed by the ollamh; and there was none of these, either
territorial lords or leaders of bands of warriors, who was not
accompanied by a shield-bearer. Moreover, the banquet-halls they had
were narrow and long, with tables along the side-walls. Along each of
these side-walls there was placed a beam in which there were numerous
hooks above the seats on which the company used to sit, with only the
breadth of a shield between each two of the hooks, and on these hooks
the seancha hung the shields of the nobles and of the warriors before
they sat down, each under his own shield, both nobles and warriors.
But the territorial lords had the choice of a side, and the leaders of
warriors had the other side; the upper end of the hall was occupied by
the ollamhs, and the other end by the attendants who waited on the
company.

It was also their custom that no one should sit immediately opposite
to another, but that all, both territorial lords and leaders of
warriors, should have their backs to the wall and sit each under his
own shield. It was their custom also not to have women in the banquet-
halls, but they were given a separate apartment in which they were
served. It was, moreover, their custom, before the company were served,
to clear out or empty the banquet-hall, so that only three remained in
it, namely, a seancha, a bollsaire, that is a marshal of the house,
and a trumpeter who had a trumpet or horn to call all the guests to
the banquet-hall. He sounded his trumpet three times. The first time
he sounded it, the shield-bearers of the nobles assembled at the door
of the banquet-hall; and the bollsaire took the shield of each noble
according to his title, and placed, according to the direction of the
seancha, each of the shields in its own appointed place. The trumpeter
sounded his trumpet a second time, and the shield-bearers of the
leaders of warriors assembled at the door of the banquet-hall; and the
bollsaire took the shields from them and placed each shield, according
to the direction of the seancha, at the other side of the house, over
the warriors' table. Then the trumpeter sounded his trumpet the third
time; and thereupon the nobles and warriors assembled in the banquet-
hall, and each of them sat beneath his own shield, so that there was
no contention or disagreement



XL.
It was this Tuathal Teachtmhar of whom we are speaking who imposed the
'Boraimhe' on the people of Leinster, as a tax to avenge the death of
his two daughters, whose names were Fithir and Dairine. Now, there was
a king over Leinster whose name was Eochaidh Aincheann, and he married
Dairine, daughter of Tuathal Teachtmhar, and took her to Leinster to
his own fortress, that is to Magh Luadhat; and some time after that he
went to Tara, and told Tuathal that Dairine had died, and asked him to
give him his other daughter, that is Fithir, and Tuathal gave her to
him, and he took her to Leinster to his own fortress; and when Fithir
saw her sister Dairine alive before her, her soul quitted her body
suddenly through shame; and Dairine having come to lament her died of
her grief on the spot. And it was to relate this that the poet
composed the following stanza:

Fithir and Dairine
Two daughters of princely Tuathal;
Fithir died of shame,
Dairine died of her grief.

Now when Tuathal heard of the death of the two ladies he became
enraged, and sent out messengers in all directions to the nobles of
Ireland to complain of the treachery which the king of Leinster had
practised against him; and accordingly the nobles of Ireland gave aid
in warriors and auxiliaries to Tuathal with a view to avenge this
outrage; and when Tuathal resolved to plunder and despoil the people
of Leinster though they were unable to meet him in the field, they
agreed to pay a tribute, themselves and their descendants after them,
to Tuathal, and to each king who should succeed him, as a retribution
for the death of these ladies.

The following is the amount of the tribute that was paid every second
year by the Leinstermen to the kings of Ireland as a penalty for the
death of the children of Tuathal, namely, three score hundred cows,
three score hundred ouunces of silver, three score hundred mantles,
three score hundred hogs, three score hundred wethers, three score
hundred bronze caldrons. And this tribute was thus divided:-- a third
part of it to the men of Connaught, a third to the Oirghialla, and a
third to the Ui Neill. The tract entitled Boraimhe Laighean speaks
thus in the following verses:

Three score hundred kine with spancels,
Gifts without fault,
With three score hundred ounces
Of silver in addition,

With three score hundred fine mantles
Of largest measure,
With three score hundred large hogs
Of lusty strength,

With three score hundred wethers,
Generous gift,
With three score hundred brazen caldrons
As a bright ornament.

A third part to the men of Connaught,
The ancient law,
A third part to the Oirghilla,
A third to the Ui Neill.

This was the tribute called Boraimhe Laighean, and it was in force
during the reigns of forty kings who ruled Ireland, that is from the
time of Tuathal Teachtmhar to the time that Fionnachta held the
sovereignty of Ireland, as the poet says in this stanza:

There were forty kings
Who carried off the Boromha
From the time of Tuathal Tlachtgha
To the time of Fear Fionnachta.

It was Moling who got it remitted by means of the respite until Monday
which he got from Fionnachhta; but the Monday Moling meant was the
Monday of thee Day of Judgment. The Leinstermen paid this tribute
submissively at times, but at other times they would not consent to
pay it, whence arose much strife and conflict between both parties, in
which a great number of the nobles of Ireland fell on either side. And
Tuathal Teachmthar fell by Mall son of Rochruidhe.

Mal son of Rochruidhe, son of Cathbhadh, son of Giallchaidh Fionn, son
of Fionnchadh, son of Muireadhach, son of Fiachna Fionnamhnas, son of
Irial Glunmhar, son of Conall Cearnach, son of Aimhirgin Iairghiunach,
son of Cas Trillseach, son of Cas, son of Fachtna, son of Capa, son of
Gionga, son of Rudhruighe Mor from whom clanna Rudhruighe are called,
of the race of Ir son of Milidh, held the sovereignty of Ireland four
years, and he fell by Feidhlimidh Reachtmhar.

Feidhlimidh Reachtmhar son of Tuathal Teachtmhar, son of Fiachaidh
Fionnoladh, son of Fearadhach Fionn Feachtnach, son of Criomhthain Nia
Nar, son of Lughaidh Riabh nDearg, son of the three Finneamhnas, sons
of Eochaidh Feidhlioch of the race of Eireamhon, held the sovereignty
of Ireland nine years. Baine daughter of Scal Balbh, wife of Tuathal
Teachtmhar, was the mother of Feidhlimidh Reachtmhar, and he was
called Feidhlimidh Reachtmhar through the excellence of the legal
judgments delivered in Ireland in his time. Now, the law Feidhlimidh
ordained in his own time in Ireland resembled the law which is called
in Latin lex talionis; this means that when one injures or wounds
another a similar infliction would be visited on himself in
retribution; thus trespass for trespass, a cow for a cow, a hand for a
hand, a leg for a leg, an eye for an eye, and so on for every other
injury beginning from these. And the result of this lawwas that the
men of Ireland improved in their behaviour in the time of Feidhlimidh,
whence he was called Feidhiimidh Reachtmhar. And at length this man
died on his pillow.

Cathaoir Mor son of Feidhlimidh Fiorurghlas, son of Cormac Gealta
Gaoth, son of Nia Corb, son of Cu Corb, son of Mogh Corb, son of
Conchubhar Abhradhruadh, son of Fionn File, son of Rossa Ruadh, son of
Fearghus Fairrge, son of Nuadha Neacht, son of Seadna Siothbhac, son
of Lughaidh Loithfhionn, son of Breasal Breac, son of Fiachaidh
Foibhric, son of Oilill Glas, son of Fearadhach Foghlas, son of Nuadha
Fullon, son of Ealloit, son of Art, son of Mogh Airt, son of
Criomhthann Coscrach,son of Feidhlimidh Foirthriun, son of Fearghus
Fortamhail, son of Breasal Breodhamhan, son of Aonghus Ollamh. son of
Oilill Bracain, son of Labhraidh Loingseach of the race of Eireamhon,
held the sovereignty of Ireland three years. Now Cathaoir had thirty
sons, as the poet says in this stanza:

Thirty sons, good the progeny,
Sprang from Cathaoir of Cuala;
Thrice ten -- a beauteous company,
A troop of champions with stout spears.

But twenty of these children went without issue, and the other ten had
issue. Here are the names of the sons who had issue:-- Rossa
Failgheach senior of the sons who had issue, Daire Barrach, Breasal
Einiochghlas, Fearghus, Oilill, Criomhthann, Deargmhosach, Eochaidh
Teimhin, Aonghus, and Fiachaidh Aiceadha, the youngest of the children,
although it was his descendants who mostly held the sovereignty of
Leinster. From Fiachaidh Aiceadha son of Cathaoir Mor sprang O Broin
and O Tuathail; from Breasal Bealach son of Fiachaidh Aiceadha sprang
Mac Murchadha; from Rossa Failgheach son of Cathaoir Mor sprang O
Conchubhair Failghe and O Diomasaigh and O Duinn and clan Colgan, as
we shall afterwards state when we are giving the genealogy of the sons
of Milidh. And this Cathaoir Mor fell by Conn Ceadchathach in the
Battle of Magh hAgha.

Conn Ceadchathach son of Feidhlimidh Reachtmhar, son of Tuathal
Teachtmhar of the race of Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of Ireland
twenty years, and was treacherously slain in the district of Tara,
being found alone there by Tiobraide Tireach son of Mal, son of
Rochruidhe, king of Ulster. Indeed Tiobraide sent fifty warriors
disguised as women to slay him; and it was from Eamhain they set out
to do that treacherous deed. Una daughter of the king of Lochloinn was
the mother of this Conn. Mogh Nuadhat wrested half of Ireland from
this Conn, having defeated him in ten battles. Sioda daughter of Flann
son of Fiachaidh, one of the Earna, was the mother of Mogh Nuadhat.
The contest between Mogh Nuadhat and Conn arose in this way: The Earna
of the race of Fiachaidh Fear Mara of the race of Eireamhon had gained
supremacy in Munster over the race of Eibhear, so that three of them
held conjointly the sovereignty of all Munster, namely, Lughaidh
Eallaightheach, Daire Dornmhar, and Aonghus. And when Mogh Nuadhat saw
the race of Eireamhon holding the sovereignty of Munster, he proceeded
to Leinster, where he had been brought up by Daire Barrach son of
Cathoir Mor, and brought thence a numerous host from Daire to assist
him in recovering the kingdom of Munster, which was his birthright. He
first turned to Ui Liathain in the south of Munster, where the above-
mentioned Aonghus had established his sway, and Mogh Nuadhat defeated
him, and drove him from the territory, so that he went to seek the aid
of Conn, who gave him five battalions, that is, fifteen thousand
fighting men. With this host he proceeded to the territory of Ui
Liathain, where Mogh Nuadhat fought against him the Battle of Ard
Neimhidh, in which he defeated him with great slaughter of his
followers.

After this Mogh Nuadhat expelled the Earna from Munster, as many of
them as would not submit to him, whence arose a great war between Mogh
Nuadhat and Conn, and Mogh Nuadhat defeated him in ten battles: namely,
the Battle of Brosnach and the Battle of Samhpait; the Battle of
Sliabh Musach; the Battle of Gabhran; the Battle of Suama and the
Battle of Grian and the Battle of Ath Luain; and the Battle of Magh
Croich, wherein fell Fiachaidh Rioghfhada son of Feidhlimidh
Reachtmhar; the Battle of Asal and the Battle of Uisneach; and this
conflict lasted till Mogh Nuadhat wrested half of Ireland from Conn,
that is, the part of Ireland to the south of Gaillimh and Ath Cliath,
Eiscir Riada being the boundary between them; and that half is called
Leath Mogha, from Eoghan who was called Mogh Nuadhat; and the northern
half is called Leath Cuinn, from Conn Ceadchathach. In declaration of
this division some poet composed this stanza:

Eoghan Mor, great was his success,
Was as exalted as Conn Ceadchathach.
These two, noble was their fame,
Shared Ireland between them.

Another reason, also, why Mogh Nuadhat wrested half of Ireland from
Conn is that there was a great famine in Ireland for seven years in
his time; and, before the time of this famine came, Eoghan's druid
foretold, long before the coming of the famine, that it would come
upon all Ireland; and Eoghan, to make provision for the famine, used
venison and fish for food, and stored the corn, and, moreover, he
spent on corn all the rents and tributes he received, so that he
filled his granaries; and, when the time of scarcity arrived, many of
the men of Ireland came to him from all sides, and laid themselves
under rent and tribute to Eoghan for his supporting them during that
time of distress, as we read in the poem which begins, Eoghan Mor,
great was his success:

Eoghan transcended Conn,
Not in number of battles and conflicts
More plenteously the food of adventurous Eoghan
Was being distributed according to laws of peace.

Lean famine rained on them
Its visitation was good for Eoghan --
So that men eat their kind
Throughout distressful Erin.

When men heard -- far it spread
That Eoghan had ale and food in plenty,
They bound themselves as vassals -- good the custom --
To Eoghan for their sustenance.

Mogh Nuadhat had four names, namely, Eoghan Fidhfheacach, Eoghan Mor,
Eoghan Taoidhleach, and Mogh Nuadhat, as the poet says in this stanza:

Four names without grief
Had Eoghan Mor,
Eoghan Fidhfheacach the generous, the hospitable,
Eoghan Taoidhleach, Mogh Nuadhat.

Now, if thou desirest to learn the reason of each of these names
mentioned in this stanza, read the Coir Anmann and thou wilt find it
there. Eoghan Mor's wife was Beara daughter of Eibhear Mor son of
Modhna, king of Castile, and she bore him a son and two daughters; the
son's name was Oilill Olom, and the two daughters' names Scoithniamh
and Coinneal. Here is the seancha's proof of this:

Beara daughter of great Eibhear
Was mother of Oilill Olom,
And mother of the two pure ones,
Coinneal and Scoithniamh.

Moreover, Conn Ceadchathach slew Mogh Nuadhat in his bed, having
treacherously, according to some seanchas, attacked him at early
morning, as they were on the point of engaging in battle against each
other on Magh Leana. This king of whom we are treating was called Conn
Ceadchathach, from the hundreds of battles he fought against the
provincial kings of Ireland, as this stanza sets forth:

A hundred battles against great Munster
Won Conn Ceadchathach the just,
A hundred battles against Ulster with valour,
Sixty battles against the Leinstermen.

Conn was treacherously slain by Tiobraide Tireach at Tara. Conaire son
of Mogh Lamha, son of Lughaidh Allathach, son of Cairbre Cromcheann,
son of Daire Dornmhar, son of Cairbre Fionnmhor, son of Conaire Mor,
son of Eidirsceol of the race of Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of
Ireland seven years, and fell by Neimhidh, son of Sraibhgheann. This
Conaire's mother was Eithne daughter of Lughaidh son of Daire. From
this Conaire are descended the Dal Riada of Alba and of Ulster, the
Baiscnigh from Leim Chon gCulainn, and the Muscruidhe, as the poet
says in this stanza:

The Albanians of Riada from the promontory,
The Baiscnigh from Leim Chou gCulainn,
The Muscruidhe beyond, without reproach,
Sprang from the fair Conaire.



XLI.

Art Aoinfhear son of Conn Ceadchathach, son of Feidhlimidh Reachtmhar,
son of Tuathal Teachtmhar of the race of Eireamhon, held the
sovereignty of Ireland thirty years; and his wife was Meadhbh
Leithdhearg daughter of Conan Cualann, and from her is called Raith
Meadhbha beside Tara. He was called Art Aoinfhear, for of his father's
sons he alone survived, as his two brothers, namely, Connla and
Crionna were slain by Eochaidh Fionn brother of Conn. For Conn had two
brothers, namely, Eochaidh Fionn and Fiachaidh Suighdhe, and by them
were slain Art's two brothers; and in testimony of this are these two
quatrains from the seanchus:

The two brothers of Conn without faults
Were Eochaidh Fionn and Fiachaidh Suighdhe;
They slew Connla and Crionna,
Conn's two sons, two fair youths;

Art hated Eochaidh Fionn
After the two sons had been slain;
He took the name of Art Aoinfhear
After his two brothers were slain.

Conn, indeed, had six children, namely, Art Aoinfhear, Connla, and
Crionna, Maoin, Sadhbh, and Saruit, as we read in the poem which
begins with the following stanza:

I can name Conn's six children:
Maoin, Sadhbh, Saruit, mother of the race of Olom;
The fair, valiant, bright-skinned men,
Connla, Crionna, Art Aoinfhear.

As we have said, Connla and Crionna were slain by Eochadh Fionn and by
Fiachaidh Suighdhe. Saruit was married to Conaire son of Mogh Lamha,
and she bore him the three Cairbres, namely, Cairbre Rioghfhada and
Cairbre Baschaoin and Cairbre Musc. It was the descendants of Cairbre
Rioghfhada who went to Alba; and it is they who are called Dal Riada.
For Eochaidh Muinreamhar, a descendant of Cairbre Rioghfhada, had two
sons, namely, Earc and Olchu. From Earc are descended the Dal Riada of
Alba, and from Olchu the Dal Riada of Ulster, from whom the Ruta is
called. Similarly Sadhbh daughter of Conn was married to Maicniadh son
of Lughaidh of the race of Lughaidh, son of Ioth, and she bore him a
son called Lughaidh, that is, Mac Con son of Maicniadh. And after the
death of Maicniadh she was married to Oilill Olom, and bore him nine
sons, namely, the seven who fell in the battle of Magh Muchruimhe, as
Oilill Olom himself says in this stanza:

Mac Con has slain my seven sons; 
Pitiful is my bitter, grievous cry,
Eoghan, Dumbhmearchon, Mogh Corb,
Lughaidh, Eochaidh, Diochorb, Tadhg,

and the two sons of Oilill who returned from the Battle of Magh
Muchruimhe, namely, Cormac Cas and Cian. Now, although Oilill Olom had
nineteen sons, that is nine by Sadhbh daughter. of Conn, and ten by
other women, still only three of them left issue, as the poet says in
this stanza:

Nineteen pleasant sons had the chief
The beauteous Oilill Olom;
Of one sole trio the race did not decay,
From whom have sprung the progeny of the freeborn.

These three who left issue were children of Sadhbh daughter of Conn.
The first of them, Eoghan Mor son of Oilill, fell in the Battle of
Magh Muchruimhe, by Beinne Briot, son of the king of Britain; and
Fiachaidh Muilleathan, from whom clann Charrthaigh and the tribe of
Suilleabhan, with their branches, are sprung, was the son of this
Eoghan; and his mother was Moncha daughter of Dil son of Da Chreaga
the druid; and he was born at Ath Uiseal on the Siuir, and was called
Fiachaidh Fear-da-Liach. For liach means 'sad event'; and sad were the
two events that took place with regard to him, namely, the slaying of
his father in the Battle of Magh Muchruimhe very soon after his
conception in the womb, and the death of his mother immediately after
his birth. Hence the name Fiachaidh Fear-da-Liach clung to him. Thus
does Oilill Olom himself refer to this matter as we read in the Battle
of Magh Muchruimhe --

A two-fold woe to thee their death
Together, and a great disaster,
Thy father and thy mother --
Grief has overwhelmed thee.

Thy father and thy mother,
Two great permanent losses:
The man in battle was struck down,
Died the wife at thy birth.

Moreover he was called Fiachaidh Muilleathan, because when the time of
his birth arrived his grandfather the druid said to Moncha that if she
delayed the birth of her son for twenty-four hours, he would be a
king; but if she brought
him forth within that time, he would be only a druid.

"Then," said Moncha, "in the hope that my son may become a king, I
will not bring him forth for twenty-four hours unless he come through
my side." And then she went into the ford of the Siuir that was beside
her father's dun, and there sat upon a stone, and remained twenty-four
hours seated on the stone. And at the end of that time she came out of
the river and gave birth to a son, and she herself died immediately
after having brought him forth. It was this son, then, that was called
Fiachaidh Muilleathan; and he was called Muilleathan from the crown of
his head being broad. For while his mother was sitting on the flag-
stone in the ford, on the point of bringing him forth, the child's
crown grew broad by the pressure of the flag-stone on which his mother
sate in the ford; hence the name Fiachaidh Muilleathan clung to him.

The second son of Oilill Olom who left issue was Cormac Cas, from whom
sprang the Dal gCais and siol Aodha, that is, clan Mac na Mara and
siol Flannchuidhe. It was to this Cormac Cas that Oilill Olom had left
the inheritance of Munster, until he was informed that Fiachaidh
Muilleathan had been born to Eoghan Mor; and when he heard this, he
directed that the sovereignty be left after him to Cormac during his
life, and that it belong after Cormac's death to Fiachaidh Muilleathan
during his life; and in this way that the sovereignty belong
alternately in each succeeding reign to the descendants of Cormac Cas
and those of Fiachaidh Muilleathan for ever. And for some generations
they held the sovereignty of Munster according to this arrangement.

This Cormac Cas son of Oilill Olom was the fifth best champion in
Ireland in his own time; the other four were Lughaidh Lamha, Fionn son
of Cumhall, Lughaidh Mac Con, Cairbre Gailin, the fifth champion being
Cormac Cas; and there was no one in Ireland fit to fight with any of
them outside of their own number. This Cormac Cas was the first to
impose a rent-tax on the districts of Munster. He gave in one day nine
ounces and five hundred ounces of silver to bards and learned men for
praising him. He brought thirty preys from Britain when he was in
exile, stirring up war against the Leinstermen; and the Leinstermen
submitted to him.

The third son of Oilill who left issue was Cian. From this Cian are
descended O Cearbhaill and O Meaghair, O hEadhra and O Gadhra and O
Cathasaigh and O Conchubhar of Ciannachta.

Oilill Olom was the first king of the race of Eibhear who is named in
the Reim Rioghruidhe as having held the sovereignties of the two
provinces of Munster. Oilill held the sovereignty of Munster twenty-
three years. For before Oilill banished Mac Con there were two races
holding sway over Munster, namely, the descendants of Dairine of the
race of Lughaidh son of Ioth, from whom sprang Mac Con, and the
descendants of Deirgthine of the race of Eibhear, from whom sprang
Oilill Olom. And whenever the sovereignty of Munster was held by the
descendants of Dairine, the brehonship and tanistship were held by the
descendants of Deirgthine; and when the descendants of Deirgthine held
supreme power, the descendants of Dairine held the other offices,
until Mac Con transgressed the command of Oilill Olom, as may be
understood from what we are about to say. For Oilill ordered him not
to take sides with Neimhidh son of Sraibhgeann against Eoghan son of
Oilill, his own kinsman, and the three Cairbres. And in order that the
cause of Mac Con's banishment may be better understood, I shall set
down here the event that led to Mac Con's expulsion from Ireland,
namely, the fall of Aingceal son of Deigheall, who was with Neimhidh
son of Sraibhgheann; and by Neimhidh, in his struggle for the
possession of Ireland, Conaire son of Mogh Lamha was slain; and it was
because of Aingceal that the three Cairbres slew Neimhidh son of
Sraibhgheann, the husband of their own mother, Saruit daughter of Conn.
For it was Neimhidh who slew Conaire, their father. On account of this
Conaire's three sons were with Art son of Conn.

Cairbre Riada went to Munster, to the house of Neimhidh and Saruit
daughter of Conn, his own mother, for she married Neimhidh after
Conaire son of Mogh Lamha, and Aingceal happened to be in Neimhidh's
house at that time; and there was a strong wrestler there with him,
called Dartadha, and whenever a party who were not known came to the
house of Neimhidh, one of their men was forced to engage in wrestling
with Dartadha. And as Cairbre Riada was going to the house of Neimhidh
to visit his mother, he engaged in wrestling with Dartadha, and laid
him on the great caldron of the house, and thus he slew him. Thereupon
he returned to Tara; and on his relating his adventure to Art
Aoinfhear, Art said that it was on a quick errand that he went
westward yesterday, seeing that he returned eastward to-day, and hence
he is called Cairbre Riada.

When the other two Cairbres, namely, Cairbre Musc and Cairbre
Baschaoin, heard that Aingceal, with whom they were at enmity, was at
the house of Neimhidh, they exclaimed, "That is pleasanter than to
pursue him to Britain." And upon this the three Cairbres set out for
Munster with a company of warriors; and when they came to the house of
Eoghan Mor son of Oilill Olom, Eoghan and themselves marched against
Neimhidh, and Neimhidh approached in the company of Ma: Con, and the
Battle of Feabhra then took place between them. Cairbre Musc wounded
Mac Con in that battle, and Aingceal was slain there, and Neimhidh
fled till he came to where Saruit was. "Protection, O my sons," said
Saruit, extending her arms round Neimhidh. "As much of him as is
within thy arms will be protected," said Cairbre Musc; and forthwith
he dealt him a blow that cut off his head, and dealt him a second blow
by which he cut off his legs. "That is a great disgrace, O Cairbre,"
said she; and hence he used to be called Cairbre Musc, that is,
greater his disgrace than that of his brethren, for it was he who slew
his mother's husband.

And on account of Mac Con's forming an alliance of friendship with
Neimhidh son of Sraibhgheann, and because of his opposing Eoghan Mor
and his kinsmen, namely, the three Cairbres, he was banished out of
Ireland by Oilill, and was for a time in exile; and in the course of
his exile he gained supporters and made friends for himself, so that
himself and Beinne Briot, son of the king of Great Britain, and many
other foreigners with them, came to Ireland and declared war on Art
Aoinfhear king of Ireland, because of his having helped Oilill Olom;
and the Battle of Magh Muchruimhe was arranged between them, to which
Art came with all his host and the nine sons of Oilill with the seven
battalions of Munster to help Art, while Mac Con with his foreigners
were against them on the other side; and the Battle of Magh Muchruimhe
was fought between them, and Art and his host were beaten, and Art
himself slain by the hand of the champion Lughaidh Lamha, kinsman of
Oilill Olom, who was taking part with Mac Con; and seven of the
children of Oilill Olom fell there.

Oilill Olom's first name was Aonghus, and he was called Oilill Olom
because he had intercourse with Aine daughter of Eoghabhal, and as she 
slept with Oilill she bit his ear off his head in retribution for his
rape of her and for his having slain her father. Hence he was called
Oilill Olom, that is ear-cropped. He was called Oilill also, because
Oilill is the same as oil oll, 'a great blemish'; and he had three
deforming blemishes which clung to him till death, namely, he was ear-
cropped, his teeth had become black, and his breath was foul, which
blemishes he thus came by: when he had lost his ear through the means
of Aine, as we had said, he got enraged, and forthwith he drove his
spear through her body into the earth, and the point of the spear
struck against a stone and got bent, and he put the point between his
teeth to straighten it, and the venom of the spear's point got into
his teeth and blackened them at once, and thence foulness of breath
came upon him, which clung to him till death, for he had violated the
three geasa that were upon that spear, namely, not to allow its point
to come against a stone, not to put its point between the teeth, and
not to slay a woman with it. And it was from the violation of these
geasa that the forementioned blemishes came upon him, and it was from
these great blemishes that he was called Oilill -- that is, oil oll,
or great blemish. And Art Aoinfhear was slain in the Battle of Magh
Muchruimhe.



XLII.

Lughaidh, that is, Mac Con son of Maicniadh, son of Lughaidh, son of
Daire, son of Fear Uillne, son of Eadbholg, son of Daire, son of
Siothbholg, son of Fear Uillne, son of Deaghamhrach, son of Deaghaidh
Dearg, son of Deirgthine, son of Nuadha Airgtheach, son of Luchtaire,
son of Logha Feidhlioch, son of Eireamhon, son of Eadaman, son of
Gosaman, son of Sin, son of Maitsin, son of Logha, son of Eadaman, son
of Mal, son of Lughaidh, son of Ioth, son of Breoghan, held the
sovereignty of Ireland thirty years. Sadhbh daughter of Conn was Mac
Con's mother, as we have said above. Lughaidh son of Maicniadh was
called Mac Con because Oilill Olum had a hound called Eloir Dhearg,
and when Mac Con was an infant in the house of Oilill, the child used
to creep on his hands to the hound, and the hound used to take him to
her belly, and he could not be prevented from going constantly to
visit her, whence he was called Mac Con.

When Mac Con had become powerful and had returned from his exile, and
had fought the Battle of Magh Muchruimhe, as we have said above in
treating of Art Aoinfhear, he obtained for himself the sovereignty of
Ireland in a single week, and kept it for thirty years, as we read in
the poem which begins "Cnucha, a hill over Lithfe." It thus speaks in
these two stanzas:

In the space of seven days, no slight cause of joy,
Lughaidh became ruler of the land of Erin;
He came to his strong kingdom
The ruler of Erin in one week.

Thirty years without flagging
Was Mac Con in supreme sovereignty,
Till the nimble champion fell
With his supremacy unimpaired.

This Mac Con of whom we are treating was not of the descendants of
Eanna Munchaoin of the race of Eibhear, as is stated in the poem which
begins "Fair Conaire, son-in-law of Conn," but of the race of Lughaidh
son of Ioth, son of Breoghan. Now Lughaidh son of Ioth, son of
Breoghan, and Milidh of Spain, who is called Golamh son of Milidh, son
of Breoghan, were sons of two brothers, so that, though the
descendants of Lughaidh son of Ioth are of the race of Gaedheal, still
they are not of the progeny of Milidh, but only kinsmen to them, as
the poet says, speaking of three branches of the descendants of
Lughaidh son of Ioth in this stanza:

O Cobhthaigh of the feast-serving goblets,
O Floinn of Ard, O hEidirsceoil,
A trio who beheld not the land of their ancestors,
A trio not sprung from the sons of Milidh.

Here follow some of the other families who sprang from Lughaidh son of
loth,namely, O Laoghaire of Ros, O Baire of Ara in Rinn Muinntire
Baire in Cairbreacha, and O Cuirnin and Mac Ailin in Alba, who was
descended from Fathadh Canann son of Mac Con, son of Maicniadh. This
Mac Con was the third king of the race of Lughaidh son of Ioth who
held the sovereignty of Ireland. The first of these kings was Eochaidh
Eadghothach son of Daire, son of Conghal, son of Eadaman, son of Mal,
son of Lughaidh, son of Ioth, son of Breoghan, who held the
sovereignty of Ireland four years till he fell by Cearmna son of
Eibric; the second was Eochaidh Apthach son of Fionn, son of Oilill,
who held the sovereignty of Ireland nine years, when he fell by Fionn
son of Bratha; the third of the race of Lughaidh son of Ioth who held
the sovereignty was this Mac Con of whom we are now speaking. And it
is in testimony of this that we have this stanza from the seanchus:

Three kings sprung from the proud son of Ioth,
Two Eochaidhs, the ferocious Lughaidh,
It is not a deed that displeases us,
The way in which pleasant Ioth was avenged.

Feircheas son of Coman Eigeas, at the command of Cormac son of Art,
slew, with the spear called ringcne, Mac Con, as he stood with his
back against a pillar-stone at Gort-an-oir, beside Deargraith in Magh
Feimhean, to the west of Ath na gCarbad, while he was there
distributing gold and silver to bards and ollamhs. When Feircheas son
of Coman Eigeas, who resided at Ard na nGeimhleach, which is now
called An Chnocach, he came to the meeting among the rest, having the
ringcne; and when he had come into the presence of Mac Con, he drove
that spear through him into the pillar-stone against which his back
rested, and this caused his death without delay. From that time to
this the plain on which Mac Con was slain is called Gort-an-Oir, from
the quantity of gold he there bestowed on bards and ollamhs. The
reason why Mac Con came to Munster was that his druids foretold to him
that he would not live half a year on the throne of Ireland unless he
left Tara. Hence he came to Munster, to seek the aid of his kinsmen --
that is, the descendants of Oilill Olom; but they remembered their old
grudge against him, namely, that he had slain Eoghan Mor and his
kinsmen in the Battle of Magh Muchruimhe. And it thus happened that he
was returning to Leinster when he was slain.

Fearghus Duibhdheadach son of Fionnchaidh, son of Oghaman, son of
Fiatach Fionn, son of Daire, son of Dluthach, son of Deitsin, son of
Eochaidh, son of Sin, son of Roisin, son of Triun, son of Roithriun,
son of Airndil, son of Maine, son of Forga, son of Fearadhach, son of
Oilill Earann, son of Fiachaidh Fear Mara, son of Aonghus Tuirbheach
Teamhrach of the race of Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of Ireland a
single year. He was called Fearghus Duibhdheadach, as he had two large
black teeth. This Fearghus came inside Cormac son of Art in the
sovereignty of Ireland, when Cormac was expelled by the Ultonians to
Connaught, after they had taken his hostages, and he had made the
feast for them in the north of Magh Breagh, whereat an attendant on
the king of Ulster held a lighted candle to Cormac's hair, and
scorched him severely.

Now, it was the three sons of Fionnchaidh son of Oghaman, son of
Fiatach Fionn, namely, Fearghus Duibhdheadach, Fearghus Caisfhiaclach,
and Fearghus Fuiltleabhair, who committed this outrage on Cormac; and
Cormac went to ask the help of Tadhg son of Cian, who was powerful in
Eile at that time. Tadhg said to him that he would give his help if he
got territory from him. "I will give thee," said Cormac, "as much of
Magh Breagh as thou canst go round with thy chariot on the day on 
which thou shalt have overcome the three Fearghuses in battle."
"Then," said Tadhg, "I can tell you where you will find the champion,
Lughaidh Lamha, my grandfather's brother, who, if you bring him to the
battle, will in all likelihood slay the three Fearghuses; and the
place where you will find him is in Eatharlach beside Sliabh gCrot.
Upon this Cormac set out for Eatharlach, where he found Lughaidh Lamha
lying down in a hunting-booth. Cormac stuck his javelin through the
hunting-booth and wounded Lughaidh in the back. "Who wounds me?" asked
Lughaidh. "Cormac son of Art," replied the other. "It is well thou
didst wound me," said Lughaidh, "for it was I who slew thy father,
that is, Art Aoinfhear." "Give me an eric for him," said Cormac. "A
king's head in battle for thee," said Lughaidh. "Then," said Cormac,
"give me the head of the king of Ulster, namely, Fearghus
Duibhdheadach, who is coming between me and the sovereignty of
Ireland." "It shall be given thee," said Lughaidh. Upon this Cormac
proceeded to Eile to Tadhg son of Cian, and himself and Tadhg marched
with their full forces to Brugh-Mic-an-Oigh at Crionna Chinn Chomair,
where the Battle of Crionna was convened between Cormac and the three
Fearghuses.

Tadhg had, moreover, another reason for going against Ulster, as it
was this Fearghus Duibhdheadach who slew his father in the Battle of
Samhain. But Tadhg did not permit Cormac to go into the battle, but
left him on a hill to the rear of the battle, and an attendant with
him there. Now, Tadhg and Lughaidh Lamha attacked the three Fearghuses
and their host; and Lughaidh Lamha slew Fearghus Fuiltleabhair and
beheaded him, and took the head to the hill on which Cormac was. Now,
Cormac, when all were on the point of going to the battle, clothed
himself in the garments of Deilionn Druit, his attendant, and put his
own clothes on the attendant; for he was certain that when his warrior
frenzy should come upon Lughaidh, and when the rage of battle should
seize him, he could not be trusted by anyone.

As to Lughaidh, he came with the head which he had into the presence
of the attendant who was disguised as Cormac, and asked him whether
that was not the head of Fearghus Duibhdheadach. "It is not," said the
attendant; "it is the head of his brother." Upon this Lughaidh went
into the battle again, and cut off the head of Fearghus Caisfhiaclach,
and took it in his hand to the hill on which was the attendant
disguised as Cormac. "Is this the head of the king of Ulster?" asked
Lughaidh. "It is not," said the attendant, "it is the head of his
other brother." He went the third time into the battle and brought the
head of Fearghus Duibhdheadach with him, and he asked the same
question of the attendant. The attendant answered and said that it was
the head of the king of Ulster. Upon this Lughaidh aimed a blow at the
attendant with the head and struck him in the chest, and the attendant
died on the spot; and Lughaidh himself fell into a swoon because of
the quantity of blood he had lost through his many wounds.

As to Tadhg, son of Cian, he defeated the Ulster host so that he
routed them seven times in the same day between Crionna and Glas Neara
on the side of Drom Ineasclainn, as the poet Flannagan says in the
following stanza:

Tadhg son of Cian in Raith Cro in the north
Won seven battles in one day,
Against Ulster, with brilliant success,
From Ath Crionna to Ard Cein.

After this Tadhg went into his chariot, having three wounds from three
spears; and he told his attendant to direct the chariot towards Tara,
so that he might include the walls of Tara within the circuit made by
his chariot on that day. They drove straight on, though Tadhg fainted
several times through loss of blood from his wounds; and as they were
approaching Ath Cliath, Tadhg asked the attendant if they had included
Tara in that circuit. "We have not," replied the attendant. Upon this
Tadhg struck him dead; and when the attendant had been slain, Cormac
son of Art came up, and seeing Tadhg's three great wounds, he ordered
the physician who was with him to put an ear of barley into one of his
wounds, and a live worm into another of them, and a splinter of a
javelin-head into the third wound, and to heal the wounds externally,
so that Tadhg was a year in a wasting condition from this treatment,
until Lughaidh Lamha went to Munster to fetch the surgeon. The surgeon
came with his three pupils, and they heard Tadhg's moaning as they
approached the dun. The surgeon asked the first of the three pupils
when they had heard from Tadhg a moan arising from the first wound,
what was the cause of that moan. "This is the moan caused by a prickle,
as there is a barley-prickle in his wound." On hearing a moan caused
by the second wound, he asked the second pupil what was the cause of
that moan. "This is the moan caused by a live creature," said he, "for
a live worm has been put into the second wound." When the surgeon
heard the third moan, he inquired of the third pupil what was the
cause of that moan. "This is the moan caused by a weapon-point," said
the third pupil. And when the surgeon reached the house in which Tadhg
was, he placed an iron coulter in the fire until it became red hot,
and then got it in readiness in front of Tadhg. When Tadhg saw the
red-hot iron put in readiness for the purpose of thrusting it into his
body, his heart trembled greatly; and, as a result of the terror that
seized him, he violently ejected from his wounds the ear of barley,
the worm, and the splinter of javelin-head, and thereupon the surgeon
completely healed his wounds; and after that Tadhg was well without
delay.

This Tadhg made large conquests in Leath Cuinn afterwards. For Tadhg
son of Cian, son of Oilill Olom, had two sons, namely, Connla and
Cormac Gaileang. From Iomchaidh son of Connla comes O Cearbhaill, and
from Fionnachta son of Connla comes O Meachair. From Cormac Gaileang
son of Tadhg, son of Cian, comes O Eadhra and O Gadhra and O
Conchubhair Ciannachta. The following are the territories they
acquired, namely: Gaileanga, east and west; Ciannachta, south and
north; Luighne, east and west.
Moreover, another company of the race of Eibhear took possession of
other territories in Leath Cuinn: these are the descendants of Cochlan
son of Lorcan, son of Dathan, son of Treachuire, son of Trean, son of
Sidhe, son of Ainbhile, son of Beag, son of Aodhan, son of Dealbhaoth,
son of Cas, son of Conall Eachluath, son of Lughaidh Meann (who
reduced to swordland the territory between Luimneach and Sliabh
Echtghe), son of Aonghus Tireach, son of Fear Corb, son of Mogh Corb,
son of Cormac Cas, son of Oilill Olom. Here are the territories,
namely, the seven Dealbhnas, that is Dealbhna Mhor, Dealbhna Bheag,
Dealbhna Eathra, Dealbhna Iarthair Mhidhe, Dealbhna Shithe Neannta,
Dealbhna Chuile Fabhair, and Dealbhna Thire da Loch in Connaught. To
describe these the poet sets down the following stanzas taken from the
seanchus:

The seven Dealbhnas of brown spears,
The race of Dealbhaoth of brown aims,
They are in Leath Cuinn of the feasting,
Where there is great honour for ollamhs:

Dealbhna Mhor, Dealbhna Bheag of Breagha,
Dealbhna of Eathra of strong headlands;
A race of pleasant customs,
Dealbhna of the tall-peaked Brugh;

Dealbhna of the brilliant Sith Neannta,
Dealbhna of harmless Nuadha;
Dealbhna of fair bright Cul Fobhair,
Which never was without good lakes.

Know that it was Lughaidh Lamha, by the direction of Cormac son of Art,
who slew this Fearghus of whom we are treating, and that it was at the
Battle of Crionna he was slain.



XLIII.

Cormac Ulfhada son of Art Aoinfhear, son of Conn Ceadchathach, son of
Feilimidh Reachtmhar, son of Tuathal Teachtmhar of the race of
Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of Ireland forty years. He is called
Cormac Ulfhada, for he had a long ulcha, that is a long beard, or from
the word Ulfhada, meaning Ultonians afar; for he sent Ultonian chiefs
into exile for sixteen years out of Ulster, on account of the injury
they had done him before he attained the sovereignty of Ireland. And
the mother of this Cormac was Eachtach daughter of Uilceathach the
smith; and it was when the Battle of Magh Muchruimhe was on the point
of being fought that Art Aoinfhear became the father of Cormac by the
smith's daughter, who was then his dowered mistress. For it was a
custom at that time in Ireland, that whatever king or king's son
coveted the daughter of a farmer or biadhtach, desiring to have her as
a mistress or paramour, should get her, provided he gave her a
marriage portion or dowry of cattle. And it was in this manner that
Art obtained Cormac's mother, for it was not she who was his wedded
wife,. but Meadhbh Leithdhearg, daughter of Conan of Cuala, and from
this latter Raith Meadhbha near Tara is named.

Strange was the vision which this Eachtach, that is, the mother of
Cormac, beheld. She imagined, indeed, as she lay asleep beside Art,
that her head was severed from her body, and that a great tree grew
out of her neck which extended its branches over all Ireland, and the
sea came over this tree and laid it low; and after this another tree
grew out of the roots of the first, and a blast of wind came from the
west and felled it; and at the sight of this vision the woman started
and awoke from her sleep, and she told the substance of the vision to
Art. "That is true," said Art, "the head of every woman is her husband,
and I shall be taken from thee in the Battle of Magh Muchruimhe; and
the tree that will grow out of thee is a son which thou wilt bear to
me, who will be king of Ireland; and the sea that will overwhelm him
is a fish-bone which he will swallow and he will be choked on that
occasion. And the tree that will grow out of the roots of the first is
a son that will be born to him who will be king of Ireland; and the
blast of wind from the west that will overthrow him is a battle that
will be fought between himself and the Fian; and he will fall by the
Fian in that battle. But the Fian will not prosper thenceforth. And
this vision was fulfilled in Cormac and his son Cairbre Lithfeachair,
since the demons choked Cormac as he was swallowing a fish-bone, and
Cairbre Lithfeachair fell by the Fian at the Battle of Gabhra.

Some seanchas state that Cormac's wife was Eithne Thaobhfhada daughter
of Cathaoir. But this cannot be true, seeing that she was the mother
of Cairbre Lithfeachair. Since there were eighty-eight years from the
death of Cathaoir till Cormac assumed the sovereignty o f Ireland,
namely, the twenty years Conn Ceadchathach held the sovereignty of
Ireland, and the seven years Conaire son of Mogh Lamha held it, and
the thirty years of Art Aoinfhear, the thirty years of Mac Con, and
the one year of Fearghus Duibhdheadach in the sovereignty of Ireland
up to the time Cormac assumed the supreme rule of that country.

It is, however, true that Eithne Ollamhdha daughter of Dunlaing son of
Ean na Nia was the mother of Cairbre Lithfeachair; and it is she who
was the foster-child of Buicead, a farmer with hundreds of kine, who
lived in Leinster, who kept a hospitable pot over a fire to give food
to everyone of the men of Ireland who visited his house. Now this
Buicead was thus circumstanced: he had vast wealth, for he had seven
herds, and seven score kine in each herd, together with a
corresponding number of horses and cattle of every other description, 
so that the nobles of Leinster, with companies of their followers,
used to frequent his house, and some of them took away from him a
number of his kine, and others some of his brood-mares, others again a
number of his steeds, and thus they despoiled him of all his wealth,
so that there remained to him only seven cows and a bull; and he fled
by night with his wife and Eithne, his foster-child, from Dun Buicead,
to an oak grove near Ceanannus na Midhe, where Cormac used to reside
at that time; and Buicead built a hut, in which himself and his wife
and foster-child then resided. And Eithne used to serve or wait upon
her foster-father and her foster-mother as a maid-servant.

Now on a certain day Cormac went out alone on horseback to travel
through the lands that surrounded the town, and he saw the fair maiden,
Eithne, milking these seven cows of Buicead. And this was her way of
doing it: she had two vessels, and she milked the first portion of
each cow's milk into the first vessel, and the second portion into the
second vessel, and she acted thus till she had milked the seven cows,
while Cormac kept watching her, through his great love for her. She
then went into the hut in which her foster-father was, and left the
milk there, and took out in her hand two other vessels and a cup to
the stream which was near the town or the hut, and with the cup filled
the first vessel from the water which was near the brink, and the
second vessel from the water which was in the middle of the stream,
and then she returned to the hut. She came out the third time, having
a reaping-hook to cut rushes; and as she cut the rushes she used to
put each long wisp of fresh rushes that she cut on one side, and the
short rushes on the other side. Now Cormac, through his great love for
her, was watching her during each of these practices; and Cormac asked
for whom she was making the special selection of the water, the milk,
and the rushes.

He, for whom I am making it," said she, "is worthy of a greater
kindness from me, were it in my power to do it." "What is his name?"
asked Cormac. "Buicead the farmer," she replied. "Is that Buicead, the
Leinster biadhthach, who is celebrated throughout Ireland?" asked
Cormac. "It is," said she. "Then," said Cormac, "thou art Eithne
daughter of Dunlaing, his foster-child?" "I am," replied Eithne. "It
is well," said Cormac; "for thou shalt be my wife." "It is not I who
can dispose of myself," said she, "but my foster-father." Upon this,
Cormac went with her to Buicead, and promised him presents if he got
Eithne as his wife. Buicead consented to give Eithne to Cormac as his
wife; and Cormac gave him the district of Odhran beside Tara, with its
stock of cattle, during his life. And then Cormac knew Eithne, and she
conceived of him; and after that she bore him an illustrious son, who
was called Cairbre Lithfeachair.

Now this Cormac was one of the wisest kings that ever ruled Ireland;
witness the Teagasc Riogh he wrote for Cairbre Lithfeachair; and many
laudable customs and laws devised by him, which are recorded in the
Breitheamhnas Tuaithe. Moreover, of all the kings that ever ruled
Ireland, Cormac was one of those who kept the most princely household,
and the largest number of attendants and followers. The truth of this
may be the more readily admitted from the account which Aimhirgin son
of Amhalghaidh son of Maoilrian, the filé of Diarmaid son of Cearbhall,
gives of the Teach Miodhchuarta, which Cormac himself renewed and
regulated, though it was long before Cormac the Teach Miodhchuarta was
built. For it was in it that Slanoll king of Ireland died, long before
Cormac's time. This is what we read in the book of Dinnseanchas, which
the above-mentioned Aimhirgin wrote, namely, that it was in Cormac's
time it was made into a banquet-hall. It was three hundred feet in
length, thirty cubits high, and fifty cubits in breadth. There was a
torch kept constantly lighting in it. It had fourteen doors; thrice
fifty beds, besides Cormac's bed; thrice fifty warriors in each bed.
Cormac had thrice fifty stewards. There were fifty warriors standing
in the king's presence as he sat at his meal. There were three hundred
cup-bearers in that dun, and thrice fifty goblets of carbuncle, of
gold, and of silver. The total number of that household amounted to
one thousand and fifty men; so that on the greatness and goodness of
Cormac, the poet composed this stanza:

Of children Art left
Only Cormac of the district of Corann.
In dispensing jewels he was not close-fisted;
Better Cormac than a hundred children.

Cormac had ten daughters, and three sons, as the poet says in this
stanza:

Ten daughters had gentle Cormac,
And three most prosperous sons, 
Plunderers of Claire of the spoils,
Daire, Cairbre, and Ceallach.

Daire was slain in Dubhros on the Boyne, in Breagha, and Ceallach was
slain by Aonghus Gaoibuaibhtheach, as the poet says:

It was Aonghus Gaoibuaibhtheach of fame
Who slew Ceallach son of Cormac:
Daire and noble Tadhg son of Cian died
In Dubhros of the Boyne in Breagha.

And that the sequence of these events may be better understood by
setting down here a short genealogical account of these persons, know
that Feidhlimidh Reachtmhar had three sons, namely, Conn Ceadchathach,
Eochaidh Fionn, and Fiachaidh Suighdhe, as we have said above. The
descendants of Conn were at Tara, and held the sovereignty; and the
second brother of Conn, namely, Eochaidh Fionn, went to Leinster, and
his descendants multiplied there; and it was his descendants that
possessed the seven Fotharta of Leinster. It was in his time that Cu
Chorb son of Mogh Corb held the sovereignty of Leinster. It was,
moreover, by this Eochaidh Fionn that Laoighseach Ceannmhor son of
Conall Cearnach was brought up and educated in politeness. It happened
at that time that the Munstermen gained great sway in Leinster, so
that they were in possession of Osruighe and Laoighis as far as
Mullach Maistean.

Now, when Cu Chorb saw the Munstermen gaining I power in Leinster, he
asked Eochaidh Fionn to help I him in expelling them from Leinster.
Eochaidh consented to this; and he assembled his friends from all
sides, and thus brought together a large army, and made his foster-son
Laoighseach Ceannmhor leader of the host; and he himself and Cu Chorb
king of Leinster, with their hosts, marched against the Munstermen,
having Laoighseach Ceannmhor as commander-in-chief of the forces; and
they drove the Munstermen from Mullach Maistean to the Bearbha, and
routed them at Ath Troistean, which is called Ath I, on the Bearbha;
and they followed up this rout till they defeated them a second time
at Coirtheine in Magh Riada, which is called Laoighis Riada; and they
continued the rout thence till they overthrew them a third time at
Slighe Dhala -- that is, Bealach Mor Osruighe; and thus they delivered
the province of Leinster from the 11 bondage of the Munstermen; and,
in consideration of this, Eochaidh obtained the seven Fotharta of
Leinster for himself and his descendants; and, similarly, his foster-
son got the seven Laoighises for himself and for his descendants as a
handsel in consideration of his leadership in expelling the Munstermen
from the places we have mentioned.

Moreover, the king of Leinster ordained on his own behalf and on
behalf of every king who should succeed him that the back of every
beef and the ham of every hog slaughtered in the, house of the king of
Leinster be given as a champion's portion to the king of Laoighis, and
that an axe-man should be in the house of the king of Leinster
constantly, at the expense of that king, to receive that tribute for
the king of Laoighis. Besides, the king of Laoighis belonged to the
council of the king of Leinster; and he took the fourth next place to
the king at a general assembly; and it was to him was given in charge
every present made by the king of Leinster for distribution to nobles
and to ollamhs; and it was to the king of Laoighis that every gift
made to the king of Leinster was given to be presented to the king of
Leinster.

In addition to this, there were seven of the king of Laoighis's men in
the pay of the king of Leinster; and they always attended the king to
dress his body. And when the king of Leinster went on tour with his
host, the only provision the king of Laoighis was bound to give him
was seven beeves which he sent to the king's own camp. But the king of
Laoighis was bound to maintain seven score warriors at his own expense
for the king's host, and he had also the right of leading the van of
the king of Leinster's host when entering hostile territory and in
positions of danger. Again, the king of Laoighis was bound to make
muster at general assemblies along with the king of Fotharta, because
Eochaidh Fionn son of Feidhlimidh Reachtmhar, ancestor of the king of
the Fotharta, was tutor to Laoighseach Ceannmhor, from whom sprang the
king of Laoighis. And this custom was ever observed by them till the
Norman Invasion.



XLIV.

As to Conn's other brother, namely, Fiachaidh Suighdhe, he got land
near Tara, namely, the Deise Teamhrach; and he did not become king of
Ireland.

Now he had three sons, namely, Rossa and Aonghus, called Aonghus
Gaoibuaibhtheach, and Eoghan, the third son. But Aonghus
Gaoibuaibhtheach surpassed his contemporaries in valour. And Cormac at
that time was at enmity with a powerful personage, and no one
protected him from Cormac but Aonghus Gaoibuaibhtheach; and the king
gave Aonghus to him as a security. Aonghus took this nobleman under
his protection. But after this, Ceallach son of Cormac took this
nobleman prisoner in violation of the security of Aonghus, and took
out his eyes without the king's permission. When Aonghus
Gaoibuaibhtheach heard this, he proceeded to Tara, accompanied by a
numerous host, and slew Ceallach by a cast of his spear, as he stood
behind king Cormac in the court, and wounded the king himself in the
eye, leaving him with only one eye. Cormac assembled a large host and
banished Aonghus and his kinsmen.

These descendants of Fiachaidh Suighdhe involved Cormac in much
fighting. However, Cormac drove them into Leinster, and they remained
there a year; and thence they went to Osruighe, and thence they came
to Oilill Olom, whose wife, Sadhbh daughter of Conn, was their
kinswoman. Oilill Olom gave them the Deise in Munster, for their
native territory was the Deise Teamhrach, before they were banished by
Cormac.

These three sons of Fiachaidh Suighdhe divided that territory between
them into three parts; and they are called the descendants of Oilill
Earann, and the Earna. However, they are not the Earna, but the
descendants of Conaire son of Mogh Lamha it is these that were styled
the Earna. It is Corc Duibhne son of Cairbre Musc who was chief over
the descendants of Fiachaidh Suighdhe who came to Munster; and it was
these descendants that were called the Deise; and Aonghus son of
Eochaidh Fionn son of Feidhlimidh Reachtmhar was their leader when
coming to Munster, and with him were the three sons of Fiachaidh
Suighdhe, namely, Rossa, Eoghan, and Aonghus. About that time Cairbre
Musc had acquired great power in Munster; and in his time adversity
and crop-failure had come upon Munster. Nor was this strange, for it
was by incest and crime that he became father of Corc by Duibhfhionn,
his own sister; for they were the children of Conaire son of Mogh
Lamha and of Saruit daughter of Conn Ceadchathach. When the Munster
nobles observed the adversity that came with Cairbre's reign, they
asked him what had deprived the country of its produce and its
prosperity. Cairbre replied that it was because he had committed
incest with his sister Duibhfhionn, and she had borne him two sons, to
wit Corc and Cormac; and when the Munster nobles heard this, they
demanded the sons, in order to destroy them -- to burn them, and let
their ashes go with the stream. "Act in that way towards Cormac," said
Dinneach the Druid; "but do not kill Corc, but let him be given to me,
that I may take him out of Ireland." This was granted to him; and he
took him with him to sea, to Inis Baoi; and he found a house on the
island in which was a crone called Baoi; and the druid placed Corc
under her protection, and he remained with her for a year, and at the
end of the year the druid took Corc and placed him under the
protection of Saruit daughter of Conn, who was grandmother to the
child, both on his father's and mother's side.

As to the Deise, they inquired of their filés whether they were fated
to have rest or dwelling in Munster; and the filés told them in reply
to stay in the country, and that the wife of Criomhthann son of Eanna
Cinnsealach, king of Leinster, whose name was Congain, was pregnant,
and that it was a daughter she would bring forth, and that they should
ask the daughter in fosterage, and give a fee in order to obtain her.
After this the daughter was born; and she was fostered by the Deise.
The daughter's name was Eithne Uathach, and she was fed by the Deise
on the flesh of infants that she might grow up the more quickly; for a
certain druid had foretold that they would get territory from the man
whose wife she would be. And when she was of age to wed, she was
married to Aonghus son of Natfraoch, king of Munster. And Aonghus gave
them, in consideration of getting her to wife, Magh Feimhean, that is,
Trian Chluana Meala, and the Trian Meadhonach after the expulsion of
the Osruighigh from these territories. And a long time after this
Aonghus and Eithne were slain by the Leinstermen in the Battle of
Ceall Osnadh, four miles east of Leithghlinn.

These descendants of Fiachaidh Suighdhe, who are called the Deise,
possessed only the district known as Deise Dheisceirt, that is, from
the Siuir southwards to the sea, and from Lios Mor to Ceann Criadain,
up to the time when Eithne Uathach was married to Aonghus son of
Natfraoch, king of Munster. For it was about that time that Aonghus
gave them Deise Thuaisceirt, that is, from the same Siuir to Corca
Athrach, which is called the Plain of Cashel. And O Faolain, who came
from that stock, was king of Deise Thuaisceirt; and the place in which
his residence was situated was on the brink of the Siuir to the west
of Inis Leamhnachta; and Dun Ui Fhaolain is the name it is called to-
day. Another kinsman of his occupied Deise Dheisceirt, and he was
called O Bric; and he had his stronghold beside the sea, in the south,
in the place which is now called Oilean Ui Bhric. And the Deise were
divided thus between these two races until the race of O Bric became
extinct; and O Faolain obtained the chieftainship of the two
territories, and held it for a long period afterwards, until the race
of Eibhear took Deise Thuaisceirt from him; and so he possessed only
Deise Dheisceirt on the coming of the Foreigners to Ireland.

Understand that it was Aonghus Osruighe and his followers that
obtained sway over Magh Feimhean, which is called Deise Thuaisceirt,
and that it was this sept of Fiachaidh Suighdhe who expelled Aonghus
Osruighe and his followers from Magh Feimhean; and from the defeat
they inflicted on Aonghus are named Baile Orluidhe, and Mullach
Inneona in Magh Feimhean at this day; Baile Orluidhe from the urlaidhe
or long hair of the warriors in the battle, and Mullach Inneona from
the Osruighigh having been driven from it to Leinster against their
will.

About this time Cormac son of Art, king of Ireland, felt a scarcity of
meat, having spent the rents of the provinces because of the extent of
his household staff; and he took counsel with his high-steward, how he
could obtain supplies for his staff until the time of his rent-taking;
and the steward advised him to assemble a large host, and go into
Munster to levy the head rent of the king of Ireland. "For they only
pay thee," said he, "the rent of one province, while there are two
provinces in Munster, and each of these provinces should pay the rent
of a province to the king of Ireland." Cormac acted on that advice,
and sent envoys to Fiachaidh Muilleathan, who was then king of Munster,
demanding from him the rent of the second province. Fiachaidh answered
the envoys, and said that he would not pay a higher rent to Cormac
than was paid to the kings who preceded him. And when this answer
reached Cormac, he assembled a large host, and marched with them, and
halted not till he reached Druim Damhghaire in Munster, which place is
now called Cnoc Luinge. And there he fixed his tent or camp; and
Fiachaidh Muilleathan, king of Munster, came on the other side against
him front to front.

At that time Cormac was thus circumstanced: he had druids from Alba
with him there, who practised much magic against the king of Munster
and his followers, and in particular, not a drop of water was left
near the camp of the king of Munster, and so people and cattle were on
the point of death through want of water, and the king of Munster was
obliged to send for Mogh Ruith, a druid, who was in Ciarraidhe
Luachra; and this Mogh Ruith lived in the time of nineteen kings, as
the poet says in this stanza:

The reign of nineteen successive kings 
Was the life of Mogh Ruith with much fighting,
From Roth son of Rioghall, great the fame,
To Cairbre Lithfeachair the strong.

And when Mogh Ruith came, the king was obliged to give him two
cantreds of Feara Muighe, which are called the country of the Roistigh
and the country of the Condunaigh. And thereupon Mogh Ruith removed
the barrier that had been put to the water withholding it, and at the
same time threw up into the air a magic spear which he had, and in the
place in which the spear fell there burst forth a well of spring water
which relieved the men of Munster from the thirst that afflicted them;
and hereupon the king of Munster with his host made a sudden onset on
Cormac and his followers, and expelled them from Munster, without
their having fought a battle or carried off a spoil. And they pursued
them to Osruighe, so that Cormac was forced to give pledges and
securities that he would send hostages from Tara to Raith Naoi, which
is called Cnoc Rathfonn, to Fiachaidh Muilleathan, as a guarantee that
he would make compensation for all the injury he had done to Munster
in that expedition; and as a declaration of this, the poet composed
this stanza:
Fiachaidh Muilleathan, good the king,
From the land of Aibhle in Leitre Craoi,
Hostages from great Tara were sent him
To bright Rathfonn to Raith Naoi.

This Fiachaidh had two sons, to wit, Oilill Flann Mor and Oilill Flann
Beag. Oilill Flann Mor had no issue, and it is from Oilill Flann Beag
that all who survive of the race of Fiachaidh Muilleathan are
descended. And hence the poet indites this stanza:

The sons of great Fiachaidh Muilleathan
Were Oilill Flann Mor of the mead-drinking,
And Oilill Flann Beag of the hosts;
His progeny are great in Munster.

Now, as Oilill Flann Mor was without issue, he adopted his brother
Oilill Flann Beag as a son, and left him his personal effects and his
inheritance on condition that he and his descendants should place his
name in the genealogy between his own name and that of Fiachaidh
Muilleathan; and so it is in the Psalter of Cashel, and in other
ancient books. It is not, however, to be inferred from them that
Oilill Flann Mor was the father of Oilill Flann Beag. But the reason
why the chroniclers used to put the name of Oilill Flann Mor in the
genealogical tree of Fiachaidh Muilleathan was to commemorate the
compact that existed between himself and Oilill Flann Beag, as we have
said above. Fiachaidh Muilleathan was treacherously slain by Connla
Clamh son of Tadhg, son of Cian, ancestor of the siol Cearbhaill and
of the siol Meachair at Ath Uiseal, which is called Ath Aiseal on the
Siuir at the present time. And the reason why he did that deed of
treachery was that when Connla was a youth with Cormac son of Art,
learning manners and accomplishments, leprosy or mange came upon him,
and no medical treatment whatever availed him. Cormac told him on that
occasion that there was no cure destined for him, until he should wash
himself in the blood of a king, and that were he to do that he would
be healed of his mange. Soon after this Connla took his leave of
Cormac, and went into Munster to visit his kinsman, Fiachaidh
Muilleathan, who was then king of Munster. And at that time Fiachaidh
Muilleathan resided at Raith Rathfainne, which is now called Cnoc
Rathfonn, with his foster-mother, whose name was Rathfonn; and when
Connla came into his presence, he bade him welcome.

Now, on a certain day soon after this, Fiachaidh went out beside the
Siuir with all his household, attended by Connla, who carried his
spear; and he went as far as Ath Aiseal, and proceeded to swim in the
stream; and Connla bethought him of Cormac's instructions. And
thereupon he went to the verge of the bank, and stabbed Fiachaidh with
his spear as he swam, and thus slew him. Fiachaidh, however, before he
died, protected Connla, and forbade his household to slay him. And he
died immediately after that. And it was in this way the life of
Fiachaidh Muilleathan ended.



XLV.

We said above, following the seanchus, that Cormac had ten daughters.
We shall, however, refer only to two of them here, to wit, Grainne,
who was wife of Fionn son of Cumhall, and Aillbhe daughter of Cormac,
who was wife of Fionn afterwards.

And whoever should say that Fionn and the Fian never existed, would
not be stating truth. For, to prove that the Fian existed we have the
three things that prove the truth of every history in the world except
the Bible, namely, oral tradition of the ancients, old documents, and
antique remains, called in Latin monumenta. For it has been delivered
to us from mouth to mouth that Fionn and the Fian existed; and,
moreover, there are numerous documents that testify to this. There are
also antique remains named after them, as Suidhe Finn on Sliabh na
mBan, called from Fionn descendant of Baoiscne, and Gleann Gharaidh in
Ui Faithche, called from Garaidh son of Morna, and Leabaidh Dhiarmada
Ui Dhuibhne agus Ghrainne at Poll Tighe Liabhain in Ui Fiachrach
Eidhne, which is now called the country of O Seachnasaigh, and so, too,
of many other places in Ireland. And should anyone say that much of
what has been written about the Fian is not to be believed, he would
certainly state the truth; for there was no kingdom in the world in
which there were not written tales called fabulæ in Pagan times, for
example, the Knight of the Sun, Bevis of Hamton, Huon of Burdex, and
other such like, which were written even in the time of the Faith. But
there is no country in the world in which also true and credible
histories have not been written. In the same manner, although many
imaginative romances have been written about Fionn and the Fian, such
as Cath Fionntragha, Bruighean Chaorthainn, and Imtheacht an Ghiolla
Dheacair, and others of a similar kind, for the sake of amusement,
still it is certain that true credible accounts of them were also
written. And it is also certain that their bodies were not abnormally
large, but only like those of their contemporaries; and they were
nothing more than hired warriors of the Kings of Ireland, to defend
and to protect the country for them, as every king has now captains
and soldiers to defend his own dominions.

Now the Fian used to be quartered on the men of Ireland from Samhain
to Bealltaine; and it was their duty to uphold justice, and to prevent
injustice, for the kings and the lords of Ireland; and also to guard
and preserve the harbours of the country from the violence of
foreigners; and from Bealltaine to Samhain to be engaged in hunting,
and the chase, and in every other duty the king of Ireland might
impose upon them, such as putting a stop to robbery, exacting the
payment of tribute, putting down malefactors, and so of every other
evil in the country. For this they had a certain pay, as every king in
Europe gives pay to the captains and to the generals who serve under
him. However, from Bealltaine until Samhain, the Fian were obliged to
depend solely on the products of their hunting and of the chase as
maintenance and wages from the Kings of Ireland; thus, they were to
have the flesh for food, and the skins of the wild animals as pay. But
they only took one meal in the day-and-night, and that was in the
afternoon. And it was their custom to send their attendants about noon
with whatever they had killed in the morning's hunt to an appointed
hill, having wood and moorland in the neighbourhood, and to kindle
raging fires thereon, and put into them a large number of emery
stones; and to dig two pits in the yellow clay of the moorland, and
put some of the meat on spits to roast before the fire; and to bind
another portion of it with suagans in dry bundles, and set it to boil
in the larger of the two pits, and keep plying them with the stones
that were in the fire, making them seethe often until they were cooked.
And these fires were so large that their sites are to-day in Ireland
burnt to blackness, and these are now called Fulacht Fian by the
peasantry.

As to the Fian, when they assembled on the hill on which was the fire,
each of them stripped off, and tied his shirt round his waist; and
they ranged themselves round the second pit we have mentioned above,
bathing their hair and washing their limbs, and removing their sweat,
and then exercising their joints and muscles, thus ridding themselves
of their fatigue; and after this they took their meal; and when they
had taken their meal, they proceeded to build their hunting-tents, and
so prepare themselves for sleep. Each of them made himself a bed of
three things: the tops of trees, moss, and fresh rushes; the tree-tops
at the bottom on the ground, the moss upon these, and the fresh rushes
on top; and it is these are called in the old books, the three
tickings of the Fian.

The following is an account of Fionn son of Cumhall, and of the branch
of the Gaels whence he sprang. Now, Campianus says, in his chronicle,
that some authors say that it was Fionn son of Cumhall who was called
Roanus. But this assertion of his is not true. Know that it was
Cumhall son of Treanmhor, the fourth in descent from Nuadha Neacht,
king of Leinster, who was his father, and that his mother was Muirn
Mhunchaomh daughter of Tadhg son of Nuadha, druid of Cathaoir Mor; and
Almha of Leinster was the native inheritance of Tadhg son of Nuadha;
and hence Alma of Leinster came to belong to Fionn in right of his
mother. However, it was the king of Leinster who gave him Formaoil na
bhFian in Ui Cinnsealaigh, where Luimneach Laighean is at this day.

Hector Boetius, in the History of Alba, unjustly calls Fionn son of
Cumhall a giant; and besides he falsely asserts that he was fifteen
cubits in height. For it is plain from the old books of the seanchus
that he was not of abnormal size as compared with his contemporaries;
and it is plain that there were some of the Fian of greater size, more
powerful, and stronger than he. Now, the reason why he was made Ri
Feinnidh over the warriors of Ireland was that his father and
grandfather beforehim were leaders of the warriors of Ireland. Another
reason also why he was made Ri Feinnidh was that he surpassed his
contemporaries in knowledge and in learning, in skill and in strategy,
and also in wisdom and valour in fields of battle, so that it was on
this account he was appointed Ri Feinnidh, and not because he
surpassed all others in strength of body and size of person. The
ordinary host that served under Fionn consisted of the three
battalions of the Gnathfhian, having three thousand in each battalion,
when the men of Ireland were at peace with one another. But whenever
any party of the nobles of Ireland were at enmity with the high king,
or whenever it was necessary to send a host to Alba to help Dal Riada
against foreigners, Fionn used to have seven battalions, so that he
had a sufficiently large host to go to Alba to assist Dal Riada, as
well as to guard Ireland from the oppression of the foreigners.

There were many chief leaders under Fionn in command of the Fian,
thus: a caithmhileadh in command of the battalion, as a colonel is in
command of a regiment, the leader of a hundred like the modern captain,
the chief of fifty like the lieutenant, and the head of thrice nine
like the corporal, and the head of nine like the decurion of the
Romans. For when the hundred were divided into ten divisions, or ten
ranks, there was an officer over each, who was called a leader of nine.
And when mention is made in the records of Ireland of a man match in
battle for a hundred, or fifty, or nine, or such like as belonging to
the Fian, we are not to understand from them that such a man would
kill a hundred, or fifty, or nine, with his own hand; but what we are
to understand from them is that he was leader of a hundred, or fifty,
or nine, and was, with his following, a match in battle for a similar
leader in command of a like following. There were four injunctions
placed on everyone admitted to the ranks of the Fian. The first
injunction was not to accept a dowry with a wife, but to choose her
for her good manners and her accomplishments; the second injunction,
not to force a woman; the third injunction, not to refuse a man asking
for valuables or food; the fourth injunction, that none of them should
flee before nine warriors.

The following are the other conditions which Fionn son of Cumhall
attached to the degrees in bravery which each one was bound to obtain
before being received into the Fian. The first condition: no man was
received into the Fian or the great Assembly of Uisneach, or the Fair
of Taillte, or the Feis of Tara, until his father and mother and clan
and relatives gave guarantees that they would never demand any
retribution from anyone for his death, so that he might look to no one
to avenge him but to himself; and that if he should inflict great
injuries, retribution should not be visited on his kinsmen. The second
condition: no one was admitted into the Fian until he had become a
filé , and had made up the twelve books of Filidheacht. The third
condition: no one was admitted into the Fian until a large pit
reaching above his knees had been made for him, and he was placed in
it with his shield and a hazel staff as long as a warrior's arm in his
hand; and nine warriors, with nine spears, were to approach him,
leaving the space of nine furrows between him and them; and they
hurled nine spears together at him, and if he were wounded in spite of
his shield and his hazel staff, he would not be received into the Fian.
The fourth condition: no man was admitted into the Fian until, having
his hair plaited, he was sent through several woods with all the Fian
in pursuit of him with a view to wounding him, while he got but the
odds of a single tree over them, and if they overtook him, they would
wound him. The fifth condition: no man was admitted into the Fian
whose weapons trembled in his hand. The sixth condition: no man was
admitted among them if a branch of a tree in the woods unloosed from
its plait a single braid of his hair. The seventh condition: no man
was admitted among them if he broke a withered bough beneath his feet.
The eighth condition: no man was admitted among them unless he leaped
over a tree as high as his forehead, and unless he stooped beneath a
tree as low as his knee, through the great agility of his body. The
ninth condition: no man was received into the Fian unless he could
pluck a thorn from his foot with his hand without stopping in his race
for the purpose. The tenth condition: no man was admitted among them
unless he had sworn to the Ri Feinnidh that he would be faithful and
submissive to him.

While Cormac held the sovereignty of Ireland some Ulster nobles made a
raid on the coasts of Alba, and they came upon Ciarnait daughter of
the king of the Cruithnigh, and brought her as a captive across the
sea. And when Cormac heard of her beauty, he demanded her publicly,
and took her to his own house; and she surpassed the women of her time
in beauty; and for this Cormac loved her. But when Eithne Ollamhdha
daughter of Dunlaing, Cormac's lawful wife, heard that Ciarnait lived
with him, she said that he must not have them both at the same time;
and Eithne insisted on getting charge of her; and she imposed on her
as a work of slavery that she should grind with a quern nine pecks or
nine measures of corn every day. Notwithstanding this, Cormac met her
in secret; and she conceived of him; and when she became pregnant, she
was unable to grind; and she went privately to Cormac and told him so.
Cormac sent to Alba for an artificer who could construct a mill. The
artificer came to him, and made the mill to release Ciarnait from her
slavery under Eithne; and it is on this theme the poet composed the
following stanzas:

Ciarnait, handmaid of just Cormac,
Fed many hundreds from a quern;
Nine pecks she had each day to grind;
It was not work for a frivolous person.

Then meets she the noble king
In his house, where she is alone;
And she conceived in secret,
And after that she refused to grind.

Conn's grandson went to visit her;
He brought a millwright from over seas;
The first mill of Cormac son of Art
Was a help to Ciarnait.



XLVI.

It was in the time of Cormac that Fitheal lived; and he was his chief
brehon; and as Fitheal was about to die, he sent for his son named
Flaithri; and this Flaithri was a wise and learned man. Fitheal left
him his blessing, and advised him to observe four things most
carefully, and that it would be to his advantage to do so, namely, not
to nurse or take in fosterage a king's son, not to impart a dangerous
secret to his wife, not to raise the state of a serf's son, not to
commit his purse or his treasure to his sister's keeping. And after
Fitheal's death, Flaithri resolved to test each of these points. And
to make trial of them he took in fosterage the son of Cormac son of
Art; and some time after he took the child with him into a wood, and
gave him to one of his people, a swineherd, who lived in the recesses
of the wood; and he asked him to conceal the child well until himself
should send him a certain token; and then he returned to the town to
his own house, and feigned much trouble and distress; and his wife
inquired of him the cause of his trouble and distress. He said it was
nothing. But when she saw his distress continue, she began to
importune him to find out from him the cause of his trouble. He said
that, if she would keep it a secret, he would tell her the cause of
his distress.

She swore that whatever he should tell her as a secret she would not
reveal it. "Then," said he, "I have committed a dreadful act of
treachery, that is, the slaying of my foster-son, the king's son."
Upon hearing this, the wife screamed, and called the house-folk, and
told them to bind the parricide because he had killed the king's son.
And they did accordingly; and they took him bound to the king.
Flaithri also had raised the state of the son of one of his own
stewards so that he became a rich man. Similarly very soon after his
father's death he committed some of his wealth to his sister's keeping,
so that none of the four counsels his father had given him should go
untested by him. Now, when the steward's son found that he was a
prisoner, and the king about to put him to death, none of them was
more bitter and severe against him than he, as he hoped to acquire
Flaithri's inheritance for himself.

Flaithri, finding himself in this difficulty, sent a message to his
sister, asking her to send him the treasure he had given her to keep,
that he might make friends for himself around the king's person. But
when the messenger reached her, she denied that she had ever received
any such thing from him. And when that reply reached Flaithri, as he
was about to be put to death, he asked to be permitted to go before
the king, in order to speak to him on a secret matter; and when he had
come into Cormac's presence, he told him that the child was safe, and
asked to be kept in his bonds till his foster-son should be brought in.
The son was sent for; and when the child had come in from the
swineherd who had been keeping him in safety, as he beheld Flaithri in
bonds, he wept without ceasing until he was set free. And when
Flaithri had been set free, Cormac asked him privately why he had
permitted himself to be placed in this predicament. "It was to test
the four counsels my father gave me I did so," said Flaithri; "and I
found on testing them that my father's four counsels to me were wise.
In the first place, it is not wise for anyone to take upon him the
bringing up of a king's son lest he may be guilty of neglect resulting
in the injury or loss of the foster-child, while the life or death of
the foster-father who had been negligent was in the power of the king.
As to the second counsel my father gave me, the keeping of a dangerous
secret is not by nature in the power of women in general; hence it is
not prudent to commit such a secret to them. The third counsel my
father gave me was not to raise or make wealthy the son of a serf or
of a lowly person; for such persons are usually unmindful of the
benefit conferred on them; and moreover, they are hurt that the party
who raised them should be aware of the meanness and lowly state whence
they rose. Good," said he, "is the fourth counsel my father gave me:
not to give my treasure to my sister; for it belongs to the nature of
women to regard as spoil whatever valuables their friends give them to
keep in safety."

It was ordained in Cormac's time that every high king of Ireland
should keep ten officers in constant attendance on him, who did not
separate from him as a rule, namely, a prince, a brehon, a druid, a
physician, a bard, a seancha, a musician, and three stewards: the
prince to be a body-attendant on the king; the brehon to explain the
customs and laws of the country in the king's presence; a druid to
offer sacrifices, and to forebode good or evil to the country by means
of his skill and magic; a physician to heal the king and his queen and
the rest of the household; a filé to compose satire or panegyric for
each one according to his good or evil deeds; a seancha to preserve
the genealogies, the history, and transactions of the nobles from age
to age; a musician to play music, and to chant poems and songs in the
presence of the king; and three stewards with their company of
attendants and cupbearers to wait on the king, and attend to his wants.
This custom was kept from the time of Cormac to the death of Brian son
of Cinneide without change, except that, since the kings of Ireland
received the Faith of Christ, an ecclesiastical chaplain took the
place of the druid, to declare and explain the precepts and the laws
of God to the king, and to his household. Thus does the seancha set
forth the matter just stated:

There are ten round the king,
Without rivalry, without anxiety -- 
I can name them all,
Both prince and official.

There are appointed to attend on gracious kings,
A brehon, a filé, and a prince;
The king who has not the three named,
His honour-price is not sanctioned by Fenian law.

A chaplain to expound the gospels,
A seancha who sets right every mishap,
A musician skilled in harp-strings also:
For these fine and honour-price are appointed.

The fourth person is a physician,
To look to each one's disease;
Three stewards to serve famous companies,
I shall record for the hosts of Erin.

The king who shall not have all these
Has no right to be in the Reim Rioghruidhe;
In the house of Tara shall not pass his time
A king not having the ten.

On account of the excellence of Cormac's deeds, and judgments, and
laws, God gave him the light of the Faith seven years before his death.
And, accordingly, he refused to adore gods made with hands; and he set
himself to reverence and honour the true God; so that he was the third
man in Ireland who believed before the coming of Patrick. Conchubhar
son of Neasa was the first to receive the faith when he heard from
Bacrach the druid that the Jewish people would put Christ to death by
torment; Morann son of Maon was the second person; and Cormac son of
Art was the third. It was at Tara that Cormac usually resided,
according to the practice of his predecessors, until his eye was
destroyed by Aonghus Gaoibuaibhtheach, as we have said above; and
thenceforward he abode in Achaill, in the house of Cleiteach, and in
Ceanannus. For the men of Ireland considered it neither becoming nor
auspicious that a king with a blemish should abide in Tara; and for
this reason Cormac gave over the sovereignty to his son Cairbre
Lithfeachair; and he gave up Tara to him, retiring himself to the
house of Cleiteach and to Achaill, not far from Tara. And it was there
he composed the Teagaisc Riogh, setting forth what a king should be,
as we have said above, and how he should rule the people through their
laws. And from the time that Cormac gave over the sovereignty, he
believed only in the one God of heaven.

On a certain day, when Cormac was in the house of Cleiteach, the
druids were worshipping the golden calf in his presence; and the
general body of the people were worshipping it after the manner of the
druids. Maoilgheann the druid asked Cormac why he was not adoring the
golden calf and the gods like the rest. "I will not," said Cormac, 
"worship a stock made by my own artificer; and it were better to
worship the person who made it; for he is nobler than the stock."
Maoilgheann the druid excited the golden calf so that he made a bound
before them all. "Dost thou see that, O Cormac?" said Maoilgheann.
"Although I see," said Cormac, "I will worship only the God of heaven,
of earth, and of hell."

After this his food was cooked for the king; and he began to eat a
portion of a salmon from the Boinn. Thereupon the demon sprites came,
at the instigation of Maoilgheann the druid, and they killed the king.
Others say that it was a salmon-bone that stuck in his throat and
choked him. For it was eating fish he was when the sprites, or demons
of the air, choked him.

When the king was in the throes of death, he directed his officers not
to bury his body at the Brugh, where the kings of Tara had been buried
up to then. But when the people were conveying his body to the Brugh
to be buried, the sprites put it into the greatly swollen river thrice
before them; for they did not wish to let his body into the burial-
place of the idolaters, since he believed in the true God. And the
fourth time its bearers carried the body into the river; and it was
snatched away from them by the current of the Boinn, and it reached
Ros na Riogh; and it became separated from the fuad, or bier, whence
the ford Ath Fuaid on the Boinn is named. They mourned for him there;
and his grave was made; and he was buried at Ros na Riogh. A long time
after this, Columcille came to that place, and found the head of king
Cormac there, and buried it. Columcille remained in the place till he
had said thirty Masses above his grave, and there is now a church in
the pl ace.

As we have spoken of the druids here, I think it will be meet to give
some account of them, and especially of their sacrifices, and of their
geasa, as will appear below. There are, indeed, to be seen in Ireland
to-day in many places, as relics of the Pagan times, many very wide
flag-stones, and pillar-stones supporting them; and these are called
idol-altars in the old books, while the general populace call them
beds of the Fian, as they are ignorant of the reason of their
construction. On these altars the druids were wont to make their
sacrifices in the olden time, and slay their he-goats, their bulls,
and their rams; and the druids themselves went on their knees under
the blood as it dropped from their victims, to cleanse themselves from
the uncleanness of their sins, as the high priest did among the Jewish
people when he went under the sacrificial bridge to let the blood of
the victims flow over him, and hence he was called Pontifex, that is,
bridgewright.

As to the druids, the use they made of the hides of the bulls offered
in sacrifice was to keep them for the purpose of making conjuration,
or laying geasa on the demons; and many are the ways in which they
laid geasa on them, such as to keep looking at their own images in
water, or gaze on the clouds of heaven, or keep listening to the noise
of the wind or the chattering of birds. But when all these expedients
failed them, and they were obliged to do their utmost, what they did
was, to make round wattles of the quicken tree, and to spread thereon
the hides of the bulls offered in sacrifice, putting the side which
had been next the flesh uppermost, and thus relying on their geasa to
summon the demons to get information from them, as the conjurer does
nowadays in the circus; whence the old saw has since been current
which says that one has gone on his wattles of knowledge when he has
done his utmost to obtain information.

Formerly, in the times of Paganism, there were two chief cemeteries in
Ireland, in which most of the kings of Ireland were buried; namely,
the Brugh of the Boinn, and the Cemetery of the Kings near Cruachain.
It is plain, from the narrative given above, that the Brugh of the
Boinn was a burial-place for the kings of Tara; and it is certain that
the Cemetery of the Kings at Cruachain was a common cemetery for the
kings of Ireland, according to Torna Eigeas in the following poem:

A fair king of Fail lies beneath thee,
Dathi son of Fiachraidh, a man of dignity;
O Cruacha, thou hast concealed this
From foreigners and from Gaels.

Beneath thee lies strenuous Dunghalach,
Who brought the hostages across the sea from the west;
There is beneath thee, make known the gift,
Conn Tuathal and Tomaltach.

Three sons of Eochaidh Feidhlioch the fair,
They are beneath thy wall as I aver;
Eochaidh Aireamh lies prostrate,
Slain by the mighty great Maol.

Eochaidh Feidhleach the prince
Is beneath thee, and worthy Deirbhri,
And Clothra, not reproachful the dignity,
And Meadhbh and Murasc.

Eire Fodla and Banbha,
Three beauteous noble young ladies,
Are in Cruacha of the clans,
Three women of the Tuath De Danann,

The three sons of Cearmad, from Sith Truim,
And Lughaidh from Liathdhruim,
The sons of Aodh son of the Daghadh,
And tall brave Midhir.

Beneath thy pillar-stones are lying
Graceful Cobhthach and Ughaine,
And Badhbhcha of the prosperous reign,
And proud, haughty Ollamh. A fair.

Eochaidh Gunnat son of Fiach, son of Iomchaidh, son of Breasal, son of
Siorchaidh, son of Fiatach Fionn from whom the Dal bhFiatach are named,
son of Dluthaidh, son of Deitsin, son of Eochaidh, son of Sin, son of
Roisin, son of Triun, son of Roithriun, son of Airndil, son of Maine,
son of Forga, son of Fearadhach, son of Oilill Earann, son of
Fiachaidh Fear Mara, son of Aonghus Tuirbheach Teamhrach of the race
of Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of Ireland one year, and he fell by
Lughna Feirtre.



XLVII.

Cairbre Lithfeachair son of Cormac, son of Art Aoinfhear, son of Conn
Ceadchathach, son of Feidhlimidh Reachtmhar, son of Tuathal Teachtmhar,
son of Fiachaidh Fionnoluidh of the race of Eireamhon, held the
sovereignty of Ireland twenty-seven years; and he was called Cairbre
Lithfeachair because it was near the Lithfe in Leinster that he was
brought up. And his mother was Eithne Ollamhdha daughter of Dunlaing
son of Eanna Nia. And Cairbre was slain at the Battle of Gabhra by
Simeon son of Cearb, one of the Fortuatha of Leinster; and the reason
why the Battle of Gabhra was fought was: Samhaoir daughter of Fionn
son of Cumhall was the wife of Cormac Cas son of Oilill Olom, and she
was the mother of Tinne and Connla and Mogh Corb; and it was by reason
of that relationship that Mogh Corb protected his mother's brother,
that is, Oisin son of Fionn, and the clanna Baoiscne from being
overpowered by Cairbre Lithfeachair and Aodh Caomh son of Garaidh
Glundubh of the race of Morna; and at that time the clanna Morna
formed the regular army of Ireland; and they were at enmity with Fionn
and with the clanna Baoiscne for seven years. Hence the party of
Garaidh Glundubh incited Cairbre Lithfeachair and the provincial kings
of Ireland to dethrone Mogh Corb in the hope that, as a consequence of
this, the clanna Baoiscne would be banished. And this led to the
Battle of Gabhra.

This Mogh Corb, with the manning of 300 ships, went with two brothers.
of his mother (they were sons of the king of Lochloinn) to obtain for
them the sovereignty of Lochloinn from the king of Lochloinn, whose
name was Iarus son of Iarnmhor, and he defeated the king in battle,
and slew him and his four sons and his eight brothers, and the
majority of the nobles of Lochloinn, and left his mother's two
brothers in the p0ssession of the country of Lochloinn.

Fothaidh Airgtheach and Fothaidh Cairptheach, two sons of Mac Con, son
of Macniadh, son of Lughaidh, son of Daire, son of Fear Uileann of the
race of Lughaidh son of Ioth, assumed the sovereignty of Ireland. They
both reigned conjointly one year. And Fothaidh Cairptheach fell by
Fothaidh Airgtheach, and Fothaidh Airgtheach fell by the Fian in the
Battle of Ollarbha.

Fiachaidh Sraibhthine son of Cairbre Lithfeachair, son of Cormac, son
of Art Aoinfhear, son of Conn Ceadchathach of the race of Eireamhon,
held the sovereignty of Ireland thirty-three years, and fell by the
three Collas in the Battle of Dubhchumair. Aoife, daughter of the king
of the Gallghaedheal, was the wife of Fiachaidh Sraibhthine, and
mother of Muireadhach Tireach; and he was called Fiachaidh Sraibhthine,
for it was at Dun Sraibhthine in Connaught he was fostered. Now in
order that this event may be better understood, we shall set down here,
from the Psalter of Cashel, the cause of the Battle of Dubhchumair,
and an account of the relationship that existed between the Collas and
Fiachaidh Sraibhthine.

It is at Cairbre Lithfeachair that the Oirghialla -- that is, the
family of the Collas -- separate in their pedigree from the clanna
Neill and the Connachtaigh. And Fiachaidh Sraibhthine son of Cairbre
Lithfeachair was grandfather of Eochaidh Muighmheadhon son of
Muireadhach Tireach, son of Fiachaidh Sraibhthine; and it is from this
Muireadhach that the clanna Neill and the men of Connaught are
descended. Eochaidh Doimhlean son of Cairbre Lithfeachair was brother
to Fiachaidh Sraibhthine; and this Eochaidh had three sons, to wit,
the three Collas, and from these are descended the Ui Mac Uais, the Ui
Criomhthainn, and the Modhornaigh. The real names of the three Collas
referred to were Cairioll, Muireadhach, and Aodh. Here is the
seancha's statement of this matter:

The three sons of Eochaidh, great their fame,
The three Collas we have heard of;
Colla Meann, Colla fo Chri,
And Colla Uais the high king.

The names of the three I know,
And they slew the high king
On yon wide bright plain,
Aodh Muireadhach and Cairioll.

Cairioll, Colla Uais the king,
Muireadhach, Colla fo Chri,
Aodh, Colla Meann, great his fame;
These three were mighty beyond all strength.

Aileach daughter of Udhaire king of Alba, wife of Eochaidh Doimhlean,
was the mother of the three Collas. It was Fiachaidh Sraibhthine these
three Collas slew, though a kinsman, which resulted in the sovereignty
of Ireland being lost to themselves. Now this was the cause of that
murder of a kinsman: When Fiachaidh was king of Ireland, he had a good
son called Muireadhach Tireach, and he was leader in battle for his
father, for the king himself would not be allowed into battle. On a
certain occasion Muireadhach went into Munster accompanied by a host,
and carried off hostages and spoils. Fiachaidh Sraibhthine happened
then to be at Dubhchumair, beside Taillte on the south side, and a
host with him there. His brother's three sons, that is the three
Collas, had another host at Dubhchumair near Taillte helping Fiachaidh
Sraibhthine. When they heard of the success of Muireadhach in Munster,
people generally said that he was the heir-presumptive to the
sovereignty of Ireland. "What shall become of us," said the Collas,
"if Muireadhach become king of Ireland after Fiachaidh?" "What we had
better do," said they, "is to give battle to the old king; and when we
have slain himself and his host, we shall overcome his son when he
will come against us." Fiachaidh at that time had a druid with him
called Dubhchumair; and he spoke thus: "O king," said he, "if thou
overcomest the Collas and slayest them, there will never be a king of
thy offspring after thee in Ireland; and if it be they who shall
succeed and slay thee, there will never be a king of Ireland of their
progeny." "Well, then," said the king, "I prefer to fall by the Collas,
and the kingdom to pass to my descendants after me, than that I should
slay the Collas, and that the sovereignty of Ireland should go to
their descendants after them." Thereupon the two hosts got ready for
battle, and made an onslaught on each other from either side; and
Fiachaidh Sraibhthine was defeated and slain in that battle, as
Dubhchumair had foretold of him.

Colla Uais son of Eochaidh Doimhlean, son of Cairbre Lithfeachair, son
of Cormac, son of Art Aonfhear, son of Conn Ceadchathach of the race
of Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of Ireland four years, and was then
with his brothers banished into Alba by Muireadhach Tireach son of
Fiachaidh Sraibhthine, where they were taken into military service by
their kinsmen. For Aileach daughter of Udhaire, king of Alba, the wife
of Eochaidh Doimhlean, was the mother of the three Collas. Cairioll
was called Colla Uais from his being distinguished above the other
Collas, since he held the sovereignty of Ireland, and the others did
not.

Muireadhach Tireach son of Fiachaidh Sraibhthine, son of Cairbre
Lithfeachair, son of Cormac, son of Art Aoinfhear, son of Conn
Ceadchathach of the race of Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of Ireland
thirty-three years, and fell by Caolbhach son of Cronn Badhraoi.
Muireann daughter of Fiachaidh, king of Cineal Eoghain, the wife of
Muireadhach Tireach, was mother of Eochaidh Muighmheadhon. As to the
Collas, they were banished by Muireadhach into Scotland, as we have
said; and their host numbered three hundred; and the king of Alba
received them with affection, and took them into military service on
account of their valour; and they remained there three years. They
came thence to Ireland -- that is, Colla Meann and Colla da Chrioch
and Colla Uais -- in the hope that Muireadhach Tireach might slay them,
though being his kinsmen, and that in consequence of this parricide
the sovereignty of Ireland might go to their descendants. And they
brought with them, as an escort, only nine warriors each, and they
neither halted nor rested till they reached Tara and came into the
presence of the king, Muireadhach Tireach. "Have ye news for us, O
kinsmen?" said the king. "We have no news," said they, "that would
affect thee more than the deed we ourselves have done, that is, that
we have slain thy father." "We have that news ourselves," said
Muireadhach; "and it matters not to you, as it shall not be avenged on
you; but the misfortune it has brought upon you will not pass away
from you." "That is the reproach of a coward," said the Collas. Be ye
not dejected; ye are welcome," said he. They spent a long time after
this in close friendship; and the Collas were leaders in battle for
the king.

The king told them, then, that it was time they should win territory
for their descendants. "In what territory dost thou wish us to make
sword-land?" -- there were no more daring youths in Ireland in their
time than they. "Rise out against the Ultonians," said he; "for ye
have just cause of battle with them, since an attendant of the king of
Ulster burned the beard or hair of Cormac son of Art with a candle in
Magh Breagh. Now, when Cormac had become king of Ireland, a strong
force of the Ultonians came against him and drove him into Connaught,
having carried off hostages from him. After that they made peace with
Cormac and get ready a feast for him in north Magh Breagh. And it was
there that an attendant of the king of Ulster burned Cormac's hair.
And that deed is still unavenged."

Upon this, king Muireadhach gave them a large host; and the Colla went
thence into the province of Connaught, and the men of Connaught took
them into military fosterage. After this, the men of Connaught joined
in their march with a force of seven battalions; and they reached Carn
Achuidh Leithdheirg in Fearnmhagh. From that hill they fought seven
battles against the Ultonians, that is a battle each day for a week.
Six of these battles were fought by the Connaughtmen, and by the
Collas was fought the seventh, in which Fearghus Fogha, king of
Eamhain, was slain; and the Ultonians were defeated and pursued from
Carn Achuidh Leithdheirg to Gleann Righe, and, after inflicting great
slaughter on them, the Collas returned and attacked Emhain, which they
plundered and burned, so that it has ever since remained without a
king to inhabit it. On that occasion, the Collas wrested the following
territories from the Ultonians, namely, Modharnuigh, Ui Criomthainn,
and Ui Mac Uais. Colla Meann took possession of Modharnuigh, and Colla
da Chrioch of Ui Criomhthainn, and Colla Uais of Ui Mac Uais. And
Muireadhach Tireach fell by Caolbhaidh son of Cronn Badhraoi.

Caolbhaidh son of Cronn Badhraoi, son of Eochaidh Cobha, son of
Lughaidh, son of Rossa, son of Iomchaidh, son of Feidhlimidh, son of
Cas, son of Fiachaidh Aruidhe, son of Aonghus Gaibhnionn, son of
Fearghus Foghlas, son of Tiobraide Tireach, son of Breasal, son of
Fearb, son of Mal, son of Rochruidhe, .son of Cathbhadh, son of
Giallchaidh, son of Cunnchaidh, son of Fionnchaidh, son of Muireadhach,
son of Fiachaidh Fionnamhnus, son of Irial Glunmhar, son of Conall
Cearnach of the race of Ir son of Milidh, held the sovereignty of
Ireland one year. Inneacht daughter of Lughaidh was the mother of
Caolbhaidh son of Cronn Badhraoi; and he was slain by Eochaidh
Muighmheadhon.

Eochaidh Muighmheadhon son of Muireadhach Tireach, son of Fiachaidh
Sraibhthine, son of Cairbre Lithfeachair, son of Cormac Ulfhada son of
Art Aoinfhear, son of Conn Ceadchathach, held the sovereignty of
Ireland seven years. Moingfhionn daughter of Fiodhach, wife of
Eochaidh Muighmheadhon, was mother of Brian and of Fiachhaidh Fearghus
and Oilill. And Cairrionn Chasdubh daughter of the king of Britain,
another wife of Eochaidh's, was mother of Niall Naoighiallach. And he
was called Eochaidh Muighmheadhon because, as to his head and breast,
he resembled the king, and, as to his waist, he resembled a slave
called Mionghadhach, and hence he was called Muighmheadhon.

It was over Eochaidh Muighmheadhon that Eanna Cinnsealach, king of
Leinster, won the Battle of Cruachan Claonta; and therein Ceadnathach,
filé to Eochaidh Muighmheadhon, was taken prisoner. But when Eanna
came up, he inquired of his party why they had spared the druid. "Thou
wouldst never," said the druid, "conquer from this hill on which I am,
if I were to live." Upon this Eanna transfixed him with his spear; and,
as the spear pierced his body, a laugh broke forth from Eanna. "Alas,"
said the druid, "that is a foul laugh, and it is this that will be
given as a name to thy posterity after thee for ever"; and hence that
tribe are since called Ui Cinnsealaigh. Eanna Cinnsealach was powerful
in his time, as may be seen from the poem composed by Dubhthach son of
O Lughair, who was chief ollamh of Ireland when Patrick came to
propagate the Gospel in Ireland. A battle fought by the Leinstermen,
is the beginning of that poem. But I shall here quote only these two
stanzas of it, from which it may be inferred that Eanna was powerful
in his time. Here are the stanzas: --

The tribute which was given to Eanna,
From Leath Cuinn of the feasts,
Was a screaball from each house,
All of fionudruine.

The tribute which was given to Eanna,
From Mumha with insults
Was an ounce of gold from each lios
In the ensuing year.

And according to the Psalter of Cashel this Eanna defeated the clann
Cuinn in thirteen battles.

Criomhthann son of Fiodhach, son of Daire Cearb, son of Oilill Flann
Beag, son of Fiachaidh Muilleathan, son of Eoghan Mor, son of Oilill
Olom of the race of Eibhear, held the sovereignty of Ireland seventeen
years. Fidheang, daughter of the king of Connaught, was his wife. This
Criomhthann gained victories and obtained sway in Alba, Britain, and
France, as the seancha says in the following stanza: --

Criomhthann son of Fiodhach swayed
The lands of Alba and of Erin;
He swayed likewise beyond the clear blue sea
Even the Saxons and the French.

It was also Criomhthann son of Fiodhach who gave the kingdom of Leath
Mogha or Munster to his foster-son, namely, to Conall Eachluaith son
of Lughaidh Lamhdhearg; and the descendants of Fiachaidh Muilleathan
were displeased at this; and they said that Conall did not show
himself a good kinsman by accepting it, while there was at the time
among the descendants of Fiachaidh one qualified to be a good king,
namely, Corc son of Lughaidh. And the arbitration the learned sages of
Munster made between them at the time was that Corc son of Lughaidh
was to have the sovereignty of Munster in the first instance, as he
was the senior, and that it was finally to go to the descendants of
Cormac Cas. The descendants of Fiachaidh Muilleathan gave sureties and
guarantees that they would allow the sovereignty of Munster to pass on
the death of Corc to Conall Eachluaith or to his son should Conall
himself be not living, as Oilill Olom ordained that it should belong
to these two families in alternate generations, that is, the family of
Fiachaidh Muilleathan and that of Cormac Cas. It was on that agreement,
then, that Conall Eachluaith allowed the sovereignty of Munster to go
to Corc son of Lughaidh; and, on the death of Corc, Conall Eachluaith
himself took up the sovereignty of Munster; and Criomhthann son of
Fiodhach gave the hostages of the men of Ireland, of Alba, Britain,
and France into the hands of Conall Eachluaith. And accordingly Cormac
son of Cuileannan composed the following stanzas: --

Eachluaith received the tribute of Ireland
After Criomthann, it was a tribute from abroad;
Though he had not gone beyond the Sea of Manainn,
Never did a better king receive it.

As many as great Criomhthann son of Fiodhach brought
Of hostages over the brimming sea,
He gave into the hand of the red-speared champion,
Illustrious noble Conall Eachluaith.

Conall Eachluaith set out on an expedition
Into every territory after pleasant Criomhthann;
To Dun Liamhna, illustrious was the warrior,
Where noble companies were slain.

To him belonged Fearta Conaill in Feimhion,
Druim Chormaic Aine Dun Gair,
Cashel Coincheann strong Raith Leamhna,
Fochair Mhaigh fair Dun Cearmna. E.

Moingfhionn daughter of Fiodhach, Criomhthann's own sister, gave him a
poisoned drink in Inis Dornghlas on Muaidh, in the hope that the
sovereignty would pass to her favourite son, that is, Brian son of
Eochaidh Muighmheadhon; and Criomhthann son of Fiodhach died of the
poison of that drink on Sliabh Uidhe an Riogh, on the north side of
Luimneach; and Mongfhionn herself died of the poison of the same drink
in Inis Dornghlas on Muaidh, having taken some of it to urge her
brother to drink it.



XLVIII

Niall Naoighiallach son of Eochaidh Muighmheadhon, son of Muireadhach
Tireach, son of Fiachaidh Sraibhthine, son of Cairbre Lithfeachair,
son of Cormac Ulfhada, son of Art Aoinfhea , son of Conn Ceadchathach
of the race of Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of Ireland twenty-seven
years. Cairionn Chasdubh, daughter of the king of Britain, was Nial's
mother. Inne daughter of Lughaidh, wife of Niall, was the other of
Fiachaidh. A second wife of Niall's was Rioghna h, who bore him seven
sons, namely, Laoghaire and Eanna, aine, Eoghan, two nails, and
Cairbre, as the poet says in this stanza:--

Joyous was the bright Rioghnach
When she bore Laoghaire son of Niall,
Eanna, Maine of bright deeds,
Eoghan, two Conalls, Cairbre.

This Niall went into Alba with a large host to strengthen and to
establish the Dal Riada and the Scotic race in Alba, who were at this
time gaining supremacy over the Cruithnigh, who are called Picti; and
he was the first to give the name Scotia to Alba, being requested to
do so by the Dal Riada and the Scotic race, on the condition that she
should be called Scotia Minor or Lesser Scotia, while Ireland should
be termed Scotia Major or Greater Scotia; and it was through
veneration for Scota daughter of Pharao Nectonibus, who was wife of
Galamh called Milidh of Spain, from whom they themselves sprang, that
the Dal Riada chose the name of Scotia for Alba, instead of calling
her Hibernia.

Camden states in his chronicle of Britain that Lesser Scotia was the
name of Alba, and Greater Scotia the name of Ireland, and says that it
cannot be proved by documents that the Albanians were called Scots
till the time of the emperor Constantine the Great. Moreover, Camden
gives the Irish the name of Scotorum Attavi, that is, the Forbears of
the Scots, thus declaring that the Scots of Alba sprang from the Irish.
Thus too he speaks on the same subject: "The Scots," says he, "came
from Spain to Ireland in the fourth age."[451] Besides, Nennius, a
British author, says, according to Camden, that it was in the fourth
age of the world that the Scithae -- that is, the Scotic race -- took
possession of Ireland. Moreover, it is plain from the annals of
Ireland that Alba was the name of that country up to the time of Niall
Naoighiallach; and when the Dal Riada were permitted to call it Scotia,
themselves and their descendants kept on that name. Before that time
Alba or Albania was the country's name, from Albanactus, third son of
Brutus, since it was Alba that fell to him as his share from his
father. Now Brutus had three sons according to Monomotensis, namely
Laegrus, Camber, and Albanactus; and Brutus divided the island of
Great Britain between them; and to Laegrus he gave Laegria, which
derives its name from him, and it is this country which is now called
Anglia; to Camber he gave Cambria, which is now called Wales; and the
third portion to Albanactus, from whom Alba is called Albania.

Niall marched after this with his full host from Alba to Laegria, and
made an encampment there; and he sent a fleet to Brittany in France,
which is called Armorica, for the purpose, of plundering that country;
and they brought two hundred noble youths as captives to Ireland with
them; and it was in this captivity that they brought Patrick, who was
sixteen years old, with them, and his two sisters Lupida and Darerca
and many other captives besides.
Many authors testify that Scota was the name of Ireland, and that it
was the Irish who were called the Scotic race. Thus does Jonas the
abbot, in the second chapter, treating of Columcille, speak: "Colman,"
he says, "who is called Colum, was born in Hibernia, which is
inhabited by the Scotic race."[452] Beda also, in the first chapter of
the first book of the History of Sacsa, says that Ireland was the
native land of the Scots. He speaks thus: "Hibernia is the true
fatherland of the Scots."[453] The same author, writing about the
saints, makes a remark which agrees with this. He speaks thus: "It was
from Hibernia, the island of the Scots, that St. Kilian and his two
companions came."[454] From this it is to be inferred that the Irish
were called the Scotic race in the time of Beda, who lived 700 years
after Christ. Orosius also, who lived within 400 years after Christ,
agrees with the same statement. He thus speaks in the second chapter
of the first book: "It is the Scotic races that inhabit Ireland."[455]
And it is plain that the country which is called Ireland used to be
called by authors Scotia. Serarius, writing of St. Kilian, speaks
thus: "Holy Kilian of the Scotic race, etc."; and immediately after he
uses these words, "Scotia, which is also called Hibernia."[456] From
this it may be inferred that Scotia was a name for Ireland in constant
use like Hibernia. The truth of this matter will be seen from the
words of Capgrave, writing of St. Colum; he speaks thus: "Scotia was
an ancient name of Ireland, whence came the Scotic race, who inhabit
that part of Alba which lies nearest to greater Britain; and that Alba
is now for this reason called Scotia from Ireland, from which they
derive their origin, and whence they immediately came."[457] Marianus
Scotus, a Scotic author, writing of St. Kilian, agrees with this. He
speaks thus: "Although that part of Britain which adjoins Sacsa on the
north is now properly called Scotia, nevertheless Beda shows that
Ireland was formerly known by that name; for when he states that the
Pictish race came from Scythia to Ireland, he adds that it was the
Scotic race they found there before them."[458] And since it was from
the Scotic race the country was named, Scotia was its name at that
time.

It is to be inferred also from the words of Caesarius, who lived
within 500 years after Christ, that Scotia was the name of Ireland. He
thus speaks in the twelfth book of the Dialogues, chap 38: "Whoever
doubts the existence of Purgatory, let him go to Scotia, and go into
the Purgatory of St. Patrick, and he will no longer doubt of the pains
of Purgatory."[459] From the words of this author it is to be inferred
that Scotia was a common name for Ireland at that time, as there is no
place in Alba called Patrick's Purgatory; and it is plain that the
place so called is in Ireland; and hence that it was Ireland Caesarius
called Scotia. Serarius, writing on St. Bonifacius, is in accord with
this: "Scotia was also a name for Ireland. However, since there came
from the same land of Ireland a certain race to the east of Britain,
where the Picti were dwelling, and there they settled down along with
them, and at first were called Dalrheudini (that is, Dal Riada), from
their own leader Rheuda (that is, Cairbre Rioghfhada), as Beda affirms.
But after this they routed the Picti themselves; and they occupied the
entire northern portion of that country; and they gave it the old name
of their race, so that there is but one Scotic race. There are,
however, two Scotias: one of them, the elder and proper Scotia, is
Ireland, and the other, which is recent, is the northern part of
Britain."[460]

I note three things from the words of the author. The first of these
is that the Irish are truly the Scots; the second is that it was the
Dal Riada that were first called Scots in Alba, since it was they who
first conquered the Picti in Alba. The third is that he says that
Ireland was the older Scotia, and Alba the new Scotia, and that it was
the Scotic race who first called it Scotia. Buchanan, a Scotch author,
in the second book of the "History of Scotland," makes a statement
which bears out the author quoted above. He speaks thus: "The
inhabitants of Ireland were called Scots, as Orosius points out, and
as our own annals record; it was not once only the Scots migrated from
Ireland to Alba."[461] From this it is to be inferred that it was not
the Dal Riada alone who went from Ireland to settle in Alba, but
numerous other tribes as well from time to time.



XLIX.

We read in the seanchus of Ireland that the following tribes went to
Alba in succession to conquer that country.

First Aonghus Ollbhuadhach son of Fiachaidh Labhruinne went to impose
on the Cruithnigh their head-rent to the kings of Ireland two hundred
and fifty years after the coming of the sons of Milidh to Ireland. A
long time after that, Reachtaigh Rioghdhearg, king of Ireland, went to
impose rent on them. Similarly Cairbre Rioghfhada with his host went
to invade the north of Alba; and it is the race of Cairbre Rioghfhada
that Beda calls the Dalrheudini of Alba. Mac Con went to conquer Alba
and Britain; and it was from these countries he came to Ireland to
fight the Battle of Magh Muchruimhe in which Art Aoinfhear fell, and
Mac Con assumed the sovereignty of all Ireland, as we have said. After
this Fathaidh Canann son of Mac Con went to Alba, and took possession
of lands there; and from his posterity Mac Cailin and the correlative
branches of that family have sprung. Also Colla Uais and his brothers
went to Scotland, and they acquired large territories there; and from
this Colla Uais sprang the clann Domhnaill of Alba and of Ireland.
Criomhthann son of Fiodhach, king of Ireland, went to Scotland to make
conquests; and Earc son of Eochaidh Muinreamhar, son of Aonghus Feart
of the race of Cairbre Rioghfhada, and his posterity are called clann
Eirc and Cineal Gabhran in Alba, and also Cineal Lodhairn, Cineal
Comhghaill, and Cineal nAonghusa and the Cineal Con Crice of the Isle,
with their branches.

Corc son of Lughaidh went to Alba with an army; and the reason of his
going thither was that he had a stepmother named Daol daughter of
Fiachaidh son of Niall (king of South Eile); and she was enamoured of
him. And when Corc refused to have intercourse with her, she made a
complaint of him to his father Lughaidh, in whose presence she wept;
and he asked why the maiden wept: "For Corc has forced me," said she.
Lughaidh grew jealous at this, and banished Corc to Alba, where he was
welcomed by Fearadhach Fionn or by Fionn-Chormac, king of Alba, and
where he was much beloved by reason of his refined manners. He got his
own daughter called Moingfhionn married to Corc; and she bore him
three sons in Alba, namely, Maine Leamhna, from whom are the
Leamhnaigh of Alba; and Cairbre Cruithneach, from whom are the
Eoghanacht of Magh Geirrghinn in Alba; and Cronan, from whom are the
Cuircnigh in West Meath; and Cronan remained abroad till the time of
Laoghaire son of Niall; and he then came to Ireland; and Laoghaire
gave him his own daughter called Cairche, and from her is named
Machaire Chuirchne; and Niall son of Eochaidh held four other sons of
Corc as hostages. The names of the four sons were Corc, Greagha, Dula,
and Maine. Corc the younger died in this captivity; and the father
released the other three, and took them with him to Munster. In the
time of Niall Naoighiallach, Corc son of Lughaidh went to Alba; and
long after Niall, six sons of Muireadhach son of Eoghan, son of Niall,
went to Alba, namely, two Lodharns, two Aonghuses, and two Fearghuses.

Conall was the first name of Corc son of Lughaidh; and Bolgbhain
Breathnach, a censorious woman, was his mother; and she was not his
father's wedded wife, since Daol daughter of Fiachaidh son of
Niall,king of South Eile, was his wife. Here is a stanza by Giolla an
Choimdhe O Corain in proof of this:

Conall was before Corc
The name of Lughaidh, faultless hero;
Fire which a caldron preserves through the day,
It was that purpled his fair ear.

And the reason why he was called Corc was: there were two simpletons
in Munster destroying infants; and they made an attack on the place in
which Conall, who is called Corc, was, for the purpose of destroying
him, and he was hidden under an inverted caldron; and the simpletons
traced him, and removed the caldron from over him, and they burned the
child's ears, and from the purpling they gave his ears he was called
Corc.

Maine Leamhna son of Corc, son of Lughaidh, went from Ireland to Alba,
and there occupied territory which is called Magh Leamhna, whence the
Mormhaor of Leamhain in Alba is named; and it is he is now called the
Duke of Lenox; and it is from this Maine Leamhna son of Corc of the
race of Eibhear sprang the noble families of the house of Lenox. It is
from a brother of this Maine called Cairbre Cruithneachan sprang the
Eoghnacht of Magh Geirrghinn in Alba; and it was after the time of
Niall Naoighiallach they went there.

It may similarly be stated of every other tribe of Gaels in Alba that
it was from the Gaels of Ireland their nobles sprang. However, the
portion of them that are nearest Sacsa who were driven by William the
Conqueror over the Saxon borders into Alba, and whose posterity have
continuously inhabited the 'Galldacht' of Alba, these are not of the
Gaels but of the race of the Saxons; and the same holds of another
tribe which we shall mention later on, according to Stow in his annals,
page 153. He bears out the same statement where he relates that
William, king of Alba, was taken prisoner by Henry the Second, king of
England, and then sent by him as a captive to the city of Rouen in
Normandy, where he was kept by king Henry in captivity until he was
forced to pay four hundred pounds for his ransom. Then, when he was
returning, being at peace with the king, he took with him to Alba a
large number of young English nobles from whom he had received
friendly attentions during his captivity; and he gave much land and
territories to them and to their descendants after them; and many of
these are in possession of the Galldacht of Alba at this day. Here are
some of the surnames of the people who went with him at that time who
inhabit Alba at present, and it is they are called the Galldacht of
Alba; here are some of these surnames: Baliol, Brus, Soully, Mowbri,
Sentcler, Hay, Gifford, Ramsey, Landell, Bisey, Barclay, Wellegen,
Boys, Montgomery, Walley, Collomille, Frizer, Grame, Gurlay, and many
others; the age of the Lord 1174.

Buchanan agrees with the above, in the thirty-fourth page of the
second book of the History of Alba, where he says: "Because both the
inhabitants of Ireland and the colonists they sent to Alba were 
originally called Scots, in order that by some difference they might
be distinguished from one another, people from the first called the
one race Irish Scots, and the other Albanian Scots."[462] From these
words of Buchanan two things are to be inferred; the first is that it
was from Ireland the Scots went to occupy Alba; and the second is that
the Irish were ordinarily called Scots from the beginning.

Before we treat of Niall Naoighiallach, we shall give here some events
taken from the annals of Stow's Chronicle in confirmation of the truth
of all that we have said above, as I imagine that the account we shall
give of Niall from the seanchus of Ireland will appear the more
credible if I set down these things from a foreign chronicle. Stow
speaks as follows: "When Marius son of Arviragus was king of Britain
in the year of the Lord 73, Rudhruighe, king of the Pictish tribe from
Scythia, together with the Scotic race, came to conquer Britain and to
waste it with sword and fire; and Marius, above mentioned, gave them
battle, and slew Rudhruighe and a large number of his host; and to
those of them who survived, he gave lands in the north of Alba to
settle down in; and they asked wives of the Britons, but these were
unwilling to give them to them. They asked wives of the Irish, and
obtained them from them." As to this incident which Stow records of
Rudhruighe, king of the Picts, it happened when the Pictish leader
took women from Ireland in the time of Eireamhon, as we have said
above, and that was more than thirteen hundred years before Marius was
king of Britain.

The same author states that it was in the above year of the age of the
Lord that Vespasian was made emperor, and that it was ten years before
that time that the abbey of Glastonbury was founded. He also states
that it was two hundred and seventy-six years after the birth of
Christ that the emperor called Aurelianus first wore the imperial
crown; and he was the first emperor who wore the imperial crown.

In the year of the Lord 395, Pelagius, a Briton, first began to sow
heresy; and at this time the Scotic race and the Picti were wasting
and destroying Great Britain; and the Britons sent envoys to the
emperor Honorius asking assistance of him; and he only wrote to them
requesting them to do all they could for themselves; and hence it came
to pass that the Britons were a long time afterwards under the
oppression of the Scots and the Picti. And again the Britons sent
envoys to Rome; and they made a pitiful complaint of the cruelty
towards them of the Scots and the Picts. The Romans sent an armed
legion to relieve them; and when these reached Britain, they had
several engagements with the Scots and the Picti; and the Roman host,
growing weary, told the Britons to build a wall or fence between
themselves and their bad neighbours, and that they themselves could
not avoid returning to Rome.



L.

As to the Britons, when the Romans had left them, they built a fence
of earth from sea to sea between themselves and the Scots and the
Picti. And when the Scotic race and the Picti had heard that the
Romans had forsaken the Britons, they made a sudden attack on the
latter, and broke down the wall and pillaged the country, so that the
Britons were forced to send envoys to the Romans a third time,
beseeching them not to permit their enemy to despoil them vengefully
as they were doing. Upon this the Romans sent another legion to help
them; and when these had reached Britain, they had several engagements
with the Scots and Picti; and the Romans drove them across the
boundary wall of which we have spoken. And when they had thus relieved
the Britons, the Romans told them that it was of no advantage to
themselves to come on any further expedition of relief to them, and
that they should consider how they might protect or guard themselves
against the enemy. Accordingly when the Roman army had left them, they
began to build the wall that stretches from sea to sea between Britain
and Alba, of stonework eight feet thick, and twelve feet high,
according to Beda, in the fifth chapter of the first book of the
History of Sacsa. When the Scots and the Picti heard that the Romans
had refused to come any more to the aid of the Britons, they collected
and assembled a large host, and marched towards the wall referred to,
and overpassed it and devastated all Britain, so that the Britons were
obliged to abandon their stone fortresses and dwellings and betake
themselves for refuge to woods and wildernesses, where their sole food
was the flesh of the wild beasts they hunted; and the remnant of them
that survived wrote piteously to the consul who was in Rome whose name
was Boetius, soliciting him for aid; and what they said was that they
were hemmed in between the enemy and the sea, for as many of them as
took to the sea, fleeing from the enemy, were drowned; and as many of
them as turned from the sea were slain by the enemy, as Beda says in
the thirteenth chapter of the first book of the History of Sacsa,
quoting the words of the Britons when complaining to the Romans of the
oppression they suffered from the Scots and Picti. These are the
words: "The barbarians force us to the sea," said they, speaking of
the Scots and the Picti; "the sea throws them [us] back upon the
barbarians; and by this twofold death, we are either slain or
drowned,"[463] said they. From this it may be inferred that the
oppression exercised by the Scots of Ireland over the Britons was very
great. Nennius, an ancient British author, says, according to Speed's
Chronicle, that the Scots and the Picti oppressed Britain for a period
of forty years; and Camden, agreeing with this, says: "Five hundred
years after Caesar came to Britain, that country was left to the
barbarity of the Scots and the Picti."[464] This may also be inferred
from the words of Beda in the fourteenth chapter of the same first
book, in which, speaking of the Irish, he says: "The shameless Irish
plunderers return to their homes," says he, "to come back soon
again."[465] From these words of Beda it may be inferred that the
Irish used often to go on expeditions of plunder into Britain.

As to the Britons, they were a long time without being pillaged or
plundered by the Scots and the Picti after the Romans had left them.
But this oppression was not the only misfortune the Britons suffered
from at that time. The Pelagian heresy was then deluding the people;
and the Britons determined to send to the French clergy, asking them
to send prelates and preachers to them from France to put down the
Pelagian heresy. Upon this, the French clergy sat in council, and
resolved to send two holy bishops to propagate the pure faith amongst
them, namely, Germanus, bishop of Auxerre, and Lupus, bishop of
Troyes; and when they arrived, they vanquished the heretics.

Notwithstanding what we have said, a constant warfare existed between
the Scots and the Britons to the time of Vortigern, who was king of
Britain in the year of the Lord 447. However, on account of the evil
passions and the pride and the sins of the Britons at that time, God
gave the Scots and the Picti the victory over them, so that they were
obliged to bring over Horsus and Hingistus with their German host to
assist them against the Scots and the Picti. And God used these
Germans as a scourge to deprive the Britons of the sovereignty of all
Britain ever since. The chroniclers of Britain relate, as Stow notes
in the fifty-third page of the first part of his Chronicle, which was
printed in London in the year of the Lord 1614, that 480 of the
British nobles were treacherously slain by the Saxons, and that
Aurelius Ambrosius, the king of Britain at that time, ordered that of
the stones which Merlin took over to Britain from Sliabh gClaire in
Munster a monument be raised on the spot on which these nobles were
slain. It was, moreover, in the same place that he himself was buried.
And the place was then called Chorea Gigantum; and it is now called
Stone Henge on Salisbury Plain. And the same author says that it was
from Africa the Gaels brought these stones; and Monomotensis says that
no two of the stones were taken from the same country.

From this we may infer that the Gaels were wont to go to Africa to
plunder that country, and that they were therefore powerful in other
countries besides Ireland; and whoever should be surprised at these
events or disbelieve them let him blame himself for it, for not having
seen or searched the records. For often one is ignorant of the truth
through not having made himself familiar with the old books of the
ancients, as Macrobius points out in the sixth book of the Saturnalia,
in which he says: "We are ignorant of many things which should not be
hidden from us if we were accustomed to read the ancients ";[466] thus,
when we state that the Scots and the Picti exacted a tribute from the
Britons, if the reader disbelieves us, let him read Camden's chronicle,
and he will find therein these words: "The Britons were made to pay
tribute to the Scots in the year of the Lord 446";[467] or if we state
that the Picti were extinguished by the Scots when Cinneide son of
Ailpin was king of Alba 839 years after the birth of Christ, let him
read Camden's chronicle, and he will find there testimony to the same
event; or were we to assert that no foreign nation ever acquired full
supremacy over Ireland except the tribes that successively occupied it,
namely, Partholon, the clanna Neimidh, the Fir Bholg, and the Tuatha
De Danann, and the sons of Milidh, perhaps we should not be believed
unless the reader had seen what Gulielmus Nubrigensis has written,
treating of Ireland, in the twenty-sixth chapter of the second book of
his history, in which he says, "Ireland never submitted to a foreign
power."[468] Similarly, if I make statements here concerning Niall
Naoighiallach which the reader has not heard hitherto, let him know
that I have song or story to prove every statement I advance here.



LI.

We read in a life of Patrick, which we found written in an old vellum
book, together with the life of Mochuda and Abban, and other saints,
that Patrick was a Briton. These are the words of the old book:
"Patrick," it says, "a Briton, born in the town called Nemptor, in the
Plain of the Tabernacles, of pious and religious parents."[469] In the
same place it uses these words: "After the Scots from Ireland,
together with their king Niall Naoighiallach, had plundered many
territories in opposition to the Roman sovereignty, they severely
pillaged Britain -- the northern portion of it at first; and when they
had banished the old tribes from it, they themselves dwelt in
it."[470]

The same author says in the same place that it followed from this that
there were three kingdoms in Great Britain, namely, Scotia, Anglia,
and Britannia. The same author states that it was at this time, when
Niall Naoighiallach was on this expedition planting the Dal Riada in
Alba, an Irish fleet went to the place where Patrick dwelt. These are
the author's words: "An Irish fleet," he says, "went at this time to
the place where St. Patrick was, to pillage the country, and, as was
the custom with the Irish, they brought a large number of captives
with them, together with St. Patrick, then aged sixteen years, and his
two sisters, namely Lupida and Darerca; and St. Patrick was brought as
a captive to Ireland in the ninth year of the reign of Niall, king of
Ireland, who held strenuously the sovereignty of Ireland twenty-seven
years, and who pillaged Wales and Anglia to the sea that lies between
Anglia and France."[471] From the above words we may believe that
Niall Naoighiallach entered Great Britain, and that he made conquests
there.

I am also of opinion that it was while Niall was making conquests in
Great Britain that he sent a fleet to pillage the borders of France,
to the country which is called Armorica, which is now called Little
Britain, and that it was thence Patrick and his two sisters were
brought as captives. I am the more convinced of the truth of this from
the fact that Patrick's mother was sister to Martin, who was bishop of
Tours in France, and because I read in an old book, in which is the
life of Patrick in Irish, that it was from Armorica Patrick and his
two sisters were brought into captivity.

It is moreover likely that, since Niall was making conquests in Great
Britain at that time, it was from Britain he sent a fleet to the
borders of France, where Patrick and those who came with him into
captivity resided. And besides I read in the old books of the seanchus
that hostages were brought from France to Niall, and amongst these I
believe was Patrick.

Now as to Niall, having taken many captives from Britain, he arrived
in Ireland with a large host of Britons and of Irish; and he assembled
additional forces, and sent word to Alba, to the chief of Dal Riada,
requesting him to follow him with all his host to France.

Niall proceeded forthwith to France with a numerous host; and the
chief of Dal Riada with his host overtook him as he was plundering
France in the neighbourhood of the river Loor. And at that time the
king of Leinster, having been banished by Niall to Alba, was under the
protection of Gabhran son of Domhanghurt, chief of Dal Riada; and when
this Gabhran went after Niall to France, Eochaidh (the king of
Leinster) accompanied him. But Eochaidh did not dare to go into
Niall's presence; and when Niall had sat down on the brink of the
river, Eochaidh went to the other side of the river, into an oak grove
which was there, and got ready an arrow in his bow, and cast it at
Niall, and sent it through his body, so that he immediately expired.

The enmity between Eochaidh and Niall arose from Eochaidh's conspiring
to settle down in Tara as king in the room of Niall; and when he had
been nine days in Tara, a learned druid came into his presence and
said to him that it was not lawful for him to violate the geasa of
Tara; "for it is one of its geasa," said he, "that no king should
settle down in Tara with a view to assuming the sovereignty of Ireland
till he should first wear the nasc niadh round his neck." This was the
same as to say that he should have received the degree of Knight of
Chivalry. For as the Knight of Chivalry is called Miles Torquatus, so
also Nia Naisc is applied in Irish to the champion who wore a nasc or
chain round his neck. For nia means 'champion' or 'valiant man,' and
nasc means 'a chain.'

As to Eochaidh, when he heard the druid's instruction, he quitted Tara
and relinquished the sovereignty. Niall came after that and settled
down in Tara, and assumed the sovereignty of Ireland; and he banished
Eochaidh to Alba after he had met him in several engagements; and it
was for this reason that Eochaidh slew Niall, as we stated above.
Another cause of enmity between them was that when Eochaidh was going
from Tara to Leinster, he went into the house of Laidcheann son of
Bairrchidh, Niall's druid; and while he was there, the druid's son
used defamatory language towards him, and on that account Eochaidh
slew him.

Now, the druid made a complaint of this to Niall, and asked him to
come and avenge the death of his son on the men of Leinster; and
incited by the druid, Niall went into Leinster with a strong and
imposing host to waste Leinster. And when they reached Leinster, the
druid would not consent to Niall's accepting gifts or cattle from the
Leinstermen until they had delivered the person of Eochaidh into the
hands of Niall. And, to prevent the spoiling of Leinster, Eochaidh put
himself in the power of Niall; and the druid ordered him to be tied to
a pillar-stone which is to be seen to the west of the Slaine, between
Cill Brighde and Tulach O Feidhlimidh; and that stone is in a standing
position; it is high and broad, and perforated near the very top; and
Eochaidh was obliged to stand with his back against the stone and an
iron chain round his waist, with both ends of the chain passing
through a hole that was in the pillar, and a stout iron spindle-bolt
stuck through the two loops at the ends of the chain; and when the
druid observed him in this position, he got ready nine warriors to put
him to death.

When Eochaidh perceived the warriors approach, with intent to slay him,
he stoutly shook himself in champion fashion, and forthwith strained
the chain and broke the bolt, and escaped from the warriors with
difficulty, after he had slain some of them; and no account is given
of his proceedings till he reached Alba, under the protection of
Gabhran son of Domhanghart, as we have said. And this was the second
reason why he was at enmity with Niall.



LII.

Now, when Eochaidh was thus an exile in Alba, some say that the wife
of Gabhran, who was called Ingheanach, and the wife of Eochaidh
Feidhlim, daughter of Cobhthach son of Dathi, were both pregnant at
the same time, and were brought to bed on the same night. The two
women were shut up in the same house, no one being with them, but both
being together, while there was a guard placed on the outside by
Gabhran. As to these women, Gabhran's wife gave birth to a daughter,
and the wife of Eochaidh to twin sons. Now, Gabhran's wife never
brought forth any children but daughters; and as the wife of Eochaidh
had brought forth twin sons, she asked her to give her one of them,
and Eochaidh's wife consented to this. When the household, who were on
guard, perceived that the women had been delivered, they asked the
queen what offspring she had given birth to; she said that she had
given birth to a son and daughter, and that the wife of Eochaidh had
given birth to a son. All were delighted at this; and this son which
the queen got from Eochaidh's wife had a name given him, and he was
called Aodhan son of Gabhran; and Eochaidh's second son was called
Brandubh son of Eochaidh. And after this, Eochaidh and his son came to
Ireland, and he himself assumed the sovereignty of Leinster.

And a long time after this, Gabhran, chief of Dal Riada, who was king
of Alba, died; and Aodhan assumed the sovereignty of Alba after him,
and came to spoil and plunder Ireland, and endeavoured to conquer it,
as he was of the posterity of Cairbre Rioghfhada. A large company of
the men of Anglia, Alba, and Wales came with him; and when they landed
in Ireland, they set to plunder Leinster in the first instance.
Brandubh son of Eochaidh at that time held the sovereignty of
Leinster; and Aodhan sent envoys demanding hostages from him as
securities for his paying tribute to him, saying that otherwise he
would waste the whole territory of Leinster. While Brandubh was in
trouble at this message, his mother told him to take courage, and that
she would avert the attack of Aodhan from him. Upon this the mother
went to the camp of Aodhan; and when she had reached it, she inquired
of Aodhan why he had come to waste Leinster. "Thou hag," said he, "I
am not obliged to give thee any information on that matter." "If I be
a hag," said she, "thy mother is a hag; and I have something to say to
thee in secret." Thereupon he went with her apart. "Aodhan," said she,
"I told thee that thy mother was a hag; and I tell thee now that I am
she, and that accordingly Brandubh is thy brother. Therefore, send to
Alba for thy supposed mother, and she will confess, in my presence,
that I am thy mother; and until we meet, do thou refrain from spoiling
Leinster."

He acted as the woman directed; and when the women came together, the
queen of Alba admitted that it was Brandubh's mother who gave birth to
Aodhan; and when he heard this, he bound the women to keep the matter 
a close secret lest he should lose the sovereignty of Alba at the
hands of the Dal Riada should they become aware of the affair.
Thereupon, he sent for Brandubh; and they both formed a friendly
alliance; and Aodhan left the country without inflicting injury on it.
However, the Brandubh who was king of Leinster was not a son of this
Eochaidh son of Eanna Cinnsealach, as will clearly appear in the
second book of this history.

As to Niall, of whom we are treating, numerous are his descendants in
Ireland sprung from his eight sons. But we shall not enumerate them
here, because we intend to speak of them at length in the genealogy of
the sons of Milidh. Now this king is called Niall Naoighiallach, from
his having received nine hostages or nine captives, five of them from
the provinces of Ireland, and four from Alba; and it was on this
subject that the poet composed the following stanzas:

Son of the noble Eochaidh of honour
Was Niall, modest in each high distinction;
He held the sovereignty of successions
In Erin and in Alba.

He got a hostage from each province
In Erin through high valour;
He brought under his sway, without blemish,
Four hostages from Alba.

Hence he was called
In the mansions of the great,
Through the gold of the prosperous kings,
Niall of the nine hostages, the heroic.

Dathi son of Fiachraidh, son of Eochaidh Muighmheadhon, son of
Muireadhach Tireach, son of Fiachraidh Sraibhthine, son of Cairbre
Lithfeachair, son of Cormac, son of Art Aoinfhear, son of Conn
Ceadchathach of the race of Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of Ireland
twenty-three years. Fial daughter of Eochaidh, from whom is named
Cruachan Feile, was his first wife. His second wife was Eithne
daughter of Orach and mother of Oilill Molt. His third wife, Ruadh
daughter of Airteach Uichtleathan son of Fear Congha, was mother of
Fiachraidh Ealgach; and she died in bringing him forth. Fearadhach was
his proper name at first; and he was called Dathi, for dathi means
'quick'; and it was because of the quickness with which he put on his
armour that he was called Dathi. And the manner in which Dathi was
slain was this: a flash of lightning descended from heaven on his
crown when he was engaged in conquering France; and it was near the
Alp mountains he was slain by the vengeance of God, since he had
pillaged the penitentiary of a holy hermit called Parmenius who cursed
him. And when he was slain in this manner, his friends brought his
body to Ireland and buried it in Roilig na Riogh at Cruachain.

END OF THE FIRST BOOK.



BOOK II.
I.
Of the kings of Ireland and of their history after the Faith and of
its annals to the coming of the Normans hither, and to their acquiring
supremacy over the country, as follows:

SANDERUS says in the first book on the English Schism that the Gaels,
immediately on their accepting the Faith, put themselves and all they
had under the power and government of the Bishop of Rome; and that
they had no other chief prince over them but the Bishop of Rome until
the Normans gained the supremacy of Ireland. These are the author's
words: "The Irish," says he, "immediately on their accepting the Faith,
put themselves and all they had under the obedience and government of
the Bishop of Rome, and they did not acknowledge any other chief
prince over Ireland but the Bishop of Rome until that time,"[472] that
is, until the Norman Invasion. But this statement of Sanderus is not
true, as is plain from the Psalter of Cashel, where it speaks of Irial
Faidh, son of Eireamhon, and where it gives the number of the kings of
the race of Eireamhon who ruled Ireland before Patrick planted the
Faith in Ireland and afterwards. "Irial Faidh ruled the kingdom of
Ireland ten years, and before the rule of Christ was planted by
Patrick in Ireland fifty-seven kings of the stock of that king held
the sovereignty of Ireland; and moreover, there were fifty kings of
the descendants of the same man ruling the kingdom of Ireland after
Patrick."[473] And this is plain from the ancient annals of Ireland
and from the Reim Rioghruidhe.

Thus does the Polycronicon treat of the same matter where it says;
"From the coming of Patrick to the time of king Feidhlimidh (i.e.,
king of Munster), there were thirty-three kings on the throne of
Ireland in the space of four hundred years. And in the time of
Feidhlimidh the Fionnlochlonnaigh, who are called Norwegians, together
with their leader Turgesius, came to Ireland."[474] From this it is to
be inferred that there were kings over Ireland of the Gaelic race
after the time of Patrick. And the same author uses these very words
in the same place, "From the time of Turgesius to the last king
Ruaidhri, king of Connaught, there were seventeen kings over
Ireland."[475]

From all these facts it is plain that it is not true to say that there
was no king over Ireland from the time of Patrick to the Norman
Invasion. And with this agrees what we read in the thirty-sixth
epistle written by St. Anselmus, archbishop of Canterbury, in which he
writes to Muircheartach O'Briain, king of Ireland, as we read in
Doctor Ussher in the gleaning he has made of the letters written to
one another by the holy clerics of Ireland and of England, and
according to the same author, where Anselmus writes to the same
Muircheartach in the year of the Lord 1100, where he says, "Anselmus,
servant of the Church of Canterbury, to the glorious Muircheartach by
the grace of God king of Ireland";[476] and as Lanfrancus, archbishop
of Canterbury, writes to Toirrdhealbhach O Briain, king of Ireland, in
the year of the Lord 1074, according to Doctor Ussher in the passage
we have quoted: "Lanfrancus a sinner and unworthy archbishop of the
holy Church of Dorobernia, benediction with service and prayers to
Toirrdhealbhach, king of Ireland."[477]

The truth of the same position is strengthened by what we read in the
forty-first letter in the same book, where Henry the First of England
writes to Radulphus, archbishop of Canterbury, asking him to give
orders to a priest called Gregorius and consecrate him bishop in
Dublin by the direction of the king of Ireland. Here are the words of
the English king in the year of the Lord 1123: "The king of Ireland in
writing, and the burgesses of Dublin have made known to me that they
have elected this Gregorius bishop, and have sent him to thee to be
consecrated. Therefore, I command thee to grant their petition and to
perform his consecration without delay."[478]

From all we have said it is plain that it is not true to say that
there was neither king nor chief ruler over Ireland until the Norman
Invasion; and it is moreover plain that the Roman Pontiff had never
definite authority over Ireland any more than he had over Spain or
France or other countries until the time of Donnchadh, son of Brian
Boraimhe, who went to Rome about seventy-seven years before the
Normans came to Ireland. But when Donnchadh, son of Brian, went to
Rome, as we have said above, himself and the nobles of Ireland
consented to the Bishop of Rome's having authority over them, because
they were wont to contend with one another for the mastery of Ireland.
For, although authors generally write that the Emperor Constantine,
after his baptism, bestowed the islands of western Europe on Pope
Sylvester, that did not give the Pope possession of Ireland, since no
emperor that was ever in Rome, nor Constantine, had possession of
Ireland. How, then, could there be any force in the right which the
emperor might give to the Pope, to what was neither in his own
possession nor in that of any emperor that succeeded him since? And
hence, it is not to be supposed that so large a kingdom as Ireland --
Doctor Sanderus notwithstanding -- would have no high chief or high
king over it from the time of Patrick to the Norman Invasion, but the
Pope alone.

Before we speak of the kings of Ireland after the Faith, we shall set
down here from the seanchus the manner in which kings were inaugurated
in Ireland, and for what object they were inaugurated, including high
kings and provincial kings and territorial high chiefs. Know that
formerly in Ireland the only title the territorial chiefs had was that
of king, as was the custom among the Jewish nation (except that the
Jewish nation had dukes), and amongst many other nations; thus the Dal
Riada in Scotland had a leader, taoiseach, until Fearghus Mor, son of
Earc, was made king over them.

Now, the reason why one person is made king over tribes and over
districts is in order that each one in his own principality should be
obedient to him, and that none of them should have power to resist or
oppose him during his sovereignty, and to have it understood that it
was by God who is Lord and ruler over all that he has been appointed
king over the peoples to govern them, and hence that they are bound to
obey him and to bear in mind that it is the same only God who is Lord
of heaven and of earth and of hell that gave him that authority, and
that it was from Him he obtained sovereignty; and frequently it was
the cleverest and most learned people in Ireland who were chosen to
reign, to repress evil, to adjust tribute, to make treaties of peace,
such as Slainghe, son of Deala, son of Loch, who was chief judge in
Ireland in his time, Ollamh Fodla, who was learned, and Tighearnmhus,
his son, who was likewise well-informed, and Cormac, son of Art, who
was learned in the Breitheamhnas Tuaithe and who wrote the Instruction
for Kings; and thus in the beginning of the ages it was the learned
and those who were most zealous for the aggrandisement of the public
weal that the men of Ireland elected to rule the districts until
Patrick came with the power of the Church. And since the coming of
Patrick, it was the bishops and the nobles and the chroniclers who
elected the kings and lords until the Norman Invasion; and the titles
that are in use now, as baron, viscount, earl, marquess, or duke, were
not in vogue in Ireland, but triath (chief), tighearna (lord), flaith
(prince) or ri (king), and they were surnamed from the districts they
possessed.

Now, on the occasion of their being inaugurated, the chronicler came
forward bearing the book called the Instruction for Kings, in which
there was a brief summary of the customs and laws of the country, and
where it was explained how God and the people would reward the doing
of good, and the punishment that awaited the king and his descendants
if he did not carry out the principles of justice and equity which the
Book of Kings and the Instruction for Kings direct to put in practice.

Often also some of them had to give sureties from amongst their
friends for the carrying out of the laws of the country in accordance
with the Instruction for Kings, or else to forego the sovereignty
without a struggle, as the Tuatha De Danann might take sureties from
Breas, son of Ealathan, on the occasion of giving him the sovereignty 
of Ireland.

It was the chronicler's function to place a wand in the hand of each
lord on his inauguration; and on presenting the wand he made it known
to the populace that the lord or king need not take up arms
thenceforth to keep his country in subjection, but that they should
obey his wand as a scholar obeys his master. For, as the wise scholar
loves and obeys and is grateful to his master, in the same way
subjects are bound to their kings, for it is with the wand of equity
and justice he directs his subjects, and not with the edge of the
weapon of injustice.

The wand which the ollamh places in the king's hand is altogether
white, as a token of truth as symbolised by the whiteness of the rod,
since whiteness is likened to truth, and blackness to falsehood.

The reason why the wand is straight is to signify to the people and
the tribes that the king is bound to be straight and faultless,
without bias in his words and judgments between friends and enemies,
between the strong and the weak, as if there were a contention between
both his hands.

The reason it is ordained that the wand be without knot or excrescence,
but be altogether smooth, is to signify to the people that the lords
are bound to be free from unevenness or roughness in dealing justice
and equity to all, to friend and enemy, according to their deserts,
etc.

It was at Tara on Leic na Riogh that every one of the kings of Ireland
who possessed the kingdom of all Ireland, by the consent of the
ollamhs and of the nobles, used to be inaugurated before the Faith,
and by the consent of the Church and of the ollamhs ever since the
Faith.

It was at Tulach Og that O Neill was inaugurated, and it was O Cathain
and O Hagain who inaugurated him; O Donnghaile was his marshal of the
hosts and muinntir Bhrislein and clann Biorthagra were the brehons of
feineachas of all Ulster.

At Cill Mic Creannain O Domhnaill was inaugurated, and it was O
Fiorghail who inaugurated him, and O Gallchubhair was his marshal of
the hosts.

At Magh Adhar O Briain was inaugurated; it was Mac na Mara who
inaugurated him. O Duibhidhir of Coil na Manach and Mag Cormain were
his marshals of the hosts; muinntear Flannchuidhe were his brehons of
feineachas; clann Chraith his ollamhs in poetry; clann Chruitin or
clann Bhruaideadha his ollamhs in seanchus.
On Lios Beannchair Mac Carrtaigh was inaugurated. It was O
Suilleabhain Mor and O Donnchada Mor who inaugurated him. Muinntear
Ruairc were his marshals of the host; claim Aodhagain were his
brehons; muinntear Dhalaigh were his ollamhs in poetry, and muinntear
Dhuinnin were his ollamhs in seanchus.

On Cnoc an Bhogha Mac Murchadha was inaugurated; and it was O Nuallain
who inaugurated him; his steed and trappings for O Nuallain. O
Deoradhain was his brehon and Mac Eochadha his ollamh in poetry.

On Leac Mic Eochadha the lord of Ui Cinnsealaigh was inaugurated, and
it was Mac Eochadha who inaugurated him.

On Dun Caillighe Beirre O Brain was inaugurated, and it was Mac
Eochadha who inaugurated him.



II.
On the kings of Ireland after the Faith as follows:

Laoghaire, son of Niall Naoighiallach, son of Eochaidh Muighmheadhon,
son of Muireadhach Tireach, son of Fiacraidh Sraibhthine, of the race
of Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of Ireland thirty years; and his
mother was Rioghnach; and it was in the fourth year of his reign that
Pope Coelestinus sent Patrick to Ireland to plant the Faith, in the
year of the Lord 431; and Patrick was sixty-one years of age then. For
when he was taken into captivity in the ninth year of the reign of
Niall his age was sixteen years, and he lived the remaining eighteen
years of the reign of Niall, so that he was thirty-four years at the
close of that reign. Add to this the twenty-three years Dathi hel the
kingdom of Ireland, and it leaves Patrick fifty-seven years when Dathi
was slain. Add four years of Laoghaire's reign to this, and it gives
sixty-one years as Patrick's age on his coming to Ireland. And this is
rendered the more probable, as we read in the book called the Roman
martyrology that Patrick's age was six score and two years at his
death. But before Patrick, Coelestinus sent paladius as bishop to
plant the faith in Ireland in the year of the Lord 430, according to
beda in the annals of the History of Sacsa. Thus does he speak: "In
the year of the Lord 430 Pope Coelestinus sent Paladius as first
bishop to the Scots who believe in Christ"[479]. And that was the
third year of the reign of Laoghaire and the year before Patrick came
to Ireland. And when he reached Ireland with twelve clerics he landed
in the lower part of Leinster at Innbhear Deaghaidh, and blessed three
churches there, to wit, Ceall Fine, where he left his books and a
portion of the relics of Paul and Peter; the second church, the House
of the Romans, and the third church, Domhnach Arda. And when he had
blessed these churches, Nathi, son of Garrchon, lord of that country,
banished him form that district, and he went to Alba and died there.

As to Patrick, he came to Ireland a year after Paladius, with trwenty-
four holy clerics, or, according to Henricus Antisioderensis in the
life of St. Germanus, as we read in the 168th chapter, Patrick brought
thirty bishops with him to Ireland. Here are the author's words:
"Blessed Patrick," says he, "having come a long journey and from a
distant country, first gladdened his own people by his presence, and
having got together thirty bishops, whom he himself had consecrated
beyond the seas, he sent them into the Lord's harvest, for the harvest
was great and the labourers few."[480] From this it is to be inferred
that a number of prelates came with Patrick to Ireland to plant the
Faith.

Moreover, we read in the seanchus that when Patrick was coming to
Ireland he brought hither with him as many as he could find of the
Scotic race who had received the light of the Faith; and learning and
faith and law were maintained in Ireland for four hundred years after
the coming of Patrick until the coming hither of the Lochlonnaigh.
Besides, silver was struck at Ard Macha and at Cashel at that time.
Henricus above says in the 174th chapter that Patrick made an
apportionment of Ireland, as to land, people and cattle, and that he
set aside a tithe of these for the Church, to wit, a tithe of the
people, the land, and the cattle, and made monks of the men and nuns
of the women, and built monasteries for them. Thus does the same
author speak referring to these people who formed the tithe: "He made
monks of all the men and nuns of tht women, and he built many
monasteries and he set apart a tithe of the land and a tithe of the
cattle for their maintenance."[481]

The same author also says that as a result of the regulation laid dowr
by Patrick, there was not a nook or corner or desert in Ireland that
was not full of pious persons and of saints, so that it came to pass
that the name by which Ireland was distinguished among the nations in
general was the Island of Saints. Nennius, a British author, in the
History of Britain, speaking of Patrick, uses these words: "He built,"
says he, "355 churches, he consecrated the same number, 355, of
bishops, and he ordained priests to the number of three
thousand."[482] Thus does the seanchus agree with Nennius as to the
number of bishops consecrated by Patrick:
Five and fifty learned bishops
Did the holy man consecrate,
With three hundred young clerics
On whom he conferred orders. [483]

Should anyone be surprised at there being so many bishops together in
Ireland in the time of Patrick, let him read what St. Bernard says in
the life of Malachias of the custom of Ireland regarding her bishops.
Thus does he speak: "Bishops are changed and multiplied at the will of
the archbishop, so that a single diocese is not content with a single
bishop, but they have almost a bishop for each church."[484] From
these words of St. Bernard it is to be inferred that it is not strange
that so great a number of bishops as we have mentioned should be in
Ireland in the time of Patrick, as the Church was then flourishing.
The number of bishops we have above mentioned is the less to be
wondered at, since we read in old books that there was a bishop in
Ireland for every deanery in the country.

Moreover, it is certain from the Irish annals that Patrick made two
archbishops in Ireland, to wit, the archbishop of Ard Macha the
primate of Ireland, and the archbishop of Cashel; the primate of Ard
Macha being over all Ireland and especially over Leath Cuinn, and the
archbishop of Cashel directly over Leath Mogha, while the primate had
higher authority over him. And the reason of that arrangement was that
the supreme sovereignty of Ireland was in the possession of the race
of Eireamhon, being in the possession of Laoghaire, son of Niall; and
Eoghan and Conall and the other nobles of that race, who were baptized
by Patrick, insisted that the principal church in the kingdom should
be in their own half of Ireland, to wit, in Leath Cuinn, and that it
should have authority over the churches of Ireland after the manner of
the supreme sovereignty which was then in their possession. As to the
race of Eibhear, they were permitted by Patrick to found the second
principal church in Leath Mogha, namely, in Cashel, because to them
belonged Leath Mogha under the king of Ireland from the time of Conn
up to then. This should with the greater reason be believed from the
fact that the archbishop of Cashel is called not only archbishop of
Munster, but also archbishop of all Leath Mogha in the old books of
chronicles and annals of Ireland.

But as regards another statement made by some writers of the present
time that Imleach Iobhair was the seat of an archbishop, it is to be
understood in this way: the archbishop and the clergy of Cashel were
for a time banished from Cashel in these days, through the oppression
of the Lochlonnaigh, when Maoilseachlainn, son of Maolruanaidh, was
king of Meath, and Niall Caille king of Ireland, and Olchobhar king of
Munster, and while Turgesius the Lochlonnach tyrant was harassing
Ireland. For the expulsion of Forannan, primate of Ireland, from Ard
Macha by Turgesius, so that he was forced into banishment in Munster,
was not a more likely event than that the archbishop of Cashel and his
clergy should be driven from Cashel by the Lochlonnaigh, and should
betake themselves for refuge to Imleach Iobhair, where there were then
woods and bogs and morasses. And there did they spend some of their
time while they were subject to the persecution of the Lochlonnaigh.

We find in the annals of Ireland only mention of two archbishops being
in Ireland, to wit, the archbishop of Ard Macha and the archbishop of
Cashel, down to the time when Cardinal Johannes Papiron came to
Ireland together with Giolla Criost O Conairce, bishop of Lios Mor,
then the Papal legate in Ireland, in the year of the Lord 1152. For in
that year they convened a National Council at Ceanannus na Midhe, in
which an archbishop was consecrated for Ath Cliath and an archbishop
for Tuam, and where each of the archbishops received a pallium, as we
shall hereafter set down from the ancient annals of Ireland which were
written at Cluain Eidhneach.



III.

While Patrick was planting the Faith in Ireland in the time of
Laoghaire, Aonghus, son of Natfraoch was king of Munster, and when
Patrick proceeded to Munster to preach, this Aonghus, son of Natfraoch,
came to Magh Feimhean in the northern Deise to welcome him, and
conducted him to the royal residence of Cashel in Eoghanacht, which is
now called Middlethird, and there Aonghus accepted faith and baptism
from him. Thus speaks an old Life of Patrick which we quoted above in
treating of Niall: "As he was going into Munster, Aonghus, son of
Natfraoch, king of Munster, came to meet him to Magh Feimhean in the
country of the Deise, and joyfully conducted him to the royal seat
which is called Cashel in the district of Eoghanacht, and there king
Aonghus believed and was baptized."[485] And in the same passage it is
stated that it was through the foot of Aonghus that St. Patrick drove
the point of his crozier. Here is what we read therein: "As St.
Patrick was standing and giving a blessing to the king, he drove the
point of his blessed crozier into the king's foot."[486] From this it
is to be inferred that it was through the foot of Aonghus, son of
Natfraoch, king of Munster, that Patrick drove the point of his
crozier, and not through the foot of Eoghan, son of Niall, king of
Ulster. Even a learned seancha of Leath Guinn, to wit, Torna, son of
Muiris O Maolconaire, agrees with the above in a poem beginning, "The
bishops' blessing on the race of Eibhear." Thus does he speak:

Through the foot of Aonghus, great the discomfort,
Went the point of Patrick's crozier;
So that the floor was covered with his blood,
The deed is no whispered gossip.

This Aonghus had twenty-four sons and twenty-four daughters, and of
these he gave twelve sons and twelve daughters to the Church. It was
this Aonghus also who imposed Patrick's capitation screaball, that is,
three pence for each person who should receive baptism in Munster, and
this tax was paid in the following manner, to wit, five hundred cows,
five hundred balls of iron, five hundred mantles, five hundred inner
garments and five hundred sheep to be given every third year to the
comhorba of Patrick as rent from the kings of Munster. And this rent
was paid up to the time of Cormac, son of Cuileannan. Moreover, we
read in the Red Book of Mac Aodhagain that Aonghus, son of Natfraoch,
used to keep in constant attendance on himself two bishops and ten
priests and seventy-two young clerics for the purpose of saying Masses
and of Divine psayer.

When Patrick was planting the Faith in Ireland in the time of
Laoghaire, Brian, son of Eochaidh Muighmeadhon, had twenty-four sons,
who were contemporaries of Laoghaire, son of Niall; and as Patrick was
blessing Ireland he went into Connaught and went to meet the son
amongst them who was their leader, whose name was Eichen. When this
man saw Patrick coming into his presence he mounted his horse and
proceeded to lash it, and directed his brothers to do likewise and not
to show reverence to the cleric; and they acted accordingly, except
the youngest son, whose name was Duach Galach. This man kept on foot,
and advanced to meet Patrick and bade him welcome and paid him homage
and respect. Upon this Patrick went forward and came into the presence
of Eichen, who was their leader, and asked him if he were not Eichen.
"I am not," said Eichen. "If thou beest, "replied Patrick, "I deprive
of success and of sovereignty both thee and as many of they brothers
as are with thee, except the one youth who paid me reverence and
honour for my Lord's sake." And that youth said if he were king over
them he would do Patrick's bidding. "Then," said Patrick, "I bless
thee, and thou shalt be king, and thy seed shall have the kingdom
after thee." And Patrick's prophecy came true, for Patrick with twelve
bishops attended at the inauguration of Duach Galach as king, and it
was the custom with the kings of Connaught ever since to have the
comhorbas of these twelve bishops and twelve chiefs of the race of
Muireadhach and Ui Maolconaire at their inauguration on the hill
called Cam Fraoich.

There were 431 years from the birth of Christ to the coming of Patrick
to Ireland in the fourth year of the reign Laoghaire, son of Niall, as
we have said; and he was sixty-one years in Ireland up to his death,
and if this number be added to the previous number, we get four
hundred and ninety-two years; and in testimony of this the seanacha
composed this stanza:

Since Christ was born, pleasant reckoning,
Four hundred and ninety also
And two full years added thereto
Till the death of Patrick our chief Apostle.

We read in the life of Patrick that he passed sixty-one years in
Ireland after he had come hither as bishop, planting and preaching the
gospel and working wonders and miracles, as we read in a Life of
Patrick by a certain author. Thus does he speak:

Three score years and one
Few there are to whom it is not a mystery,
In Ireland with many prodigies
Did Patrick continue to preach.

And should anyone say that this stanza is not in the Life of Patrick,
let him know that we have read in an ancient historical record that
there were sixty-four Lives of Patrick written, each of them being
distinct from the others. And it is likely that each writer wrote
something new about Patrick which none of the others had written.
Hence, one who has read the life of Patrick by one author, must not
deem it strange if he happen on a story or miracle of Patrick in
another book which he did not find in that life.

It was in Laoghaire's time that Dubhthach Ua Lughair and Fearghus File
and Ros son of Trichim, brought the Seanchus of Ireland to Patrick to
be approved and purified by him. And from this it arose that Laoghaire
was empowered to call a general assembly in which the kings, clerics,
and ollamhs of Ireland should meet for the purpose of purifying the
Seanchus. And when they had all come together nine were chosen from
among them to purify the Seanchus, to wit, three kings, three bishops,
and three ollamhs in seanchus. The three kings were Laoghaire, son of
Niall, king of Ireland, Daire, king of Ulster, and Corc, son of
Lughaidh, king of Munster. The three bishops were Patrick, Beinen and
Cairneach. The three ollamhs in seanchus were Dubhthach, Fearghus and
Ros. And these nine men purified and arranged and established the
Seanchus, and it was this that was called the Seanchus Mor. The poem
which begins "Aimhirgin Gluingheal "confirms this account. Here follow
the stanzas from the poem that bear out this account:

The authors of the Seanchus Mor
Were nine who set it in order rightly,
Naoimhfhios is its fair noble name,
By reason of the sacred learning of that nine.

Patrick, Beinen, noble Carineach,
Laoghaire, son of Niall the strong,
Fearghus File, laughter pure,
And Daire king of Ulster.

And the king of Munster without stain,
Corc, son of Lughaidh of the red hand,
Dubhthach Ua Lughair of the lake,
The professor of language, Ros son of Trichim.

Nine sages, of wise aspect,
By whom the Seanchus was set in order
After they had examined it with excellent skill
Through every generation from Aimhirgin.



IV.

Now when the Seanchus had been purified in this way the nobles of
Ireland decreed that the charge of it should be entrusted to the
prelates of Ireland, and these prelates ordered that it should be
copied in their own chief churches. And some of the old books are
still extant, or the copies made from them, such as the Book of Ard
Macha, the Psalter of Cashel, the Book of Gleann da Loch, the Book of
Ui Congmhala, the Book of Cluain Mic Nois, the Book of Fiontan of
Cluain Eidhneach, the Yellow Book of Moling and the Black Book of
Molaga, and the rest of the chief books of Ireland where the Seanchus
was preserved without doing injustice to any one Irish noble as
against another.

Moreover, there was a summary of the records in all these books in the
Psalter of Tara, and they used to be approved every third year at the
Feis of Tara, as we have said above in treating of the reign of Cormac.
But in the pagan period the following were the chief authors of the
Seanchus from age to age, to wit, Aimhirgin Gluingheal, Sean son of
Aighe, Bridhe an authoress, from whom is the expression Briathra
Bridhe (the sayings of Bridhe), Connla Caoinbhriathrach a Connaught
sage, Seancha son of Cuil Claon, Fachtna his son, Seancha son of
Oilill, Morann son of Maon, Fearghus Fiannaithe from the country of
Ciarraidhe Luachra, Feircheirtne File, Neidhe son of Adhna, Aithirne,
Amhnas, Fearghus File son of Aithirne, Neara son of Fionncholl from
Siodha, Seadhamus son of Morann, Fearadach Fionn Feachtnach chief
author for skill in Ireland, Fitheal, Fearghus File, Ros son of
Trichim, and Dubhthach son of Ua Lughair, and it was this last trio
who brought the Seanchus to Patrick to be approved and purified.

Now in Pagan times in Ireland no professor of seanchus could rank as
an ollamh or author in seanchus who had been known once to falsify
historical truth. Moreover, no one could hold the rank of breitheamh
who had given a partial judgment; and besides some of them were bound
by geasa in the Pagan times. First, when Sean, son of Aighe, delivered
a partial judgment, blisters grew on his right cheek, and when he
delivered a just judgment they did not grow.

Connla Caoinbhriathrach never delivered an unjust judgment, for he was
a virtuous truly upright man according to the light of nature; Seancha
son of Cul Claon never gave judgment without having fasted the night
before. When Fachtna, his son, delivered an unjust judgment, if it was
in the autumn he delivered it, the fruit fell to the ground that night
in the country in which he was. But when he delivered a just judgment,
the fruit remained in full on the trees; or if in the spring he
delivered an unjust judgment, the cattle forsook their young in that
country. Morann son of Maon gave no judgment without having the Morann
collar round his neck, and when he gave an unjust judgment the collar
grew tight round his neck, and when he gave a just judgment the collar
stretched out over his shoulders, as we have said above. And so it was
with several Pagan authors, they were subject to geasa, preventing
them from partiality in history or judgment. From what we have said,
the Irish records are to be believed like the records of any other
country, seeing that they are borne witness to by the writings of old
Pagan authors and by their having been approved by the holy clerics
and prelates of the Irish Church.

Laoghaire, son of Niall, convened the Feis of Tara to renew the
customs and the laws of Ireland, as the kings who went before him were
wont to do at that Feis. Now when the nobles and the ollamhs of
Ireland came together in that assembly the high king of Ireland and
his party had a separate chief residence, to wit, the Teach
Miodhchuarta. Each provincial king in Ireland had also a chief
residence, to wit, the king of Munster had the Long Mhuimhneach; now
long means house, as the poet says:

Not more inhospitable is Donn Cuan
With a bad house for his people than with a full house;

and hence a village where people dwell is called a longphort, that is,
the port or embankment of the houses; and the king of Leinster had the
Long Laighneach, and the king of Connaught the Coisir Chonnachtach,
and the king of Ulster the Eachrais Uladh. There were besides three
other residences at Tara at that time, to wit, Carcair na nGiall,
where the hostages or captives of the king were kept. The second was
called Realta na bhFileadh, where the brehons and bards of Ireland
assembled to fix a tax on those who violated the laws and customs of
the country. The third house was called Grianan na nInghean, where the
provincial queens dwelt, each of these queens with her female
attendants having a separate place in the dwelling. But when the
entire assembly sat for the purpose of determining and completing the
laws and customs of the country, the great Teach Miodhchuarta was
their hall of public debate.

Now they were arranged in that hall in this manner. First the king of
Ireland himself sat in his royal chair in the very middle of the hall
facing westwards, with the king of Munster to the south of him, for
the ends of the house looked east and west, the king of Lenister
opposite to him, and the king of Connaught behind him, and the ollamhs
of Ireland behind the king of Connaught, and the king of Ulster to the
north of him at his right hand, while each king had a party of real
nobles of his own province beside him. Here is a pithy account by the
seancha of these rules of precedence observed in the hall of Tara:

The Munstermen on the south side,
Without falsehood, without injustice;
And the Leinstermen, sufficient in strength,
Face to face with the high king.

The Connaughtmen behind the king,
To preserve history truly;
The under king of Aruidhe near him
In a special high seat,

On the right of the king of mighty Tara,
Without falsehood, without churlishness,
The Oirghialla, a defence were they,
Without overlapping, without strife.

It was against Laoghaire that the Leinstermen and Criomhthann, son of
Eanna, fought the Battle of Ath Dara, wherein Laoghaire was made
prisoner by them, and he gave the sun and moon and stars as sureties
that he would fulfil his promise not to exact the Boraimhe from them;
but he did not fulfil this promise in their regard. However, to avenge
this falsehood Laoghaire was soon afterwards killed by a lightning
flash at Greallach Dabhaill beside the Lithfe, as the poet says:

Laoghaire, son of Niall, died
Beside Lithfe, green its land,
The elements of God whose guarantee he had violated
Inflicted the fate of death on the king.[487]

Anghus, daughter of Tasach, king of Ui Liathain, was Laoghaire's wife
and the mother of Lughaidh, son of Laoghaire, and, unlike Laoghaire,
she received the faith from Patrick. Now, on a certain day when
Patrick went to visit the queen she bade himself and his company of
clerics welcome, and ordered food to be prepared for them; and
Lughaidh, son of Laoghaire, her son and heir, set to eating the meal
with them greedily, and a portion stuck in his throat which choked him,
and he died on the spot. The queen gave a start, and committed the
youth to Patrick's protection. Patrick went into an unoccupied house
and ordered the child's body to be brought to him, and prayed to God
with fervour, and continued thus in constant prayer without food or
sleep for three days, and at the close of the third day Michael the
Archangel, in the form of a dove, appeared before him in the house in
which he was, and he greeted Patrick and said it was God's will that
the child be brought back to life through Patrick's intercession. Upon
this, as the child lay on his back with his mouth open, the Archangel,
who was in the form of a dove, went and put his bill into the child's
throat and took out the morsel, and thereupon life came to him at once.
And immediately on this the angel became invisible to them, and the
child Lughaidh arose. And when the queen heard that the child was
alive, she came joyfully to meet Patrick and cast herself on her knees
before him, and proceeded to thank him for bringing her son back to
life. "O princess," answered he, "it is not I whom thou shouldst thank
for thy son, but Michael the Archangel, by whom he was brought back to
life." And he told her the story in substance as we have given it.
When the queen heard that it was Michael the Archangel who brought
back her son to life, she bound herself to give a sheep out of every
flock she possessed each year and a portion of every meal she should
take during her life to the poor of God in honour of Michael the
Archangel; and, moreover, she enjoined this as a custom throughout
Ireland on all who received baptism and the Faith from Patrick, whence
is the custom of the Michaelmas sheep and the Michael's portion in
Ireland ever since.

Oilill Molt, son of Dathi, son of Fiachraidh, son of Eochaidh
Muighmheadhon, of the race of Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of
Ireland twenty years. Uichtdhealbh, daughter of Aonghus, son of
Natfraoch, was the wife of Oilill Molt, and he was called Oilill Molt
because of a craving for wether's flesh that his mother Eithne,
daughter of Oraidh, felt when she was pregnant with Oilill; and a lady
who was with her named Fial, daughter of Eochaidh Seideadh, called him
by the name of Oilill Molt after he was born. It was in the reign of
Oilill that Amhalghuidh, son of Fiachraidh, son of Eochaidh
Muighmheadhon, who was king of Connaught twenty years, died, and there
died also Muireadhach Muindearg, son of Feargna, son of Dallan, son of
Dubhthach, son of Mianach, son of Lughaidh, son of Aonghus Fionn, son
of Fearghus Duibhdheadach, son of Iomchaidh, son of Fionnchaidh, son
of Oghamhal, son of Fiatach Fionn, a quo Dal bhFiatach, who was twelve
years king of Ulster.



V.

Oilill Molt convened the Feis of Tara. There used to be three general
assemblies in Ireland in the olden time, to wit, the Feis of Tara, the
Feis of Eamhain, and the Feis of Cruachain. We have set down above the
things that were treated of at the Feis of Tara. Now the chief object
for which the Feis of Eamhain and the Feis of Cruachain were convened
was to approve those who practised mechanical crafts in Ireland, such
as smithwork, woodwork or stonework and the like handicrafts. And the
nobles and ollamhs who were at these two assemblies selected from each
assembly three score masters of each craft, and these were then
distributed throughout Ireland, and no fellowcraftsman to these was
permitted to practise his craft without permission from the master of
that craft who was in that district; and the master must examine
whether he be competent to practise the craft. And these masters were
called ioldanaigh; now ioldanach means iolcheardach, or skilled in
many crafts, for dan means ceard or craft.

The Leabhar Irsi calls Oilill Molt the king of the Scots. It was in
his time that Benignus, the comhorba of Patrick, died. It was also
against Oilill that the Leinstermen fought the Battle of Dumha Aichir,
where many fell on both sides. It was about this time that a war was
waged between Ambrosius, king of Britain, and the Picts and Scots. It
was also in the reign of Oilill that Conall Creamhthainne died, and
Iarlaithe the third bishop of Ard Macha after Patrick. Simplicius was
Pope at that time. It was against Oilill Molt, king of Ireland, that
the Battle of Ocha was fought by Lughaidh, son of Laoghaire, and by
Muircheartach, son of Earc, and by Fearghus Ceirrbheoil, son of Conall
Creamhthainne, and by Fiachaidh Lonn, son of Caolbhadh, king of Dal
nAruidhe, as the poet says:

By Lughaidh and by Fiachaidh Lonn,
And by the great Muircheartach
And by blameless Fearghus,
Was the noble Oilill Molt slain.

Twenty years after this battle was fought the six sons of Earc, son of
Eochaidh Muinreamhar, went to Alba, to wit, two Aonghuses, two
Lodharns, and two Fearghuses. Three hundred and seven years are
reckoned from the time of Conchubhar, son of Neasa, to the time of
Cormac, son of Art; two hundred and four years from the time of Cormac
till the Battle of Ocha was fought; and twenty years after that the
sons of Earc, son of Eochaidh Muinreamhar, went to Alba. Duach
Teangumha, son of Fearghus, son of Muireadhach Mal, son of Eoghan
Sreibh, son of Duach Galach, son of Brian, son of Eochaidh
Muighmeadhon, was king of Connaught seven years at this time, and he
fell by Eochaidh Tiormcharna.

Lughaidh, son of Laoghaire, son of Niall Naoighiallach, of the race of
Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of Ireland twenty years. Anghus,
daughter of Tasach of Ui Liathain, was the mother of Lughaidh. The
king of Leinster at that time was Fraoch, son of Fionnchaidh. About
this time took place the Battle of Ceall Osnadh in Magh Fea in the
county of Ceithearlach, four miles east of Leithghlinn, where Aonghus,
son of Natfraoch, who was king of Munster thirty-six years, and Eithne
Uathach, daughter of Criomhthann, son of Eanna Cennsealach, his wife,
both fell by Muircheartach, son of Earc, and by Oilill, son of
Dunluing; hence the poet composed this stanza:

There died the spreading branch of a great tree,
Aonghus Molbhthach, son of Natfraoch;
He lost his success by Oilill
In the Battle of Ceall Osnadh the vile.

After this, Fraoch, son of Fionnchaidh, was slain in the Battle of
Graine by Eochaidh, son of Cairbre. Felix the third Pope of that name,
it was in the tenth year of the reign of Lughaidh, son of Laoghaire,
that he was made Pope. It was about this time that the Battle of
Sleamhain Mhidhe was won by Cairbre, son of Niall, over the
Leinstermen, and the Battle of Seaghais was fought, in which Duach
Teangumha, king of Connaught, was slain by Muircheartach, son of Earc,
as the poet says in this stanza:

The Battle of Dealga, the Battle of Muchromha,
And the Battle of Tuaim Drubha,
And also the Battle of Seaghais,
In which fell Duach Teangumha.

It was about this time that the Leinstermen won the Battle of
Lochmhagh over Ui Neill, in which fell many people, and Fearghus Mor,
son of Earc, went to Alba with the Dal Riada and they assumed
sovereignty there. It was in the nineteenth year of the reign of
Lughaidh, son of Laoghaire, that Patrick died, having passed six score
and two years in this life, as we have said above. After this Lughaidh,
son of Laoghaire, died in Achadh Fharcha, from lightning which fell
from heaven on him for disobeying Patrick. Gelasius was Pope the last
year of the reign of Lughaidh.

Muircheartach, son of Earc, son of Muireadhach, son of Eoghan, son of
Niall Naoighiallach, of the race of Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of
Ireland twenty-four years. Earc, daughter of Lodharn king of Alba, was
the mother of Muircheartach, son of Earc, and it was in the beginning
of his reign that Ciaran mac-an-tSaoir, who was of the race of Corc,
son of Fearghus, son of Rogh, was born. The fourth year of the reign
of Muircheartach Anastasius the second Pope of that name was made Pope.
About this time was born St. Comhghall of Beannchair, the holy abbot,
a man who had forty thousand monks under his obedience or under his
authority, as we read in the Red Book of Mac Aodhagan; and this is the
more to be believed because we read in an author of repute, namely, St.
Bernard, in the Life of Malachias, that there was a disciple of the
abbot Comhghall called Soanus, who built a hundred monasteries; and
this Comhghall is of the race of Irial, son of Conall Cearnach, son of
Aimhirgin, of clanna Rudhruighe. In testimony of this, the poem on
saint-history speaks thus:

Comhghall of Beannchair, son of Seadna,
Whom fear of death troubled not,
Was of Uladh's stock, who were not caught napping,
Of the race of Irial, son of Conall.

It was about this time that the emperor Anastasius died, and Cainneach
of Achadh Bo, the saint, and this saint was of the race of Fearghus,
son of Rogh; and Columcille, son of Feidhlimidh, son of Fearghus, son
of Conall Gulban, son of Niall Naoighiallach, was born. It was about
this time that Brighid, daughter of Dubhthach, son of Dreimhne, son of
Breasal, son of Dian, son of Connla, son of Art, son of Cairbre Nia,
son of Cormac, son of Aonghus Mor, son of Eochaidh Fionn Fuath nAirt,
son of Feidhlimidh Reachtmhar, son of Tuathal Teachmhar, of the race
of Eireamhon, died, at the age of eighty-seven years, or, according to
others, at the age of seventy years. Now Brighid is the equivalent to
Breo-shaighead, that is, an arrow of fire; and she is not inaptly so
called, for she was as a fire lighting with the love of God, ever
darting her petitions towards God. And according to the Feilire, it
was she who composed this stanza:

A morsel of fair barley bread,
This is my part of the table.
A cress-stalk and hot water
Is my portion each night.



VI.

The sixth year of the reign of Muircheartach, son of Earc, Symmachus
was made Pope, and he was Pope for fifteen years and eight months; and
the thirty-first year of the reign of Muircheartach, Hormisdas was
made Pope, and he was nine years Pope. It was about this time that the
holy body of the monk Antonius was miraculously discovered, and it was
taken to Alexandria, and it was enshrined in the church of John the
Baptist. Muircheartach, son of Earc, fought the following battles in
one year according to what the poet says in this stanza:

The Battle of Ceann Eich, the Battle of Almhain,
In a famous glorious time;
The Plunder of Clu, the Battle of Eibhlinn,
And the Battle of Magh Ailbhe.

Soon after having fought these battles Muircheartach died in the house
of Cleiteach; and Ailbhe of Imleach died.

Tuathal Maol Garbh, son of Cormac Caoch, son of Cairbre, son of Niall
Naoighnallach, of the race of Eireahmon, held the sovereignty of
Ireland thirteen years. He is called Tuathal Maol Garbh, for Comain,
daughter of Dall Bronach, was his mother, and when she gave birth to
Tuathal she struck his head against a stone as a ceremony foreboding
success for him, and the stone made a hollow in his head, and no hair
grew in that hollow; hence he was called Tuathal Maol Garbh.

It was in the reign of Tuathal that Moctaeus, disciple of Patrick,
died, and he had lived three hundred years; and Baoithin, disciple of
Columcille, was born; and Baoithin and Columcille were the children of
brothers; and Comhghall, king of Alba, died, and Mobhi, who is called
Bearchan of Prophecy, of the race of Fiachaidh Aiceadha, son of
Cathaoir Mor, died. It was also in the reign of Tuathal that the
Leinstermen fought the Battle of Tortan, where Earc, son of Oilill
Molt, was slain, and from him the Fir Cheara sprang. It was about this
time that the Battle of Sligeach was fought by Fearghus and by
Domhnall, two sons of Muircheartach, son of Earc, where. they slew
Eoghan Beal, who was king of Connaught thirty-five years; and Odhran,
the saint of Leathrach, of the race of Conaire, son of Mogh Lamha,
died, and Ciaran mac-an-tSaoir at the age of thirty-one years died;
and Beoaidh was his father's name, and his mother's name was Dairearca,
as he himself says in this stanza:

Dairearca was my mother,
No poor woman was she;
Also Beoaidh, the artificer, was my father,
From Latharna Molt.

It was about this time that his head fell off Abacuc at the fair of
Taillte, for having sworn falsely by the hand of Ciaran; and he lived
thus headless four years amongst the monks. After that Tuathal Maol
Garbh, king of Ireland, was slain by Maol Mor, uterine brother to
Diarmaid, son of Fearghus Ceirrbheoil, in Greallach Eilte.

It was also in the reign of Tuathal that Guaire, son of Colman, became
sovereign of Connaught in succession to Eoghan Beal; and at that time
the eldest son of Eoghan was a pupil under Ciaran with a view to
becoming a monk; his name was Ceallach, and Eoghan's friends enticed
him to quit Ciaran's community that he might be their leader in
opposition to Guaire. But on Ceallach's going out, Ciaran cursed him
and besought God that he might be carried off by a violent death. Now,
when he had been for some time outside, he considered that he had
acted amiss in disobeying Ciaran, and he paid Ciaran a visit and
acknowledged his guilt to him, and promised that he would do his will
during his life. Ciaran gave him his blessing, but said that a violent
death would carry him off. Ceallach remained in the community
thenceforwards, and was in course of time made bishop and while he was
in the district as bishop he was making partisans and friends for a
brother who was younger than himself, with a view to his obtaining the
sovereignty of Connaught; and when Guaire heard this he suborned three
of Ceallach's own friends who slew him, and thus the prophecy which
Ciaran had made for him was fulfilled, for he had foretold that
Ceallach would meet a violent death.

Diarmaid, son of Fearghus Ceirrbheoil, son of Conall
Creamhthainne, .son of Niall Naoighiallach, of the race of Eireamhon,
held the sovereignty of Ireland twenty-two years. Corbach, daughter of
Maine, a Leinsterwoman, was the mother of Diarmaid, son of Fearghus.
It was in the reign of this king that Tighearnach, bishop of Cluain
Eoais, of the race of Daire Barrach, son of Cathaoir Mor, and Oilill,
son of Muireadhach, who was nine years king of Leinster, died. And
Cormac, son of Oilill, son of Eochaidh, son of Daire Cearb, son of
Oilill Flann Beag, was king of Munster.

It was about this time that Fearghus and Domhnall, two sons of Mac
Earc, fought the Battle of Cuil Chonaire, where Oilill Anbhann, king
of Connacht, and his brother, Aodh Fortamhail, were slain; and it was
in the reign of this Diarmaid that a plague came on Ireland, which was
called the Crom Chonaill, and many saints died of it, and in
particular Mac Tail of Cill Chuilinn. At this time the Battle of Cuil
took place, where many of the people of Corcach fell through the
prayer of Midhe, that is, a noble female saint of the race of
Fiachaidh Suighdhe, son of Feidhlimidh Reachtmhar, to whom these
people showed disrespect.

It was at this time that Eochaidh, son of Connlo, son of Caolbhach,
son of Crann Badhraoi, son of Eochaidh Cobha, son of Lughaidh, son of
Rossa, son of Iomchaidh, son of Feidhlimidh, son of Cas, son of
Fiachaidh Aruidhe, who was king of Ulster twenty-two years, died, and
he was the first king of the Dal nAruidhe. And Cormac, son of Oilill,
king of Leinster, and Beag Mac De, the seer, died, and St. Molua, son
of Sineall, son of Aimhirgin, son of Eirnin, son of Duach, son of
Brian, son of Eochaidh Mogh, was born; and Cathfuidh, bishop of Achadh
Chuinnire and St. Neasan, the Leper, died; and St. Breanainn, of the
race of Cear, son of Fearghus, built the Church of Cluain Fearta; and
Gabhran, king of Alba, died; and Gruige, son of Maolchu, king of the
Cruithnigh, defeated and routed the Albanians.

It was about this time that Fearghus and Domhnall, two sons of
Muircheartach Mac Earc, won the Battle of Cuil Dreimhne over Diarmaid,
son of Fearghus, and he was routed and most of his people were slain,
through the prayer of Columcille. For he had slain, in violation of
Colum's protection, Cuarnan, son of Aodh, son of Eochaidh Tiormcharna,
and God avenged that deed on him in this battle. Aodh, son of
Breanainn, king of Teathbha, defeated Diarmaid in the Battle of Cuil
Uinnseann, in Teathbha, where many of his followers were slain; and
after this Columcille went to I, in Alba, when he was forty-three
years of age; and the Battle of Moin Doire, in Alba, was fought by
clanna Neill of the North, wherein seven minor kings of the Cruithnigh
fell by them. It was about this time that Colman Mor, son of Cairbre,
son of Oilill, son of Dunlaing, who was thirty years king of Munster,
died.

It was while Diarmaid, son of Cearbhall, was king of Ireland that a
poet of Alba, called Labhan Draoi, came to Ireland; and having heard
tidings of the generosity of Eochaid Aontsula, ancestor of siol
Suilleabhain, he came to visit him and ask him for a gift, and he
would not accept any gift from him but one of his eyes; and Eochaidh
gave him one of his eyes lest the druid might satirise him. Ruadhan of
Lothra happened to be present at the time, and when he heard the
unjust request he asked of God to put Labhan's eyes in Eochaid's head,
and that they might perform the same function for him that they did
for Labhan; and it came of the saint's petition that Labhan's eyes
passed into Eochaidh's head and performed that function for him during
his life.



VII.

The seventh year of the reign of this Diarmaid, king of Ireland, a nun
named Sineach Chro came to Diarmaid to make a complaint to him against 
Guaire, son of Colman, for having taken her only cow from her.
Diarmaid assembled a numerous host with the object of obtaining
satisfaction from Guaire for the nun's cow, and he at once marched to
the Sionainn. Now Guaire had assembled a host and multitude on the
other side to oppose him, and he sent Cuimin Foda, son of Fiachna, to
ask Diarmaid not to go westward beyond the Sionainn for the space of
twenty-four hours. "That is not a great request to grant thee," said
Diarmaid, "and a greater would be granted thee had'st thou asked it."
Now they were on either side of the Sionainn, King Diarmaid on the
east side and Guaire on the west side until the following morning. "I
wonder," said Cuimin, "at the smallness of this host of thine seeing
how great the host is which is against thee." "Understand, O cleric,"
said Diarmaid "that a battle is not won by large armies, but according
to God's will; and if thou contemnest my host, know that it is not
fair forms but stout hearts that win battles."

The battle was set on foot between them, the king and his host on one
side and Guaire, with the Connaught and Munster forces, on the other.
But Guaire and his host were defeated, and many Connaught nobles and
Munster-men were slain. And it was at the intercession of Caimin, who
lived and blessed in Inis Cealltrach, that the battle went against
Guaire; for Caimin fasted three days against Guaire in order that he
might lose the battle. This St. Caimin is of the race of Fiachaidh
Aiceadha, son of Cathaoir Mor. Now Guaire went to Caimin and paid him
respect and homage and bowed down before him. "There is no avoiding
defeat in battle for thee," said Caimin.

Now when Guaire had lost the battle he came alone to a little
monastery, in which there was a solitary pious woman, and the woman
asked who he was. "I am one of Guaire's officers," said he. "I am very
sorry," said she, "that defeat should have overtaken this king, who is
the most charitable and humane and hospitable in Ireland, and that his
followers should be visited with dreadful slaughter." The pious woman
went to a stream hard by and saw a salmon therein. She came back to
Guaire with this news. Guaire went out to the stream and killed the
salmon, and gave God thanks for having only the salmon that night,
though he had often ten beeves other nights. Guaire went the next day
to meet his friends, and took counsel of them as to whether he should
give battle again to the king of Ireland or swear submission to him on
a javelin's point. What Guaire and his friends resolved on was that he
should go to Diarmaid and make his submission to him. Now the way in
which he made his submission to him was to put the point of the king's
javelin or sword in his mouth, between his teeth, while on bended
knees. And while Guaire was in this position the king said secretly to
some of his own people: "We will find out," said he, "whether it was
through vain glory that Guaire practised such great generosity." He
caused a druid from among his friends to ask him for something for the
sake of science, but Guaire did not heed him. He sent a leper to ask
him for an alms for God's sake; he gave the poor man the gold bodkin
that held his mantle. The poor man left him; and one of king
Diarmaid's people met him and took the gold bodkin from him and gave
it to Diarmaid. The poor man again came back to Guaire and complained
of this to him, and Guaire gave him the gold belt that was round him,
and Diarmaid's people took the belt also from the poor man; and he
came again to Guaire, who had the point of Diarmaid's sword between
his teeth, and, as Guaire beheld the poor man troubled, a flood of
tears came from him. "O, Guaire," said the king, "is it distress at
being under my sway that makes thee thus weep?" "I solemnly declare
that it is not," said he, "but my distress at God's poor one being in
want." Thereupon Diarmaid told him to arise and that he would not be
thenceforth under his own authority, and that the King of all the
elements was over him if he were to make a submission, and that he
considered that sufficient on his part. They made a treaty of peace
with one another, and Diarmaid asked him to come to the fair of
Taillte, into the presence of the men of Ireland; "and," added he, "I
will give thee my lordship to be thine from my death onwards."

Guaire then went to the fair of Taillte, having with him a budget or
bag of silver to dispense to the men of Ireland. Now Diarmaid charged
the men of Ireland that none of them should ask anything of Guaire at
the fair. Two days passed in this manner; on the third day, however,
Guaire asked Diarmaid to send for a bishop for him that he might make
his confession and be anointed. "How is that?" enquired Diarmaid. "As
I am near death," said Guaire. "How dost thou know that?" asked
Diarmaid. "I know it," said Guaire, "for the men of Ireland are
assembled and none of them asks me for anything." Then Diarmaid gave
Guaire leave to make gifts. Guaire proceeded to make gifts to everyone,
and, if the tale be true, the hand with which he made gifts to the
poor was longer than that with which he made gifts to the bards. Then
Diarmaid made peace and agreement with Guaire in presence of the men
of Ireland, and they were thenceforth on friendly terms with each
other.

Now Guaire had a brother called Mochua, a holy virtuous man, and on a
certain occasion he went to observe Lent to a well of spring water,
which is a little to the south-west of Buirenn, five miles from Durlus
Guaire, attended only by one young cleric, who used to serve him at
Mass, and neither himself nor the young cleric took more than a meal
every day-and-night, and then they took only a little barley bread and
spring water. And when Easter day had come, and Mochua had said Mass a
desire for meat seized the young cleric, and he said to St. Mochua
that he would go to Durlus to visit Guaire in order to get enough of
meat. "Do not go," said Mochua, "stay with me, and let me pray to God
for meat for thee." And on this he knelt on the ground and prayed with
fervour to God, asking for meat for the young cleric. At the same time
while food was being served to the tables of Guaire's house, it came
to pass through Mochua's prayer that the dishes and the meat they
contained were snatched from the hands of those who were serving them
and were carried out over the walls of the dwelling, and by direct
route reached the desert in which Mochua was; and Guaire went with all
his household on horseback in quest of the dishes; and when the dishes
came into the presence of Mochua he set to praise and magnify the name
of God, and told the young cleric to eat his fill of meat.

The latter thereupon looked up and saw the plain full of mounted men,
and said that it was of no advantage to him to get the meat, seeing
how many there were in pursuit of it. "Thou needest not fear," said
Mochua, "these are my brother and his household, and I beseech God to
permit none of them to advance beyond that point until thou hast had
thy fill." And on this the horses' hoofs clung to the ground so that
they could not go forward till the young cleric had had his fill. Then
Mochua prayed God to set his brother and his household free. On this
they were set free, and they came into Mochua's presence. Guaire knelt
before St. Mochua and asked his forgiveness. "Thou needest not fear,
brother; but eat ye your meal here." And when Guaire and his people
had taken their meal they bade farewell to Mochua and returned to
Durlus. It is a proof of the truth of this story that the Road of the
Dishes is the name given to the five miles' path that lies between
Durlus and the well at which Mochua then was.



VIII.

It was in the time of Diarmaid, son of Fearghus, king of Ireland, that
St. Beacan lived. Some seanchas say that Eoghan Og had a son besides
Fiachaidh Muilleathan, to wit, Diarmaid, and it was from this
Diarmaid's progeny that St. Beacan, who lived and blessed in Muscruide
Chuirc, sprang. And, moreover, the seanchas say that Fiachaidh
Muilleathan himself had three sons, to wit, Oilill Flann Mor and
Oilill Flann Beag and Deachluath. Here is a proof of this:

Beacan, noble saint, from Diarmaid sprung,
Let us celebrate the children of Fiachaidh;
A race who ruled country and district,
Of them were two Oilills and Deachluath.

About this time Breasal, son of Diarmaid, son of Fearghus, that is,
son of the king of Ireland, wished to prepare a feast for his father
at Ceanannus na Midhe, and he was not pleased with anything he had for
that feast as long as he had not fat beef to give to his father on the
occasion. He, however, could find no such beef in his neighbourhood
except one beef that belonged to a female recluse at Cill Ealchruidhe;
and Breasal gently and humbly asked the woman to give him the beef,
and offered her seven cows and a bull instead of the one beef. The
woman refused his offer. On this he took the cow from her against her
will and killed it for the feast. And when the king of Ireland and his
people were enjoying the feast, the nun came and made a complaint
against Breasal to the king. Now when Diarmaid, the king, heard this
complaint he became furious, and said he would kill Breasal for having
wronged the nun of Cill Ealchruidhe, and he took him to the brink of
the river Lorcach, and thus he drowned Breasal. Diarmaid repented of
having drowned his son, and he, went to Columcille to express his
sorrow for the deed, and Columcille told him to go to visit the aged
man, Beacan, to Munster; and he set out, accompanied by Columcille,
and they reached Cill Bheacain, on north side of Sliabh gCrot. And
they found the saint making a fence round his cemetery and his habit
wet upon him. When Beacan got sight of Diarmaid he said, "Get thee
beneath the ground, parricide," said he. Upon this Diarmaid sank in
the ground up to his knees. "It is to ask thy protection on account of
the deed he has done that he has come," said Columcille, "and to ask
thee to beseech God to bring back his son to life." Upon this Beacan
prayed to God fervently thrice, by the direction of Columcille; and it
was in this way that the son of the king of Ireland, to wit, Breasal,
was brought back to life through the prayer of St. Beacan; and God's
name and that of Beacan were magnified through that miracle.

It happened that Guaire, son of Colman, who was a contemporary of this
Diarmaid, and Cuimin Foda, son of Fiachtna, and Caimin of Inis
Cealltrach, were in the principal church of the island, and three
questions were proposed between them. First, Caimin said, "O Guaire,
what wouldst thou wish to have?" "Gold and wealth to bestow," answered
Guaire. "And thou, O Cuimin," said Guaire, "what wouldst thou like to
have?" "Many books containing the word of truth," said Cuimin. "And
thou, O Caimin," said Cuimin, "what is thy wish?" "Many diseases in my
body," answered Caimin. And the three got their wishes, save that at
the end of his life Cuimin was cursed by Mochua, who took all
prosperity from him, if we may trust the seanchus.

Guaire, son of Colman, with three battalions of the Connaught host,
came to plunder Munster, and they met Dioma, son of Ronan, son of
Aonghus, who was king of Cashel at that time, in Ui Fidhghinnte, which
is now called Clar Chonntae Liumnigh, and Dioma and Guaire gave battle
to one another at Cam Fearadhaigh, and Guaire and the Connaughtmen
were defeated there, and a countless number of them were slain,
together with six leaders of the Connaught nobility. The reason why
Guaire came with that host was to claim the territory from Sliabh
Echtghe to Luimneach, which belonged to Connaught formerly, until
Lughaidh Meann, son of Aonghus Tireach, defeated the Connaughtmen in
seven battles, in which he slew seven of their kings, though he had no
host except mercenaries and attendants, and he made sword-land of all
the land from Bearn tri gCarbad, at Carn Fearadhaigh, to Luchad, that
is, Bealach an Luchaide, and from Ath na Boraimhe to Leim an Chon, and
it is as a setting forth of this that Cormac, son of Cuileannan,
composed this stanza:

It was this Lughaidh Lamhdhearg
Who lopped off from the fair Province of Connaught
From Cam Fearadhagh, it was a choice,
To Ath Luchad abounding in valour.

Mochua and Columcille were contemporaries, and when Mochua or Mac
Duach was a hermit in the desert the only cattle he had in the world
were a cock and a mouse and a fly. The cock's service to him was to
keep the matin time of midnight; and the mouse would let him sleep
only five hours in the day-and-night, and when he desired to sleep
longer, through being tired from making many crosses and genuflexions,
the mouse would come and rub his ear, and thus waken him; and the
service the fly did him was to keep walking on every line of the
Psalter that he read, and when he rested from reciting his psalms the
fly rested on the line he left off at till he resumed the reciting of
his psalms. Soon after that these three precious ones died, and Mochua,
after that event, wrote a letter to Columcille, who was in I, in Alba,
and he complained of the death of his flock. Columcille wrote to him,
and said thus: "O brother," said he, "thou must not be surprised at
the death of the flock that thou hast lost, for misfortune exists only
where there is wealth." From this banter of these real saints I gather
that they set no store on worldly possessions, unlike many persons of
the present time.

After that Diarmaid, son of Fearghus Ceirrbheoil, king of Ireland, was
slain at Raith Bheag, in Magh Line, by Aodh Dubh, son of Suibhne
Aruidhe; and his head was brought to Cluain Mic Nois, and his body was
buried at Cuinnire.

Fearghus and Domhnall, two sons of Muircheartach Mac Earc, son of
Muireadhach, son of Eoghan, son of Niall Naoighiallach, of the race of
Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of Ireland one year. Duinnseach,
daughter of Duach Teangumha, king of Connaught, was mother of these
two sons. It was about this time that the Battle of Gabhra Lithfe was
won by Fearghus and Domhnall over the Leinstermen, wherein four
hundred Leinstermen fell, and Dioman, son of Caireall, son of
Muireadhach Muindearg, who was ten years king of Ulster, was slain by
the boors of Buirren. And after this Fearghus and Domhnall died.

Eochaidh, son of Domhnall, son of Muircheartach Mac Earca, and Baodan,
son of Muircheartach Mac Earca, of the race of Eireamhon, held the
sovereignty of Ireland. They reigned three years. It was about this
time that Cairbre Crom, son of Criomhthann Sreibh, son of Eochaidh,
son of Aonghus, son of Natfraoch, who was king of Munster three years,
died. It was, moreover, this Cairbre Crom who, before his death,
fought the Battle of Feimhean against Colman Beag, son of Diarmaid,
wherein Colman was defeated and many of his followers slain. And he
was called Cairbre Crom from his having been educated or brought up at
Cromghlaise, as the poet says in this stanza:

Straight was he from head to foot,
A truly brave man was Cairbre Crom;
The reason why he received his name
Was that he was reared at Cromghlais.

It was this Cairbre Crom who gave Cluain Uama to God and to the son of
Leinin.

Some seanchas say that it was about this time Breanainn of Biorra died.
And he lived nine score years according to the seanchus in this
stanza:

Woe to him who reaches not great prosperity!
Breanainn, excellent was his race,
One hundred and eighty years
Was the time he was in the world.

After this Fiachaidh, son of Baodan, fought the Battles of Tola and
Forthola against the men of Eile and of Osruighe, where many of the
Elians and the Ossorians fell; and Conall, son of Comhghall, king of
Dalriada, in Alba, died, having been sixteen years on the throne of
Alba; and it was this Conall who gave the island of I in Alba to
Columcille. After this Eochaidh and Beodan fell by Cronan, son of
Tighearnach, king of Ciannachta Ghlinne Geimhean.

Ainmire, son of Seadna, son of Fearghus Ceannfhoda, son of Conall
Gulban, son of Niall Naoighiallach, of the race of Eireamhon, held the
sovereignty of Ireland three years.

Brighid, daughter of Cobhthach, son of Oilill, one of the Lagenians,
of Ard Ladhrann, was the wife of Ainmire and mother of Aodh, son of
Ainmire. After this Ainmire fell by Fearghus, son of Niall, at the
instigation of Baodan, son of Ninnidh, at Carrig Leime an Eich.

Baodan, son of Ninnidh, son of Fearghus Ceannfhoda, son of Conall
Gulban, son of Niall Naoighiallach, of the race of Eireamhon, held the
sovereignty of Ireland one year. Cacht, daughter of the king of
Fionnghall, was the wife of Baodan; and it was in Baodan's reign that
Breanainn of Cluain Fearta, the saint, died, also Aodh son of Eochaidh
Tiormcharna, king of Connaught, who was killed in the Battle of Bagha,
and Baodan, son of Caireall, king of Ulster, and Ruadhan, of Lothra,
the saint. This latter was of the race of Oilill Flann Beag, son of
Fiachaidh Muilleathan. And Baodan, son of Ninnidh, king of Ireland,
was slain by the two Cuimins, to wit, Cuimin,. son of Colman Beag, and
Cuimin, son of Libhrean, at Carraig Leime an Eich, in Iomairg.
According to Beda, in the fourth chapter of the third book of the
History of Sacsa, the age of the Lord when Columcille went to Alba was
565.



IX.

Aodh, son of Ainmire, son of Seadna, son of Fearghus Ceannfhoda, son
of Conall Gulban, son of Niall Naoighiallach, of the race of Eireamhon,
held the sovereignty of Ireland twenty-seven years. Brighid, daughter
of Cobhthach, son of Oilill, a Lagenian, was the mother of this Aodh.
It was Aodh, son of Ainmire, who fought the Battle of Beal Dathi,
where Colman Beag, son of Diarmaid, and five thousand with him fell
through the prophecy of Columcille. It was about this time that
Seanach, bishop of Cluain Ioraird, died, also Fiachaidh, son of Baodan,
son of Caireall, son of Muireadhach Muindearg, who was king of Ulster
twenty-five years, but who now fell at the Battle of Beatha by
Fiachaidh, son of Deaman. And Feidhlim, son of Tighearnach, king of
Munster, died.

It was Aodh, son of Ainmire, who convened the great assembly of Drom
Ceat, where there was a convention of the nobles and of the clergy of
Ireland. And Aodh had three chief reasons for calling together that
assembly. The first reason was to banish the filés (or poets) from
Ireland, because of their being so great a burden and because it was
so difficult to rule them. For the ollamh's retinue numbered thirty,
and there were fifteen in the retinue of the anroth, that is, the
person who was next to the ollamh in poetic rank; and about that time
nearly a third of the men of Ireland belonged to the poetic order, and
they quartered themselves from Samhain to Bealltaine on the men of
Ireland. Now Aodh, son of Ainmire, judging that they were a heavy
burden to Ireland, decided to banish them from the entire kingdom.
Another reason, too, that Aodh had for banishing the filés was that
they went to demand a gold bodkin that was in his mantle. Now this was
a bodkin that each king left as an heirloom to each succeeding king,
and it was their inordinate demand of this bodkin that incited Aodh to
drive them out, so that they were banished to Dal Riada of Ulster. The
filés had been dismissed before then in the time of Conchubhar, son of
Neasa, king of Ulster, on account of their unjust demands.

At that time the filés of Ireland assembled and held a meeting; and
their number at that meeting was ten hundred filés who had retinues,
and they were at that time deliberating on going to Alba, and when
Conchubhar heard this, Cuchulainn went to meet them, and he retained
them for seven years, as the poet says in this stanza which is taken
from the poem beginning "Dear to me is Eamhain of Ulster"

The Ulstermen arise, noble the host,
Led by Conchubhar of the red sword;
Maintenance for seven years with renown
We give to the filés.

After this they let the filés scatter all over Ireland, and they were
not banished from that time forward until the time of Fiachna, son of
Baodan, king of Ulster, nor from the time of Fiachna to the time of
Maolcobha, son of Deaman, son of Caireall, king of Ulster, nor from
the time of Maolcobha to the time of Aodh son of Ainmire. Thrice then
did the men of Ireland cast off the filés, and the Ulstermen retained
them on each of these occasions. The first time they were banished
they numbered a thousand; and Conchubhar and the nobles of Ulster
maintained them seven years, as we have said. On their second
banishment Fiachna, son of Baodan, king of Ulster, maintained them a
year, and seven hundred was their number under Eochaidh Righeigeas, as
the poet says, in the above-mentioned poem:

Eochaidh Righeigheas of noble laws,
Went to Fiachna, son of Baodan;
He gave him great welcome,
And he retained the filés.

The third time they were banished, when Maolcobha, king of Ulster,
retained them, they amounted to twelve hundred, under Dallan Forgaill
and Seanchan, as the poet says in the same poem. Thus he speaks:

When Maolcobha of the companies was once
At Iobhar Cinn Trachta on the west side,
Twelve hundred filés he found
Behind the Yew to the north-west;

Maolcobha, the chief, gave them
Maintenance for three fair years.
It shall live to the day of pale judgment
For the well-shaped race of Deaman.

The second reason why the convention of Drom Ceat was held was in
order that Aodh might impose a tribute on the Dal Riada of Alba, as he
had no tribute from them up to that time except that they were bound
to raise an army by land and sea and pay an eiric to the king of
Ireland, as Colman, son of Coimhgheallach ordained, as he says himself
in this stanza:

A host on land always,
A fleet on sea as a perpetual custom --
My skilled oral judgment without harm --
And an eiric for kindred blood.

The third reason why the convention of Drom Ceat was held was to oust
Scannlan Mor, son of Ceannfaolaidh, from the kingdom of Osruighe,
because of his not having paid tribute to Aodh, and to install his son,
Iollann son of Scannlan, in his place as king over the Ossorians on
account of his being obedient to Aodh as regards tribute. And these
are the three reasons why the convention of Drom Ceat was ordained, as
Dallan Forgall says in this stanza:

There were three reasons for the convention:
In order to depose Scannlan from kingship,
The case of the Dal Riada, kingly the battle,
And the extermination of the bards.

The following are the provincial kings and the territorial princes who
were at the convention of Drom Ceat: First Criomhthann Cearr, king of
Leinster; Iollann, son of Scannlan, son of Ceannfaolaidh, king of
Osruighe; Maolduin, son of Aodh Beannain, king of West Munster;
Finghin, son of Aodh Dubh, son of Criomhthann, king of all Munster;
Criomhthann Deilgneach, king of the south of Ireland; Guaire, son of
Colman, from the kingdom of clann Fiachrach, south and north;
Raghallach, son of Uadaidh, who was king of Tuatha Taidhion and of
Breithfne Ui Ruairc as far as Cliabhan Modhairn; Ceallach, son of
Cearnach, son of Dubh Dothra, king of Breithfne Ui Raghallaigh;
Conghalach Chinn Maghair, king of Tir Chonaill; the two kings of
Oirghiall, to wit, Daimhin, son of Aonghus, from Clochar Deasa to
Fionncharn, on Sliabh Fuaid; Aodh, son of Duach Galach, from
Fionncharn on Sliabh Fuaid to the Boinn.

When Columcille heard in Alba of the summoning of this convention and
the three reasons for which it was summoned, to wit, the deposition of
Scannlan, the banishment of the filés, and the laying tribute on the
Dal Riada, he proceeded from I to Ireland with a company of holy
clerics; and the number of clerics he had with him as he came to this
convention was forty priests, twenty bishops, fifty deacons, and
thirty minor clerics, as the Amhra Choluim Chille says in this stanza:

Forty priests, the full number,
Twenty bishops noble strong
To chant psalms, faultless the repute,
Fifty deacons, thirty minor clerics.


The reader may possibly disbelieve what has been here stated, to wit,
that bishops should be among the following of an abbot. If, however,
one reads the second chapter of the History of Sacsa which Beda has
written, where he speaks of the privileges of the island of I, in Alba,
it will appear that the bishops of Alba were subject to the abbot of I
in olden times. It is thus, indeed, he speaks: "It was ever the custom
in this island," says he, "to have as superior an abbot who was a
priest, and who had jurisdiction and authority over the entire country,
and even the bishops themselves were subject to him, though the custom
was unusual, according to the example of the first doctor who was in
the island, who was not a bishop but a priest and a monk."[488] And it
is plain that Columcille was the first doctor, who was first given the
privilege in I, as Beda says in the tenth chapter of the fifth book of
the same History. "Colum," says he, "was the first doctor of the
Catholic faith to the Picts of the mountains in the north, and the
first to build a monastery in the island of I, which was long
venerated by many congregations of the Scots and Picts."[489] From
these words of Beda it is to be understood that Columcille was the
first doctor who went to plant the Faith among the Picts in the north
of Alba, and that it was for this reason that not only the priests and
monks undertook to be subject to Columcille and to the abbot of I
after him but even the bishops themselves took this yoke on them
because it was Columcille first gave them the light of the Faith. And
it was for this reason that bishops came to Ireland accompanying
Columcille to the convention of Drom Ceat.



X.

Columcille came to Ireland having a cerecloth over his eyes, so that
he might not see the soil of Ireland. For he was forbidden to look at
the soil of Ireland from the time that Molaise imposed as penance on
him to go to Alba and not to see the land of Ireland till death, and
it was for this reason that he kept the cerecloth over his eyes while
he was in Ireland until his return to Alba; and it is to relate
Columcille's fulfilment of this penance that Molaise composed this
stanza:

Though Colum came from the east
In a bark across the great sea,
He saw nothing in noble Ireland
On his coming to the convention.

Now the reason why Molaise imposed on Columcille the penance of going
to Alba was that Columcille caused three battles to be fought in
Ireland, to wit, the Battle of Cuil Dreimhne, the Battle of Cuil
Rathan, and the Battle of Cuil Feadha. The cause of the Battle of Cuil
Dreimhne, according to the old book called Uidhir Chiarain, was this:
Diarmaid, son of Fearghus Ceirrbheoil, king of Ireland, held a Feis of
Tara, and a nobleman was slain at that feis by Cuarnan, son of Aodh,
son of Eochaidh Tiormcharna;, and the reason why Diarmaid slew this
Cuarnan was that he had slain the nobleman at the feis in violation of
the law and sanctuary of the feis. And before Cuarnan was slain he put
himself under the protection of the two sons of Mac Earca, to wit,
Fearghus and Domhnall, and they put him under the protection of
Columcille, and Diarmaid slew him in violation of Columcille's
protection for having transgressed the law of Tara, and the result of
this was that Columcille assembled clanna Neill of the north (on
account of his own protection and that of the children of Mac Earca
having been violated), and the Battle of Cuil Dreimhne was fought
against Diarmaid and the men of Connaught, and they were defeated
through the prayer of Columcille.

The Black Book of Molaga gives another reason why. the Battle of Cuil
Dreimhne was fought, to wit, through the unjust judgment Diarmaid gave
against Columcille, when he secretly copied the Gospel from
Fionntain's book, and Fionntain claimed for hit own the copy which was
written from his own book. Accordingly, both sides chose Diarmaid as a
judge between them; and the judgment Diarmaid gave was that to every
cow belonged her calf and that to every book belonged a copy of it;
and that was the second reason why the Battle of Cuil Dreimhne was
fought.

The reason why Columcille caused the battle of Cuil Rathan to be
fought against the Dal nAruidhe and the Ultonians was because a
contention had arisen between Columcille and Comghall, when the Dal
nAruidhe showed themselves partial in the contention.

The reason why Columcille had caused the Battle of Cuil Feadha to be
fought against Colman, son of Diarmaid, was to avenge the affront
given him in the murder of Baodan, son of Ninnidh, king of Ireland, at
Leim an Eich by Coman, son of Colman, in violation of Colum's
protection.

Now Colum, with his holy clerics, proceeded from Alba to Ireland, as
we have said, and when he was approaching the convention the queen,
Aodh's wife, told her son, Conall, not to show any reverence to the
heron-cleric or to his company. And when Colum was informed of this
before he arrived at the place he said: "It is my will that the queen
and her handmaid, in the shape of two herons, be over that ford below
until Doom. Here is a proof from the Amhra repeating the words of
Colum in this stanza:

Let her become a heron,
Said the cleric in a great rage,
And let her handmaid exactly be
A heron in her company.

And the reason why he ordered that the handmaid become a heron
together with the queen was that it was she who came with a message
from the queen to Conall, telling him not to show any reverence to the
heron-cleric or to his company. And I hear from many people that ever
since two herons are usually seen on the ford which is beside Drom
Ceat.

As to Columcille, when he arrived at the convention the party of
Conall, son of Aodh, son of Ainmire, was the nearest to him in the
assembly, and when Conall saw the clerics he incited the rabble of his
party against them, thrice nine their number, and they pelted them
with clods of clay, and they bruised and hurt the clerics. And Colum
asked who were thus beating them. Colum was told that it was Conall,
son of Aodh, who was inciting them to do this deed, and he ordered
that thrice nine bells be rung on the spot against Conall, whom he
cursed and deprived of royalty, of authority, of senses, of memory, of
his understanding. And from these bells that were rung against him he
is called Conall Clogach.

After this Colum went to the party of Domhnall, son of Aodh, and
Domhnall went to meet him and bade him welcome, and kissed his cheek
and seated him in his own place. Colum gave his blessing to Domhnall,
son of Aodh, and prayed God that he might attain the sovereignty of
Ireland; and it happened ultimately that he held the sovereignty of
Ireland for thirteen years before he died.

Colum, accompanied by Domhnall, proceeded thence to the king's party,
and when he had come into the king's presence the latter welcomed him
-- the king dreaded him greatly on account of what he had done to
Conall, to the queen, to her handmaid, as we have said. "My welcome is
compliance with my wish," said Colum. "It shall be granted thee," said
the king. "Then," said Colum, "what I wish is this: I make three
requests of thee, namely, to keep the filés whom thou art banishing
from Ireland, and to free Scannlan Mor, son of Ceannfaolaidh, king of
Osruighe, from the bondage in which thou keepest him, and not to go to
impose a tribute on the Dal Riada in Alba." "I do not wish to keep the
filés," said the king, "so unjust are their demands and so numerous
are they. For there are usually thirty in the train of an ollamh, and
fifteen in that of an anroth, and so on for the other grades of the
filé down to the lowest." Each of them used to have a separate train
of attendants according to his degree, so that nearly the third of the
men of Ireland followed the bardic profession.

Columcille said to the king that it was right to set aside many of the
filés, as they were so numerous. But he advised him to maintain a filé
as his own chief ollamh, after the example of the kings who went
before him, and that each provincial king should have an ollamh, and,
moreover, that each lord of a earthed or district in Ireland should
have an ollamh, and Columcille proposed this plan and Aodh assented to
it; and it was to celebrate this benefit which Columcille conferred on
the filés that Maolsuthain composed this stanza:

The filés were saved by this means
Through Colum of the fair law;
A filé for each district is no heavy charge.
It is what Colum ordained.

From this regulation, which was made by Aodh, son of Ainmire, and
Columcille, it followed that the king of Ireland and every provincial
king and every lord of a cantred had a special ollamh, and that each
of these ollamhs had free land from his own lord, and, moreover, the
lands and worldly possessions of each of these ollamhs enjoyed general
exemption and sanctuary from the men of Ireland. It was also ordained
that a common estate should be set apart for the ollamhs where they
could give public instruction after the manner of a University, such
as Raith Cheannait and Masruidhe Mhuighe Sleacht, in Breithfne, where
they gave free instruction in the sciences to the men of Ireland, as
many as desired to become learned in seanchus and in the other
sciences that were in vogue in Ireland at that time.

The ardollamh of Ireland at that time was Eochaidh Eigeas, son of
Oilill, son of Earc, and it was he who was called Dallan Forgaill, and
he sent out ollamhs and set them over the provinces of Ireland, namely,
Aodh Eigeas over the district of Breagh and over Meath, Urmhaol chief
eigeas over the two provinces of Munster, Sanchan, son of
Cuairfheartach, over the province of Connaught, and Fear Firb, son of
Muireadhach, son of Mongan, in the ollamhship of Ulster; and, moreover,
an ollamh in every cantred in Ireland under these high ollamhs, and
they were to have free land from their territorial chiefs, as well as
sanctuary, as we have said; and each of them was to get certain
rewards for their poems and compositions.

The second request Colum asked of Aodh was to set Scannlan Mor, king
of Osruighe, free, and let him go to his own country. This the king
refused. "I shall not press it further," said Colum, "if it be God's
will may Scannlan untie my thongs or take off my shoes to-night when I
am at matins."

"The third request I make of thee," said Columcille, is to grant a
respite to the Dal Raida and not to go to Alba to plunder them with a
view to laying a tribute on them, for you have a right only to a head-
rent from them and a levy of forces on land and sea." "I shall not
grant them respite, but shall pay them a visit," said Aodh. "Then,"
said Colum, "they will have a respite from thee for ever," and so it
was.

Thereupon Columcille, with his clerics, took leave of the king and of
the convention, and the Book of Glendalough states that Aodhan, son of
Gabhran, son of Domhanghurt, king of Alba, was at that convention, and
that he took his leave of the king and of the assembly along with
Columcille. The same book says that the convention of Drom Ceat sat
for a year and a month instituting laws and regulating tributes and
forming friendly alliances between the men of Ireland.



XI.

As to Columcille, when he had taken his leave of the assembly he
proceeded to Duibheaglais, in Inis Eoghan, and on the next night,
after nightfall, a brilliant flame of fire came upon the guards at the
convention, who kept the cell in which Aodh had Scannlan Mor confined,
bound by twelve iron chains, so that the guards put their faces to the
ground because of the greatness of the blaze which they saw. And a
bright dazzling flame came to Scannlan in the place where he was, and
a voice in the flame said to him, "Arise, O Scannlan, and quit thy
chains and thy cell, and come forth and follow me, and place thy hand
in mine." After this Scannlan came forth with the angel in front of
him. His guards observed him, and asked who was there. "Scannlan,"
said the angel. "If it were he, he would not tell," said they.
Thereafter the angel and Scannlan went after Columcille; and when
Colum was at matins, as he was passing through the sanctuary railing
it was Scannlan who was taking off his shoes; and Columcille asked who
was there, and he replied that he was Scannlan. When Columcille asked
news of him, he answered "a drink," so great was his thirst, for it
was salted meat they gave him in the cell, with no drink after. From
the frequency with which he gave that answer to Columcille, the latter
left an impediment in speech on every king of his progeny who should
rule in Osruighe. Now Columcille directed Baoithin to give three
drinks to Scannlan, and then Scannlan told his story to Colum, as we
have said above. Columcille directed Scannlan to proceed to Osruighe.
"I cannot," said Scannlan, "through fear of Aodh." "Thou needest have
no fear," said Colum; "take my staff with thee as a protection, and
leave it with my community at Durmhagh, in Osruighe." Upon this
Scannlan proceeded to Osruighe, and ruled over his own country during
his life; because fear of Columcille prevented Aodh from troubling him
thereafter.

In return for his liberation in this manner, Scannlan imposed a yearly
tax of a screaball, or threepence, on every household in his country
from Bladhma to the sea, to be paid to the community of Columcille at
Durmhagh, in Osruighe, as we read in the Amhra Choluim Chille, which
quotes the promise which Scannlan made to Colum:

Thy share of my lands, of my house,
Be they numerous as rushes or herbs,
It is screaball from each house,
The portion from Bladhma to the sea.

Columcille, moreover, gave his blessing to all the Ossorians on
condition that they and their king should be obedient to himself and
to his community at Durmhagh in succeeding times as regards the
payment of the tax which Scannlan imposed on themselves and on their
posterity, as we read in the Amhra:

A blessing from me on the Ossorians,
On their pure-handedness and wisdom;
A blessing on sea and on land
From me, because of their king's submission to me.

Criomhthann was the baptismal name of the Columcille we are treating
of here, and Axal was the name of his guardian angel, and Demal was
the name of the demon that specially troubled him, as we read in the
Amhra. Thus it speaks:

Criomhthann Ua Cuinn, fair consummation,
Was the baptismal name of Columcille;
Axal the name of his angel, without fault,
And Demal his demon.

Now Columcille clung to him as a name, because when he was a child
under instruction at Dubhghlaise, in Tir Luighdheach, in Cineal
Conaill, he was permitted to go out into the village one day each week
to play with his equals in age as a privilege, as he was of the royal
blood. And as he was wont to go out thus a day in each week, the
children of the district used to assemble to meet him-on the day on
which he was wont to go out, and, being together waiting for him, when
they beheld him coming towards them from the monastery, they used to
lift their hands for joy, and say with one voice, "Here comes the
Colum or dove of the Church," and when the teacher heard that the
children were in the habit of calling him Columcille he deemed it to
be God's will that he should be always called by that name which was
in the mouths of the innocent children, and that his baptismal name,
to wit, Criomhthann, should lapse. And a change of name of this kind
has often been the lot of the saints, witness the case of Mochuda, who
was first called Carrthach, and of St. Caomhan, a disciple of Patrick,
who was first called Mac Neise, and of Patrick himself, whose
baptismal name was Sochet, and whom Germanus called Magonius, when he
imposed hands on him, and whom Pope Coelestinus called Patrick on the
occasion of his sending him to Ireland to propagate the Faith, and
that of Fionnbharr, of Cork, whose baptismal name was Luan, and of the
bishop of Iobhar, whose name was Loichead, and who lived and blessed
in Beigeirinn, in the lower part of Leinster, and of St. Connlaoch,
bishop of Cill Dara, whose first name was Roincheann, and of Moling,
whose first name was Dairchill, and similarly of many others like
them; so that it cannot be doubted that Criomhthann was the baptismal
name of Columcille, notwithstanding that Columcille clung to him as
his common name for the above reason.

Know, O reader, that Columcille was a genuine Irishman on his father's
and mother's side, and not an Albanian, as some Albanians say. For it
is evident that he was Irish on his father's side, as we read in the
history of the saints of Ireland that Feidhlimidh, son of Fearghus
Ceannfhoda, son of Conall Gulban, son of Niall Naoighiallach, who was
high king of Ireland, was father to Columcille. Here is the seancha's
statement of this, as we read in the poem which begins: The sacred
history of the saints of Inis Fail:

Columcille, of the land of Conn,
Son of Feidhlimidh, over every tribe, 
Son of Fearghus, of the fierce action,
Son of the very noble Conall Gulban.

It is also certain that Columcille was Irish on his mother's side,
according to the account given in the Amhra, where it states that
Eithne, daughter of Dioma, son of Naoi, of the race of Cairbre Nia
Fear, king of Leinster, was his mother. Thus speaks the Amhra:

Eithne, who is mighty,
The queen out of the Dal Cairbre,
Mother of Colum, who was thence pious,	
Was daughter of Dioma, son of Noe.

Columcille mortified his body by fasting and prayer and prostration to
such a degree that he grew so emaciated through pious austerity that
when he lay in the sand in his cell as the wind rushed in through the
roof his ribs were distinguishable through his habit, as the Amhra
says in this stanza:

Plain he used to lie on the sand,
In his bed was great suffering;
The form of his ribs through his dress
Was distinct as the winds blew.

Columcille's age when he died was seventy-seven years, as Dallan
Forgaill says in Amhra Choluim Chille itself, which was written by
Dallan soon after the death of Columcille:

While Colum was in the fair world
His body laboured beneath the yoke,
He went to angels out of his body
After seven and seventy years,

namely, forty-three years of his life he spent in Ireland, and after
that thirty-four years in Alba, as the Amhra says in this stanza:

He was three years and forty of them
In Ireland, without anxiety,
Four and thirty strong years
In Alba after Erin.

The three places in which Columcille used to dwell are in I in Alba,
in Derry, in Dun da Leathghlas where he was buried, as he says himself
in this stanza, in which he reveals his love for these three places:

My happiness in I, without fault,
And my soul in Derry,
And my body beneath the stone
Under which are Patrick and Brighid.

When Columcille said Mass or sang psalms or preached, his voice was
heard at a distance of a mile and a-half, and a demon could not endure
his voice, but fled before it, as the Amhra says in this stanza:

The sound of his voice, of Columcille's,
High its melody above every company;
As far as fifteen hundred paces,
Mighty courses, was it distinct.

There was a priest in Tir Chonail in the time of Columcille who built
or erected a church of precious stones, and he made an altar of glass
therein, and he had images of the sun and moon set up in the church.
Soon afterwards this priest fell into a deep swoon, after which a
demon came to him and took him with him into the air. And when they
came near Columcille overhead, he caught sight of them and made the
sign of the cross above him in the air, and thereupon the priest fell
down. And for that reason the priest made an offering of the church he
had built to Columcille on account of his having rescued him from the
hands of the demon, and he joined an order of monks himself, and led a
good life thenceforward.

There was a saint in Ui Faircheallaigh, in Osruighe, called Coisfhionn,
and Columcille went on a certain occasion to see him in the hope that
he might let him see his books, for he was a very learned man and had
many books. And he refused to let Columcille see them. And Columcille
prayed God to grant that no person alive might be able to read any one
of these books; and from that time not a word of them could be read,
and they decayed.

Baoithin saw in a vision three chairs in heaven, namely, a chair of
gold, a chair of silver, and a chair of glass; and Columcille
explained to him that the chair of gold was for Ciaran mac an tSaoir
for his great hospitality to guests, "and the chair of silver is for
thyself, O Baoithin, for the purity of thy piety; but the chair of
glass is for me, for though my piety be pure, I am often frail and
worldly."

The following are the four rules of Ireland, to wit, the rule made by
Patrick forbidding the killing of clerics; the rule of Adhamnan
forbidding the killing of women; the rule of Doire Choluim Chile,
forbidding the killing of milch cows; and the rule of Sunday
forbidding a journey on that day.



XII.

It was in the reign of this Aodh son of Ainmire that Columcille died.
Understand, O reader, that the Colum of whom we have been speaking up
to this is Columcille son of Feidhlimid, son of Fearghus. But the Red
Book of Mac Aodhagan and the sacred history of the saints of Ireland
say that many of the saints, male and female, of Ireland bore the same
name. For they say that there were twenty-two St. Colums in Ireland,
and Columcille was the first Colum of them; and further, it was in
commemoration of the sanctity of Columcille that each of them was
called Colum. There were twenty-five St. Ciarans in Ireland, and
amongst them were Ciaran of Cluain Mic Nois, and Ciaran of Saighir,
and Ciaran of Tiobraid Naoi. There were thirty-two St. Aodhans in
Ireland. There were seven St. Bairrfhionns in Ireland, and amongst
these was Bairrfhionn, or Fionnbharr, of Corcach. And this Fionnbharr
was the son of Aimhirgin, son of Dubh Duibhne, son of Ninnidh, son of
Eochaidh, son of Cairbre Ard, son of Brian, son of Eochaidh
Muighmheodhon, who was king of Ireland. And there were seventeen holy
bishops and seven hundred religious in the community of Corcach along
with Fionnbharr. There were four St. Baoithins in Ireland, to wit,
Baoithin son of Breanainn, Baoithin son of Fionnach, Baoithin son of
Alladh, and Baoithin son of Cuanaidh. There were fifteen St. Brighids
in Ireland, and amongst them was Brighid, daughter of Dubhthach, of
Leinster, who is celebrated throughout Europe; and it is clear that
she is of the stock of Eochaidh Fionn Fuath nArt; and that Eochaidh
Fionn was brother to Conn Ceadchathach, who was king of Ireland. Here
is the testimony of the sacred history of Ireland on this point, as we
read in the poem which begins: The sacred history of the saints of
Inis Fail:

Brighid, daughter of Dubhthach Donn,
Son of Dreimhne, son of Breasal Borr,
Son of Dein, son of Connla, son of Art,
Son of Cairbre Nia, son of Cormac,

Son of Aonghus Mor, of high dignity,
Son of Eochaidh Fionn, hated of Art,
Son of Feidhlimidh Reachtmhar the noble,
Son of Tuathal Teachtmhar, the excellent.

The following are the fourteen St. Brighids who were in Ireland
besides the Brighid spoken of above: Brighid, daughter of Dioma;
Brighid, daughter of Mianach; Brighid, daughter of Moman; Brighid,
daughter of Eanna; Brighid, daughter of Colla; Brighid, daughter of
Eachtar Ard; Brighid of Inis Brighde; Brighid, daughter of Damhar;
Brighid of Seanbhoth; Brighid, daughter of Fiadhnat; Brighid, daughter
of Aodh; Brighid, daughter of Luinge.

It was in the time of Aodh son of Ainmire, of whom we are treating,
and of Aodhan son of Gabhran, king of Alba, who was very old at the
time, that the Gaels lost Manainn.

It was, moreover, in the time of Aodh son of Ainmire, that St.
Cainneach, of Achadh Bo, died, aged eighty-four years; and this
Cainneach was of the stock of Fearghus, son of Rogh. It was about this
time that Colman Rimhidh fought the Battle of Sleamhain, in which
Conall, son of Aodh, was defeated, and the Battle of Cuil Caoil
against Fiachaidh, son of Baodan, in which Fiachaidh, son of Deman,
was defeated and his people slaughtered.

After that Conall son of Suibhne defeated in battle the three Aodhs in
one day, namely, Aodh Slaine, and Aodh Buidhe, king of Ui Maine, and
Aodh Roin, king of Ui bhFailghe. It was at Bruighean da Choga he
defeated them, as the poet says in this stanza:

Dreadful was the bloody state
Of the kings of all Ireland,
Aodh Slaine with a host,
Aodh Roin and Aodh Buidhe.[490]

Now there was constant dissension between the two Fiachaidhs we have
just mentioned, to wit, Fiachaidh, son of Baodan, and Fiachaidh, son
of Deaman, and through the prayer of St. Comhghall the son of Baodan
often got the upper hand; and when the son of Deaman charged the saint
with this, Comhghall asked him in turn whether he preferred heaven and
to be slain to gaining a victory and living for a time and hell in the
end. The son of Deaman said he preferred to gain a victory over his
enemy so that his slaughter of them and exploits against them might be
recited at general assemblies from age to age. Comhghall disapproved
of the choice he made, and the other Fiachaidh chose heaven and defeat
in battle, and this he obtained through the prayers of Comhghall.

Indeed every great tribe of the nobles of Ireland had an attendant
guardian saint. In testimony of this take the following tribes: For
the Tuathalaigh and the Branaigh had Caoimhghin of Glenn da Loch; the
Ui Cinnsealaigh had Maodhog of Fearna; the Caomhanaigh had Moling; the
siol Mordha had Fionntain of Cluain Eidhneach; the Ossorians had
Cainneach of Achadh Bo; the siol gCinneidhidh had Ruadhan of Lothra;
the Deise had Deaglan; the clann Briain of Eatharla had Seanna;
Gobnuid was for Muscraidhe Mic Diarmada; Colman for Ui Mac Coille; and
similarly there was no district or tribe in Ireland without the
special protection of a male or female saint, whom they venerated and
honoured. But there are other saints more generally known than those
we have mentioned, such as Columcille, Finnen of Magh Bile, Ciaran of
Cluain, Comhghall of Beannchair, Brighid of Cill Dara, Ailbhe of
Imleach, and St. Patrick, as Aonghus Ceile De says in the book which
is called Psaltair na Rann. Thus does he speak:

The Ui Neill, all protected by Colum,
Are not in the shade of a bramble;
Protected by Finnen of Magh Bile
Are all the Ultonians;
The tribes of Connaught are protected by Ciaran,
Though it be not an equal division;
The Dal nAruidhe, the noble, the amiable,
Are protected by Comhghall;
The Leinstermen are protected by Brighid,
Fame and riches;
All Munster, with its produce,
Is protected by Ailbhe.
The chief saints of Ireland, with her monks,
It is their care,
Whatever path they walk in, to be all under the shield
Of Patrick.

It was while Aodh son of Ainmire, held the sovereignty of Ireland that
Brandubh, son of Eochaidh, son of Muireadhach, son of Aonghus, son of
Feidhlimidh, son of Eanna Cinnsealach, was king of Leinster for one
year. And he and the Leinstermen slew Aodh son of Ainmire, in the
Battle of Bealach Duin Bolg. It is also said that it was the
Leinstermen themselves who slew Brandubh in the Battle of Camcluain,
or that it was by Saran Saobhdhearg, the airchinneach of Seanbhoth
Sine, he fell, as the poet says in this stanza:

Saran Saobhdhearg, noble guide!
The airchinneach of Seanbhoth Sine,
'Tis no falsehood, though he was seldom in battle,
He slew Brandubh, son of Eochaidh.[500]

It was about this time that St. Colman of Eala died.

Aodh Slaine, son of Diarmaid, son of Fearghus Ceirr bheoil, son of
Conall Creamhthainne, son of Niall Naoighiallach, and Colman Rimhidh,
son of Muircheartach Mac Earca, of the race of Eireamhon, held the
sovereignty of Ireland. They were six years in joint sovereignty.
Mughainn, daughter of Cucharainn, son of Duach, a Connaught-woman, was
the mother of Aodh Slaine; and Eithne, daughter of Breanainn Dall, a
Connaughtwoman, was his wife; and she bore him six sons, to wit,
Diarmaid, Donnchadh, Maolbreasail, Maolodhar, Comhghall, and Oilill.
He was called Aodh Slaine, for it was on the river which is named
Slaine he was born. It was in the reign of this pair that Gregory the
Great of Rome sent St. Augustine, the monk, together with a community
of holy clerics, to propagate the Catholic Faith in Britain. Colman
Rimhidh fell by Lochan Diolmhain. Aodh Slaine was slain by Conall
Guithbhinn, son of Suibhne.

Aodh Uairiodhnach, son of Domhnall, son of Muircheartach, son of
Muireadhach, son of Eoghan, son of Niall Naoighiallach, of the race of
Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of Ireland twenty-seven years. Brigh,
daughter of Orca Mac Eire, son of Eochaidh, was the mother of Aodh
Uairiodhnach. And he is called Aodh Uairiodhnach, for he was subject
to cold fits of pain, and if he owned the wealth of the world he would
give it to get a moment's relief. Now uara eidhnigh means readhg fuar,
or 'a cold pang,' and hence he was called Aodh Uairiodhnach. It was in
the reign of this Aodh that Aonghus, son of Colman, fought the Battle
of Odhbha, in which Conall Laoghbhreagh, son of Aodh Slaine, fell. And
Aodh Uairiodhnach, king of Ireland, fell in the Battle of da Fhearta.

Maolcobha, son of Aodh, son of Ainmire, son of Seadna, son of Fearghus
Ceannfhoda, son of Conall Gulban, son of Niall Naoighiallach, of the
race of Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of Ireland four years.
Croinseach, daughter of Aodh Fionn, king of Osruighe, was the wife of
this Maolcobha. Maolcobha fell by, Suibhne Meann in the Battle of
Sliabh Bealgadain.



XIII.

Suibhne Meann, son of Fiachna, son of Fearadhach, son of Muircheartach,
son of Muireadhach, son of Eoghan, son of Niall Naoighiallach, held
the sovereignty of Ireland thirteen years. It was in the reign of
Suibhne Meann that Caoimhghin of Gleann da Loch died, aged six score
years. Caoimhghin was the son of Caomhlogha, son of Caoimhfhiodh, son
of Corb, son of Fearghus Laoibdheargh, son of Fothach, son of Eochaidh
Laimhdhearg, son of Meisin Corb, of the race of Labhraidh Loingseach.
It was about this time that Aodh Beannain, king of Munster, died, and
St. Adhamnan, son of Ronan, son of Tinne, son of Aodh, son of Colum,
son of Seadna, son of Fearghus, son of Conall Gulban, son of Niall
Naoighiallach, who was abbot of I in Alba. Rona, daughter of Dunghal,
king of Ui Turtaire, was the wife of Suibhne Meann, king of Ireland.
Suibhne Meann, king of Ireland, was slain by Conghal Claon, son of
Scannlan Sciathleathan.

Domhnall, son of Aodh, son of Ainmire, son of Seadna, son of Fearghus
Ceannfhoda, son of Conall Gulban, son of Niall Naoighiallach, of the
race of Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of Ireland thirteen years. And
it was this Domhnall who won the Battle of Dun Ceitheirn against
Conghal Claon, in which he overthrew him and slew many of his people.
It was, moreover, in the reign of Domhnall that the saint who was
called Munna died, and that Carrthach, that is, Mochuda, were banished
from Rathain to Lios Mor. And Mochuda was of the stock of Ciar, son of
Fearghus,

Now when Mochuda went from Ciarraidhe on a pilgrimage to Rathain he
built a monastery there, and he placed a community of monks in the
monastery; so that there were seven hundred and ten monks with him
there, who passed their lives so piously that an angel used to
converse with every third monk of them, and thus it came to pass that
the fame and renown for great sanctity of the community of Rathain
grew apace. For this reason the saints of the clann Neill became very
envious, and they sent word to Mochuda directing him to abandon
Rathain and betake himself to his own country, that is, to Munster.
Mochuda replied to the messengers who brought him these instructions
and said that he would not leave Rathain unless he were put out of it
by the hand of a bishop or of a king. When this message reached the 
pious men of the clann Neill they besought Blathmhac and Diarmaid
Ruanuidh, two sons of Aodh Slaine, who were of the clann Neill, to go
and expel Mochuda from Rathain; and at the instigation of this body,
Blathmhac and Diarmaid Ruanuidh, along with a company of clerics from
the northern side, visited Rathain.

When Mochuda heard that they had come close to him he sent a lord of
the Picts, or Cruitnigh, from Alba, called Constantine, who was a lay-
brother in the community, to beseech these nobles to give a year's
respite to Mochuda and to his community before expelling them from
Rathain. And he got this request from them. And when the year passed
the same nobles came in a year's time, along with a company of the
same clerics, and when they had come close to Rathain, Blathmhac sent
word to Mochuda asking him to come out of the monastery; and thereupon
Mochuda sent the same Constantine to beseech them to give him another
year's respite, and they granted this, though unwillingly. And at the
end of the third year the same nobles and the same clerics were
incited by the lawless folk of the Ui Neill to come and expel Mochuda
the third year from Rathain; and when that company had come near the
village, they, of one accord, sent Diarmaid Ruanuidh and the
airchinneach of Cluain Conghusa, along with a party, to bring Mochuda
by the hand out of the monastery; and when these had reached the
church the airchinneach went in and Diarmaid remained outside at the
doorpost. When Mochuda heard that Diarmaid was at the door he went to
welcome him and ask him into the church. "I will not go in," said
Diarmaid. "Is it to carry me off from the monastery thou hast come?"
said Mochuda. "It is," said Diarmaid, "but I dare not do it, and I
repent of having come on this expedition, by reason of thy great
sanctity and of the honour God gives thee." "Honour in heaven and on
earth be thine," said Mochuda, "and power and the sovereignty and the
kingdom of Ireland be thine, and may thy progeny prosper after thee;
and when thou shalt have returned to thy company, the youths who are
there will give thee the name Diarmaid Ruanuidh in reproach. But that
nickname will redound to thy honour and to that of thy offspring."
Thereupon Diarmaid returned to the company, and when he came before
them Blathmhac asked him why he did not lay hands on Mochuda and bring
him out of the monastery. "I dared not do it," said Diarmaid. "That, O
Diarmaid, is a bashful behaviour." And when the company heard this
they dubbed him Diarmaid Ruanuidh. Now ruanuidh means deargthach or
'bashful,' so that his descendants are called the descendants of
Diarmaid Ruanuidh ever since.[501]

As to Blathmhac, he went with a party to the monastery and laid hands
on Mochuda, and brought him and his community out of the monastery
against their will. And Mochuda cursed Blathmhac. And Mochua proceeded
thence, with his community of monks, performing wonders and miracles
till he arrived at the Deise; and when he arrived there the king of
the Deise went to meet him, and reverenced and honoured him, and
commended his body and soul to his protection; and they both proceeded
to Dun Scinne, which is now called Lis Mor. There Mochuda and his
community dwelt, and there they built a church, so that the place has
been honoured and celebrated for piety and learning ever since. Thus
far the going of Mochuda from Rathain to Lis Mor.

It was Domhnall, son of Aodh, son of Ainmire, king of Ireland, who
fought the Battle of Magh Rath, where Conghal Claon, who had been ten
years king of Ulster, was slain, And from the tract called the Battle
of Magh Rath it may be readily seen that the array and order of the
Irish troops as they went into conflict or engaged in battle were well
regulated. For there was a leader of the entire host, and a leader of
each division of the host under his charge, and an emblem on the
standard of each leader, from which the divisions of the army were
distinguished from one another by the seanchas, who were bound to be
with the nobles whenever they engaged with one another in conflict or
battle, so that the seanchas might be eyewitnesses of the exploits of
the nobles, and thus be able to give a true account of their deeds on
either side. And hence Domhnall, son of Aodh, king of Ireland, had his
own seancha with him when he was about to engage in the Battle of Magh
Rath. For when Domhnall was marching against Conghal, king of Ulster,
and they were on either side of the river, and when they were in sight
of each other's host Domhnall asked his seancha to name every one of
the standards separately, and its emblem, and the seancha told him
what they were, as we read in the poem which begins: Mightily advance
the battalions of Conghal, in which is, this stanza on the king of
Ulster's own emblem:

A yellow lion upon green satin,
The emblem of the Craobh Ruadh,
Such as was held by noble Conchubhar
Conghal now holds.

It is a long time since the Gaels began the practice of having emblems,
in imitation of the children of Israel, who employed them in Egypt, in
the life-time of Gaedheal, when the children of Israel passed through
the Red Sea, with Moses as their chief leader. Now there were twelve
tribes of them, and each tribe had a separate division of an army and
a separate emblem.

The tribe of Ruben, a mandrake on its standard as an emblem;
The tribe of Simeon, a javelin on its standard as an emblem;
The tribe of Levi, the Ark on its standard as an emblem;
The tribe of Juda, a lion on its standard as an emblem;
The tribe of Isacar, an ass on its standard as an emblem;
The tribe of Zabulon, a ship on its standard as an emblem;
The tribe of Nephtalem, the figure of a wild ox on its standard as an emblem;
The tribe of Gad, the figure of a lioness on its standard as an emblem;
The tribe of Joseph, a bull on its standard as an emblem;
The tribe of Benjamin, a wolf on its standard as an emblem;
The tribe of Dan, a serpent on its standard as an emblem;
The tribe of Aser, an olive branch on its standard as an emblem.

Here follows the seancha's account of the emblems of the children of
Israel, as we read in the old Book of Leacaoin, in Urmhumha, and in
many other old books, in the poem below:

I know each great ensign
That the proud children of Jacob had,
Few are the people thereafter
Who know their names.

The tribe of Ruben, prosperity helped them,
Their ensign was a mandrake;
The spirited tribe lasted a long time,
A good host followed its ensign.

The tribe of Simeon asked no ensign
But a stern avenging javelin;
Simeon, the guileful wise one,
Who was vindictive in the affair of Dionna.

The tribe of Levi, the people of the Ark,
Numerous their flocks and great herds;
It was a guarantee of their welfare
To see the Ark with them.

The ensign of the noble tribe of Juda,
The figure of a powerful lion;
The tribe of Juda, in the hour of wrath
Proud hosts following a good ensign

The tribe of Isacar, of the pure gold,
Had an ensign like an ass;
Often a host with ruddy face,
Followed the great beautiful ensign.

The tribe of Zabulon, of the bright girdles,
The figure of their ensign was a laden ship;
It was usual on the shallow waves
For all to be in their laden ships.

The figure of a wild ox, short-flanked, swift,
Had the tribe of Neptalem, the venemous;
Of the tribe that practised the fury of wrath
The warriors round their ready ensign were not few.

The ensign of the tribe of Gad, in conflict,
Was as the figure of a lioness;
Nor have we deemed timorous in the time of wrathful fury
Each warrior following the great ensign.

An ensign like a bull with constant strength,
In the east had the tribe of renowned Joseph;
It is well known that vultures sought
The bold, glorious race.

The tribe of Benjamin, of swift vigour,
Its ensign was above ensigns;
An ensign like the ravening wolf,
Ruddiness in the glorious feast.

The tribe of Dan, stubborn the race,
A venemous family of a sinister house,
Powerful to strike back, as it implies,
Like a great serpent, its ensign.

The tribe of Aser, not stinted in herds,
An ensign they clung to like a garment; 
Its choice was identical with
A beautiful fair olive branch.

I have enumerated their tribes above,
I have enumerated their ensigns;
The enumeration of the abodes of the spirited tribes,
How many men are ignorant of? I know.

It was in the reign of Domhnall, son of Aodh, king of Ireland, of whom
we are treating, that the following saints died, to wit, Mochua, of
the race of Oilill, son of Cathaoir Mor, who lived and blessed in
Teach Mochua in Laoighis, and Mochudha and Maolaise of Leithghlinn,
who were of the race of Conall Gulban, son of Niall Naoighiallach and
Comhdhan, son of Da Cearda, and Cronan, bishop of Caondrom. And
Domhnall, son of Aodh, son of Ainmire, king of Ireland, died.



XIV.

Conall Caol and Ceallach, two sons of Maolcobha, son of Aodh, son of
Ainmire, son of Seadna, son of Fearghus Ceannfhoda, son of Conall
Gulban, son of Niall Naoighiallach, of the race of Eireamhon, assumed
the sovereignty of Ireland. They reigned together for thirteen years.
It was in their reign that Cuanna, son of Cailchin, king of Fearmaighe,
that is, Laoch Liathmhaine, died, and this Cuanna was a contemporary
of Guaire, son of Colman, and there was a rivalry between them in
hospitality and charity; and hence the two jesters, Comhdan and Conall,
composed between them this stanza on their rivalry, in which they say:

Everything that is in his hand
Guaire son of Colman bestows, 
What each one covets is given him
By the Warrior of Liathmhain.

It was, moreover, in their reign that Raghallach, son of Udaidh, who
was king of Connaught twenty-five years, was slain by Maoilbrighde,
son of Mothlachan, and by his slaves. It happened thus: this
Raghallach was full of hatred and envy towards the son of an elder
brother, fearing lest he might oppose him and deprive him of the
kingdom of Connaught. Still he found no opportunity of slaying his
brother's son, so that he was wasting away through not taking food
because of his envy of his brother's son. Moreover, he sent a
messenger to his kinsman, asking him to come and see him. As to the
kinsman, he understood Raghallach's deceit, and he assembled a company
and went to meet his kinsman Raghallach; and as he went into his
presence he directed his party to wear their swords unsheathed at
their waists, and when Raghallach saw this he said: "It is sad that he
whom I love most dearly on earth, and whom I wish to make my heir,
trusts me not, though I am at the point of death." Now, when his
kinsman heard this he was greatly afflicted at heart, and he came
alone next day to see him, and Raghallach's party sprang upon him and
slew him. Thereupon Raghallach got up in health on the spot and set to
feasting merrily and most pleasantly. But Muireann, that is,
Raghallach's wife, inquired of her druid after Raghallach had slain
his kinsman whether there was trouble in store for her. The druid said
that since Raghallach had slain his kinsman, both their deaths would
be speedily brought about by their own children; and, moreover, that
it was the child in her womb who would bring about their death. She
made this known to Raghallach, and he told her to kill the child
immediately after its birth.

Muireann gave birth to a daughter, and put her into a bag with a view
to giving her to one of her people, a swineherd, that he might kill
her. When the swineherd saw the face of the infant his heart yearned
towards it, and he put it in the same bag in which he got it from its
mother and took it privately to the door of a pious woman, who was
near at hand, and left the bag on one of the arms of a cross that was
near the pious woman's house. The pious woman came upon the bag, and
when she found the infant in it she loved it greatly and reared it
religiously. And there was not in Ireland in her time a more beautiful
girl, so that her fame reached Raghallach, and he sent messengers
asking her of her nurse. But the nurse did not grant this request.
After this she was brought to him by force, and when he saw her he
became greatly in love with her and he had her as a concubine. Now his
own wife, Muireann, became jealous, and went to the king of Ireland to
complain of this deed. And the scandal of this evil deed spread
through Ireland, and the saints of Ireland were pained thereat, and
Feichin Fabhair came to Raghallach and charged him, and many saints
came with him and entreated him to give up this sin. But he did not
give it up for them all, though they fasted on his account. However,
as a warning to other people of inordinate desires, the saints prayed
God that he should not be alive the Bealltaine following, and that he
should fall by wicked people, and, moreover, by puny arms and in a
squalid spot; and all these things befel him on the approach of
Bealltaine. For a wild deer which had been wounded came helter skelter
into the island in which Raghallach was, and which he was guarding,
and as he saw the deer he laid hold of his javelin and made a cast of
it at the animal and pierced it through therewith. The deer swam away
from him and he followed it in a skiff, and the deer went some
distance from the lake and came upon slaves, who were cutting turf,
and they slew the deer and divided it between them. Ragallach came up
to them and threatened them for having divided the deer, and asked
them to give back the venison. But the slaves resolved to slay the
king, and thereupon they attacked him with their oars and other
implements, and slew him as was foretold regarding him by the saints.
And Muireann, his wife, died through jealousy of her own daughter.

It was about this time that the Battle of Carn Conaill was fought by
Diarmaid, son of Aodh Slaine, wherein Cuan, son of Amhalghuidh, who
was king of Munster ten years, and Cuan, son of Conall, king of Ui
Fidhgheinnte, and Talamonach, king of Ui Liathain, were slain; and it
was through the prayer of Ciaran's community at Cluain Mic Nois that
Diarmaid won that battle. And when Diarmaid returned to Cluain Mic
Nois he bestowed land on that church as altar-land. And the name of
that land at this day is Liath Mhanchain, and it was at Cluain Mic
Nois that Diarmaid willed that he should be buried after his death. It
was about this time that St. Furs a, of the race of Lughaidh Lamha,
brother of Oilill Olum, died, and also Moicheallog, the saint, who
lived and blessed at Cill Moicheallog; and this saint was of the race
of Conaire, son of Eidirsceol. After this Ceallach fell at the Brugh
on the Boyne, and Conall Caol was slain by Diarmaid, son of Aodh
Slaine.

Blathmhac and Diarmaid Ruanuidh, two sons of Aodh Slaine, son of
Diarmaid, son of Fearghus Ceirrbheoil, son of Conall Creamthainne, son
of Niall Naoighiallach, of the race of Eireamhon, held jointly the
sovereignty of Ireland seven years; and it was in their reign that
Hossa fought the Battle of Pancti, where fell the king of Sacsa and
thirty lords of his people. It was about this time that St. Ulltan
died, and Maodhog of Fearna, son of Seadna, son of Earc, son of
Fearadhach, son of Fiachraidh, son of Amhalghuidh, son of Muireadhach,
son of Carrthann, son of Earc, son of Eochaidh, son of Colla Uais, and
Cuimin Foda, son of Fiachna the saint, and Maonach, son of Finghin,
king of Munster. Diarmaid Ruanuidh and Blathmhac died of the plague
called the Buidhe Conaill.

Seachnasach, son of Blathmhac, son of Aodh Slaine, son of Diarmaid,
son of Fearghus Ceirrbheoil, son of Conall Creamhthainne, son of Niall
Naoighiallach, of the race of Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of
Ireland six years. It was in the reign of this king that the Battle of
Feart took place between the Ulstermen and the Cruithnigh, wherein
there were many slain on both sides. It was about this time that
Baoithin, abbot of Beannchair, died. After this Seachnasach, king of
Ireland, fell by Dubh nDuin, of the Cineal Cairbre.

Ceannfaolaidh, son of Blathmhac, son of Aodh Slaine, son of Diarmaid,
son of Fearghus Ceirrbheoil, son of Conall Creamhthainne, son of Niall
Naoighiallach, of the race of Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of
Ireland four years. And it was in his reign that Beannchair was burned,
and its community slain by foreigners. And the reason why this place
is called Beannchair is this, Breasal Breac, king of Leinster, went
with a full host to plunder Alba, and brought much cattle and herds
with him to Ireland, and when himself and his host came to land they
built a camp in the place which is now called Beannchair, and they
killed many of the cows for meat, and many of the cows' horns, or
beanna, remained throughout the plain; and hence the place was given
the name of Magh Beannchair. And a long time after that, when the holy
abbot Comhghall built a monastery in the same place he ordered that it
be named from the place in which it was built, and hence it is called
the Monastery of Beannchair. Soon after the foreigners had burned this
monastery, Ceannfaolaidh, king of Ireland, was slain by Fionnachta
Fleadhach, son of Donnchadh, in the Battle of Cealltair.

Fionnachta Fleadhach, son of Donnchadh, son of Aodh Slaine, of the
race of Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of Ireland seven years; and in
his reign many banquets and feasts used to take place in Ireland,
hence he is called Fionnachta Fleadhach. It was, too, in his reign
that Colman, bishop of Inis Bo Finne, died, and Fionan, who lived and
blessed in Ard Fionain; and this Fionan was of the race of Fiachaidh
Muilleathan; and St. Arannan died. It was Fionnachta who won the
Battle of Loch Gabhair against the Leinstermen, wherein many of the
Leinstermen fell by him. It was in his reign that Ceannfaolaidh, the
learned, died, and Dunghal, son of Scannal, king of the Cruithnigh,
and Ceannfaolaidh, king of Ciannachta Ghlinne Geimhean, were burned by
Maolduin, son of Maoilfithrigh, in Dun Ceitheirn. It was in his reign,
moreover, that the British made an incursion into Ireland, according
to Beda in the 26th chapter of the fourth book. The leader of the host
of the king of Sacsa, whose name was Egberthus, the leader's name
being Berthus, came and plundered a large part of Ireland, in the age
of the Lord 684. Thus does Beda lament this deed: "Berthus plundered
deplorably an inoffensive nation and one ever most friendly to the
people or race of Sacsa." And they fought the Battle of Raith Mor in
Magh Line, wherein they slew Cumascach, king of the Cruithnigh,
together with a large body of Gaels. Moreover, the Britons went thence
on an expedition to the Orcades and plundered that island. A company
of them also landed in the east of Leinster, and they plundered
churches and country districts, and they returned after having
committed much spoiling and plundering. Here is a stanza that Adhamnan
composed for Fionnachta when he remitted the Boraimhe to Molaing:

Fionnachta, son of Donnchadh,
Remitted much to a saint:
Thrice fifty hundred chained cows,
And each cow with her calf.

Soon after that Fionnachta, king of Ireland, was slain by Aodh, son of
Duitheach, and by Conghalach, son of Conaing, at Greallach Doluidh.

Loingseach, son of Aonghus, son of Domhnall, son of Aodh, son of
Ainmire, of the race of Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of Ireland
eight years. It was in his reign that Adhamnan came from Alba to
Ireland to preach, and Moling, of Luachair, died, and Magh
Muirtheimhne was plundered by the Welsh. It was in the reign of this
king that a great cow-plague existed in Sacsa and in Ireland, and
there was a famine for three years in Ireland, so that the people
devoured one another there at this time. It was about this time that
St. Egberthus went to preach to Alba, and Muireadhach Muilleathan,
king of Connaught, died, and the Ulstermen won the Battle of Magh
Cuilinn over the Britons, where many Britons fell. It was about this
time that Adhamnan, abbot of I, died, aged seventy-seven years, and
the Saracens, with a numerous host, laid siege to Constantinople and
built a three years' encampment around it. After this they raised the
siege. After this Coibhdhean, bishop of Ard Srath, died. Soon after
this the Battle of Corann was fought by Ceallach, son of Raghallach,
who was king of Connaught for seven years, wherein he slew Loingseach,
son of Aonghus, king of Ireland.

Conghal Ceannmhaghair, son of Fearghus Fanad, son of Conall Gulban,
son of Niall Naoighiallach, of the race of Eireamhon, held the
sovereignty of Ireland nine years. It was this Conghal who burned all
Cill Dara, both church and district. But he himself got a sudden and
instant death after this event.

Fearghal, son of Maoilduin, son of Maoilfhithrigh, son of Aodh
Uairiodhnach, son of Domhnall, son of Muircheartach, son of
Muireadhach, son of Eoghan, son of Niall Naoighiallach, of the race of
Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of Ireland seventeen years. Ceacht,
daughter of Ceallach, son of Maolcobha, king of Cineal Conaill, was
this Fearghal's mother. And it was in his reign that Baodan, bishop of
Inis Bo Finne, died, and a battle was fought between the Dal Riada and
the Britons in the place called Cloch Mhionnuirc, and the Britons were
defeated there. It was about this time that Neachtain, king of Alba,
expelled a community of monks from Britain for animadverting on his
vices.

It was in the reign of this king that there fell the three showers
from which Niall Frasach is named, as he was born when these freasa or
showers fell; a shower of honey on Fothain Bheag and a shower of
silver on Fothain Mhor and a shower of blood on Magh Laighean. It was
about this time that the Battle of Almhuin was fought between Murchadh,
son of Bran, who was fifteen years king of Leinster, and Fearghal, son
of Maolduin, king of Ireland; and the host the king of Ireland brought
to that battle amounted to twenty-one thousand, and the host the king
of Leinster brought there amounted to nine thousand and eight score
chosen warriors as a bodyguard to the king himself when going into the
battle. And the king of Ireland was defeated in the battle, and two
hundred and sixty-nine of his people were seized with frenzy, and
three thousand two hundred of them were slain; and others say that
seven thousand of them were slain. The reason why this disaster befel
the king of Ireland was that when he was on the point of setting out
to fight the Battle of Almhain a party of his followers went to
plunder a church called Cillin, and carried off by force the one cow
that the solitary hermit of that church had and the hermit cursed the
king and his host, and hence they met reverse in battle; and the king
of Ireland fell there with many of his people, as we have said above.

Fogharthach, son of Niall, son of Cearnach Sotal, son of Diarmaid, son
of Aodh Slaine, of the race of Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of
Ireland one year, and fell by Cionaoth, son of Iorghalach, in the
Battle of Beilge.

Cionaoth, son of Iorghalach, son of Conuing Currach, son of Conghal,
son of Aodh Slaine, of the race of Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of
Ireland four years. It was in the reign of this king that the relics
of Adhamnan were brought from Alba to Ireland. After that the Battle
of Drom Corrain was won by Flaithbhearthach, son of Loingseach,
against Cionaoth, son of Iorghalach, where Cionaoth, king of Ireland,
fell, and many of his people along with him.

Flaithbhearthach, son of Loingseach, son of Aonghus, son of Domhnall,
son of Aodh, son of Ainmire, of the race of Eireamhon, held the
sovereignty of Ireland seven years. Muireann, daughter of Ceallach,
was the mother of this Flaithbhearthach. It was in the reign of this
king, according to Beda, that the Battle of Drom Dearg, in Alba, was
fought between Drust and Aonghus, two kings of the Cruithnigh, for the
mastery of the country, and Drust and many of his people fell there.

And soon after that was fought the Battle of Murbholg between the Dal
Riada and the Picts, that is, the Cruithnigh, wherein many of the
Picts were killed. It was about this time that the Battle of Fotharta,
in Muirtheimhne, was won by Aodh Ollan and by the clann Neill against
the Ultonians, wherein Aodh Roin, who was thirty years king of Ulster,
and Conchadh, son of Cuana, king of Cobha, were slain. After this
Flaithbhearthach, son of Loingseach, king of Ireland, died at Ard
Macha.

Aodh Ollan, son of Fearghal, son of Maolduin, son of Maoilfithrigh,
son of Aodh Uairiodhnach, son of Domhnall, son of Muirchearthach, son
of Muireadhach, son of Eoghan, son of Niall Naoighiallach, of the race
of Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of Ireland nine years. Brige,
daughter of Orca, son of Carrthann, was mother of Aodh Ollan. It was
in the reign of this Aodh that the Battle of Bealach Feile was fought
between Munster and Leinster, wherein fell many Munstermen and
Leinstermen, together with Ceallach, son of Faolchur, king of Osruighe.
It was Cathal son of Fionghaine, king of Munster, who won that battle.

After this Aonghus, son of Fearghus, king of the Picts, routed and
defeated the Dal Riada in Scotland, and he plundered and robbed them
and burned Dun Creige; and he seized Donnghal and Fearghus, two sons
of Sealbhuidhe, king of Dal Riada, and put them in prison. It was
about this time that a meeting took place between Aodh Ollan, king of
Ireland, and Cathal, son of Fionghaine, king of Munster, at Tir
Daghlas, in Urmhumha, where they imposed Patrick's rule and law and
tribute on Ireland. Soon after that the Battle of Ath Seannaigh, that
is, the Battle of Uchbhadh, was fought between Aodh Ollan, king of
Ireland, and Aodh, son of Colgan, king of Leinster, wherein Aodh Ollan,
was severely wounded, and wherein fell Aodh, son of Colgan, and Bran
Beag, son of Murchadh, half-king of Leinster, together with many
Leinster nobles, and nine thousand Leinstermen fell there. After that
Flann, son of Cronnmhaol, bishop of Reachruinne, and Cathal son of
Fionnghaine, king of Munster, and Aodh Balbh son of Innreachtach, who
was the king of Connaught seven years, died; and Aodh Ollan, king of
Ireland, was slain in the Battle of Seiridmheadh, that is at Ceanannus,
by Domhnall son of Murchadh.

Domhnall, son of Murchadh, son of Diarmaid, son of Airmeadhach Caoch,
son of Conall Guithbhinn, son of Suibhne, son of Colman Mor, son of
Diarmaid, son of Fearghus Ceirrbheoil, son of Conall Creamhthainne,
son of Niall Naoighiallach, of the race of Eireamhon, held the
sovereignty of Ireland forty-two years. Ailpin, daughter of Comhghall,
of the Dealbhna Mor, was mother of Domhnall, son of Murchadh, king of
Ireland. It was in his reign that Colman, bishop of Laosan, was slain
by the Ui Turtaire, and Cormac, bishop of Ath Truim, died. It was
about this time that the form of a serpent was seen in motion in the
air; and Seachnasach, son of Colgan, king of Ui Cinnsealaigh died; and
Caitheasach, son of Oilloll, king of the Cruithinigh, was slain at
Raith Beitheach by the Leinster-men. It was in the reign of this king
that Suairleach, bishop of Fobhar, died, also Osbhran, bishop of
Cluain Chreamhuidh.

After that was fought the Battle of Bealach Cro by Criomhthann, son of
Eanna, where fell Fionn, son of Arb, at Tiobraid Fhinn, and the
Dealbhna were slaughtered around him; and it is from this event that
the lake in that place is called Loch an Bhealaigh Chro, and the well
that is in the same place is called Tobar Finn. It was about this time
that Cumascach, king of Ui Failghe, fell by Maolduin, son of Aodh
Beannan, king of Munster, and Aonghus, king of Alba, died; and Mac
Coinchearca, king of Osruighe, won the Battle of Bealach Gabhran
against Dungal, son of Laidhghein, king of Ui Cinnsealaigh, wherein
Dunghal was slain, together with many of the Leinster nobles. And
Muirchearthach, son of Murchadh, king of Leinster, died. After this
Domhnall, son of Murchadh, first king of Ireland of the clann Colmain,
died.

Niall Frasach, son of Fearghal, son of Maolduin, son of Maoilfithrigh,
son of Aodh Uairiodhnach, son of Domhnall, son of Muircheartach, son
of Muireadhach, son of Eoghan, son of Niall Naoighiallach, of the race
of Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of Ireland four years. Aithiochta,
daughter of Cian O Conchubhair king of Ciannachta, was the mother of
Niall Frasach. And the reason why he is called Niall Frasach is that
there fell three showers in Ireland when he was born -- a shower of
honey on Fothain Bheag and a shower of silver on Fothain Mhor and a
shower of blood on Magh Leighean. And frais means a shower. It was in
the reign of this Niall that Duibhionnracht, son of Cathal, son of
Muireadhach Muilleathan, who was five years king of Connaught, died;
and there was an earthquake and a great famine in Ireland, and Dunghal,
son of Ceallach, king of Osruighe, died. After that was fought the
Battle of Achadh Liag between Ui mBriuin and Ui Maine, where many fell
on either side, and Cronnmhaol, bishop of Cill Mhor, and Ailpin, king
of the Picts, and Aolgnat, bishop of Ard Breacain, died. Soon after
that Artghaile, son of Cathal, went on a pilgrimage to I Columcille,
in Alba, and Fearghus, bishop of Daimhliag, died; and at Corann there
was a battle fought between Cineal Conaill and Cineal Eoghain, wherein
Maolduin, son of Aodh Ollan, king of the Fochla, was victorious, and
Domhnall, son of Aodh Muindearg, was defeated and many of his people
slain there. After this Niall Frasach, king of Ireland, died in I
Columcille, in Alba.



XVI.

Donnchadh, son of Domhnall, son of Murchadh, son of Diarmaid, son of
Airmeadhach Caoch, son of Conall Guithbhinn, son of Suibhne, son of
Colman Mor, son of Diarmaid, son of Fearghus Ceirrbheoil, son of
Conall Creamhthaine, son of Niall Naoighiallach, of the race of
Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of Ireland twenty-seven years, and it
was on his pillow he died.

Aodh Oirndighe, son of Niall Frasach, son of Fearghal, son of Maolduin,
son of Maoilfithrigh, son of Aodh Uairiodhnach, son of Domhnall, son
of Muircheartach, son of Muireadhach, son of Eoghan, son of Niall
Naoighiallach, of the race of Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of
Ireland twenty-four years. Dunlaith, daughter of Flaithbheartach, son
of Loingseach king of Cineal gConaill, was the mother of Adoh
Oirndighe. And he is called Aodh Oirndighe, for when he was weaned 
from his nurse's breasts he set to suck his fists as if he were
sucking his nurse's breasts; hence he was called Aodh Oirndighe or
Aodh Doirndighe.

It was in the reign of Aodh Oirndighe that the Lochlonnaigh first came
to Ireland in the year of the Lord 820. And twelve years after that
the tyrant Turgesius came to Ireland, and it was Olchobhar, son of
Cionaoth, son of Conghal, son of Maolduin, son of Aodh Beannain, who
was king of Munster at that time according to certain chroniclers. But
the Policronicon where it treats of Ireland in its chronicle says that
it was when Feidhlimidh, son of Criomhthann, reigned in Munster that
the Lochlonnaigh first came to Ireland. Thus it speaks: "From the
coming of Patrick to the time of Feidhlimidh, son of Criomhthann, king
of Munster, thirty-three kings held the sovereignty of Ireland during
the period of the four hundred years that elapsed from the coming of
Patrick to Ireland till Feidhlimidh assumed the sovereignty of
Munster; and in the time of Feidhlimidh came the Norwegians with their
leader Turgesius to conquer that country,"[501] that is, Ireland.
Others say that it was when Airtre, son of Cathal, reigned in Munster,
the Lochlonnaigh began to come to plunder Ireland. And in this they
are right. However, they did not get a grip of Ireland though they
harassed the country. Moreover what the Policronicon states is true
where it says that it was in the reign of Feidhlimidh, son of
Criomhthann, over Munster that the tyrant Turgesius, who reduced
Ireland to slavery, came. True also is the statement of those who
assert that the Lochlonnaigh came to Ireland in the reign of Olchobhar
over Munster, but the tribe who came hither then were the Dainfhir or
Danes from Dania, that is Denmark, and it is these are called
Duibhgheinnte or Dubhlochlonnaigh in the old books of the seanchus,
while the Norwegians are called Finngheinnte or Fionnlochlonnaigh.

Understand now, O reader, that Lochlonnaigh in Irish is not a specific 
name for any particular tribe, but Lochlonnach means a man who is
strong at sea; for lonn means strong and loch means the sea; and since
the inhabitants of those countries of the north of Europe held for a
time powerful sway over Ireland, as we shall hereafter relate, the
Irish called them Lochlonnaigh, that is men strong at sea, because of
the great sway they acquired over the Gaels as we shall show below on
the authority of the book which is called Cogadh Gall re Gaedhealaibh.
Here follows a short summary of the history.

While Aodh Oirndighe reigned over Ireland and Airtre son of Cathal was
king of Munster, the foreigners came to Caoin-inis O bhFathaidh, their
number being the manning of sixty ships, and they ravaged the country
and plundered and burned Inis Labhrainne and Dairinis; and the
Eoghnacht of Loch Lein gave them battle, and therein were slain four
hundred and sixteen foreigners. Another fleet bringing
Fionnlochlonnaigh, that is Norwegians, came to Ireland the second year
of Feidhlimidh son of Croimhthann's reign over Munster, and they
ravaged and plundered Inis Teimhin and Beannchair and Cluain Uama and
Ros Maolaidh and Sceilig Mhichil. Another fleet came to the north of
Ireland and they plundered Beannchair in Ulster and slew its bishop,
and its learned people, and they broke the shrine of Comhghall.
Another fleet of the same people came to Ui Cinnsealaigh, and they
plundered Teach Munna, Teach Moling and Inistiog; and they went thence
to Osruighe and they plundered the country; and the Ossorians gave
them battle and seven hundred and seven of the Lochlonnaigh fell.
Similarly Dun Deargmhuighe and Inis Eoghanain and Disirt Tiobraide and
Lios, Mor were spoiled by them. They burned and spoiled Ceall Molaise,
Gleann da Loch, and Cluain Ard Mobheadhog and Sord Cholum Chille and
the Daimhliag Chiarain and Shine and Cealla Saile and Cluain Uama and
Mungairid and the greater number of the churches of all Ireland.

Another fleet of them entered the harbour of Luimneach and spoiled and
plundered Corca Baiscinn and Tradruidhe and Ui Conaill Gabhra, and the
Ui Conaill gave them battle at Seannaid, and many of the Lochlonnaigh
were slain therein, but we do not know the full number. After that
Turgesius the tyrant came with a large fleet to the north of Ireland
and became ruler of all the Lochlonnaigh that were then in Ireland,
and they spoiled all the north of Ireland, and they let the Danair
loose on the entire of Leath Cuinn; and they put some of their vessels
on Loch nEachach and others in Lughmhuigh and on Loch Ribh, and they
plundered Ard Macha thrice in a single month. And Turgesius took
possession of the abbacy of Ard Macha, as Columcille had foretold, as
he himself says:

A fleet on Loch Ribh,
The Gentiles will be greatly uplifted;
Of them will be the abbot of Ard Macha,
And the tyranny of a despot.

The saints of Ireland foretold that evil would befal Ireland through
the pride of their rulers, and through their tyranny, hence the
oppression of the Lochlonnaigh came on them in the reign of Airtre son
of Cathal over Munster, and of Aodh Oirndighe over all Ireland. And it
was with the tyrant Turgesius that the Lochlonnaigh came again to
Ireland when Feidhlimidh, son of Criomhthann, was king of Munster; and
it was this Turgesius who banished Farannan the primate and his clergy
from Ard Macha, as we have said, and he took their place himself, and
he was seized by Maoilseachlainn afterwards, who drowned him in Loch
Ainninn, as we shall relate below. It was in the reign over Ireland of
Aodh Oirndighe that the Lochlonnaigh plundered Inis Phradraig and many
of the islands that lie between Ireland and Alba.

It was about this time that Patrick's tribute was imposed on the
people of Connaught by Gormghal, son of Din Dathaidh, and Aodh
Oirndighe divided Meath between the two sons of Donnchadh, son of
Domhnall, to wit, Conchubhar and Oilill; and I Coluimcille in Alba was
burned by the Lochlonnaigh at this time, and Laighin was twice
plundered in one month by Aodh Oirndighe, king of Ireland. In the
following year, after the Feast of St. Patrick, there were great
thunder and lightning in Ireland, which killed one thousand and ten
persons, male and female, between Corca Baiscinn and the sea, and Inis
Fide burst itself into three parts, and in that place as much land as
would support twelve cows was deluged, the sea having come over it.

It was about this time that Aodh Oirndighe, king of Ireland, together
with a numerous host went into Leinster to Dun Cuair; and he divided
the province of Leinster between two, that is between Muireadhach, son
of Ruaraidh and Muireadhach, son of Bran. After that the Lochlonnaigh
burned Inis Muireadhaigh. About this time Eochaidh, bishop of
Tamhlacht, died; and the Lochlonnaigh wreaked great slaughter on the
men of Umhall, on which occasion Coscrach, son of Flonn Abhradh and
Dunadhach, king of Umhall, died; and Eidirsceol, son of Ceallach,
bishop of Gleann da Loch, and Siadhal, bishop of Ros Commain, died.
After that Aodh Oirndighe, king of Ireland, was slain in the Battle of
Da Fearta by Maolcanaigh



XVII.

Conchubhar, son of Donnchadh, son of Domhnall, son of Murchadh, son of
Diarmaid, son of Airmeadhach Caoch, son of Conall Guithbhinn, son of
Suibhne, son of Colman Mor, son of Diarmaid, son of Fearghus
Ceirrbheoil, son of Conall Creamhthaine, son of Niall Naoighiallach,
of the race of Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of Ireland fourteen
years. It was in the reign of this Conchubhar over Ireland that
Ceannfaolaidh, bishop of Ath Truim, died, and Eochaidh O Tuathail,
bishop of Lughmhagh; and Inis Daimhli and Corcach were plundered by
the Lochlonnaigh; and Patrick's tribute was imposed on Munster by
Feidhlimidh son of Criomhthann, and by Airtre son of Conchubhar, and
Patrick's tribute was imposed on Connaught by the same Airtre; and
Beannchair and Dun Leathghlaise were plundered by the Lochlonnaigh;
and they burned Magh Bile and its penitential cells. About this time
Muireadhach, son of Eochaidh, was king of Ulster, and Conchubhar, son
of Donnchadh, king of Ireland, inflicted the Defeat of Aonach
Tailltean on the Gaileanga, wherein many of them fell; and the
Lochlonnaigh inflicted a great defeat on the Leinstermen at Drom
Connla, where Conuing, son of Cu Choingiolt, king of the Forthuath,
fell, and several others with him. After that Ard Macha was plundered
by the Lochlonnaigh, and a month afterwards Lughmhagh and Fine
Chiannachta and Lios Mor with all their churches were plundered by
them.

Now up to this time there were four chief schools in Ireland, to wit,
a school at Ard Macha in which there were seven thousand students
according to an old scroll which was found in Oxford, and a school at
Cashel, a school at Dun da Leathghlais and a school at Lios Mor,
together with numerous colleges as well. But they were now broken up.
After this Conchubhar son of Donnchadh, king of Ireland, died.

Niall Caille, son of Aodh Oirndighe, son of Niall Frasach, son of
Fearghal, son of Maolduin, son of Maolfithrigh, son of Aodh
Uairiodhnach, son of Domhnall, son of Muircheartach, son of
Muireadhach, son of Eoghan, son of Niall Naoighiallach, of the race of
Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of Ireland fifteen years. Meadhbh,
daughter of Innreachtach, son of Muireadhach, king of Connaught, was
the mother of this Niall. And he is called Niall Caille, for one day
when Niall with a large host of calvalry approached the river which is
called Callann, and there was a great flood in the river at that time,
a youth of the king's party went before them to explore the river and
was drowned. The king asked the party to go to his relief and he got
no one to go. The king himself went on his horse to relieve him, and
as the horse's feet touched the bank of the river, the bank gave way
and the river carried away the king, and he was drowned, as it was
foretold him that he would die by being drowned at Callann. For this
reason he is called Niall Caille.

It was in the reign of this Niall that Diarmaid, son of Tomaltach,
king of Connaught, died, and Loch Bricirnne was plundered against
Conghalach, son of Eochaidh, and he himself was slain by the
Lochlonnaigh; and Niall Caille, king of Ireland, went with a large
host to Leinster to appoint a king over them, that is Bran, son of
Faolan. After that Fearna Maodhog was plundered by the Lochlonnaigh
and Mungairid and many churches in Urmhumha were burned by them; and
similarly Cill Dara was plundered by the Lochlonnaigh. It was about
this time that the crews of sixty ships came from Normandy to the
Boyne, and forty ships to the river Lithfe, and that fleetful
plundered Magh Lithfe, that is the county of Ath Cliath, and Magh
Breagh, that is Fine Ghall, their churches, fortresses and dwellings.

After this the Lochlonnaigh won a battle over the Ui Neill at Inbhear
na mBarc, between the Sionainn and the sea, wherein many fell though
only their chief leaders are mentioned; and Inis Cealltra and Cluain
Mic Nois and all the churches of Loch Eirne were burned by the
Lochlonnaigh.

It was about this time that Feidhlimidh, son of Criomhthann, was king
of Munster and archbishop of Leath Mogha, and he went to plunder Leath
Cuinn from Biorra to Teamhair Bhreagh, and he was detained at
Teamhair; and Innreachtach, son of Maolduin, was slain by
Feidhlimidh's party at Teamhair, and soon after that Feidhlimidh, son
of Criomhthann, died, having been then twenty seven years king of
Munster; and the character the Leabhar Irsi gives of him is: "the
excellent, wise man and anchorite of the Scots, rested in peace."[503]
From this it is to be inferred that Feidhlimidh, son of Criomhthann,
was a wise and pious man in his own time.

This Feidhlimidh made the circuit of Leath Cuinn, and paid the rents
that by law its kings were entitled to from the king of Cashel --
while they gave the food-supply that they were bound to give in
exchange for them -- and the wages that the kings of Cashel were bound
to pay to the kings of Leath Cuinn and to the kings of Leinster, and
to the chief territorial lords that were under them, as St. Beinen,
son of Seiscnen, primate of Ireland, sets it down in the Book of
Rights in the poem which begins: Every king is entitled to get from
the king of Cashel. Now the following are the rent and wages of these
kings from the king of Cashel, and his circuit amongst them and his
seasons for getting provisions from them on the occasion of it; a
hundred swords, a hundred goblets, a hundred steeds and a hundred
mantles for the king of Cruachain, and provision for two quarters from
the king of Cruachain for the king of Cashel, and that he should 
escort him to Tir Chonaill; twenty bracelets or rings, twenty chess-
boards, twenty steeds for the king of Cineal Conaill, and provision
for a month from the king of Cineal Conaill, and that he should escort
him to Tir Eoghain; fifty goblets, fifty swords for the king of
Oileach, and provision for a month, and that he should escort him to
Tulach Og; thirty goblets, thirty swords for the prince of Tulach Og,
provision for twelve days from him for the king of Munster, and that
he should escort him to Oirghialla; eight coats of mail, three score
tunics and three score steeds for the king of Oirghialla, and
provision for him for a month in Eamhain, and that he should escort
him to Ulster to the clann Rudhruighe; a hundred goblets, a hundred 
mantles, a hundred swords, a hundred steeds and ten ships for the king
of Ulster and provision for two months from the clann Rudhruighe for
him, and that he should escort him to Tara; thirty coats of mail,
thirty rings, a hundred steeds and thirty chess-boards for the king of
Tara, and provision for a month from the king of Tara for him and the
four tribes of Tara to escort him to Ath Cliath; ten women, ten ships,
ten steeds for the king of Ath Cliath and provision for a month for
him from the king of Ath Cliath, and that he should escort him to
Leinster; thirty cows, thirty ships, thirty steeds, thirty female
slaves or maidens for the king of Leinster, and provision for two
months for him from Leinster, to wit, a month from Upper Leinster and
a month from Lower Leinster; thirty steeds, thirty coats of mail,
thirty swords for the chief for Lower Leinster from the king of Cashel.
Understand, O reader, that I am not the author of these things, but St.
Beinen, as is plain from the Book of Rights.[504]



XVIII.

And after the death of Feidhlimidh, son of Criomhthann, Olchobhar,
abbot of Imleach Iobhair, assumed the sovereignty of Cashel; and in
that year Maoilseachlainn, king of Meath, won a battle over the
Lochlonnaigh at Casan Brige in Meath, where seven hundred of them fell,
and Tighearnach defeated them at Doire Dhisirt dha Chonna. It was
about this time that Saxolbh, leader of the Lochlonnaigh, was slain by
the Ciannachta of Gleann Geimhean, and great slaughter was made of the
Lochlonnaigh at Carn Fearadhach and terrible slaughter also at Eas
Ruadh.

After this Ath Cliath was first taken by the Lochlonnaigh. It was also
about this time that Cormac son of Cuileannan, who was king of Munster
seven years, and was at the same time archbishop at Cashel, was born,
and the bishop of Tealach, whose name was Exnich, was slain, and the
Lochlonnaigh won a battle over the Connaughtmen, in which fell
Maolduin, son of Muirgheas, and many Connaughtmen with him; and Brian,
son of Faolan, king of Laoighis, died. After that the Lochlonnaigh
came with a large fleet on Loch nEachach, and they plundered the
districts and churches of the north of Ireland and similarly they
burned Fearna and Corcach.

Niall Caille, king of Ireland, went at this time with a numerous host
to plunder and spoil Feara Ceall and Dealbhna Eathra; and Murchadh,
son of Aodh, king of Connaught, died at this time, also Joseph, bishop
of Cluain Uais. It was about this time also that the Lochlonnaigh
built a camp on Linn Duachaill from which they plundered the districts
of Teathbha. Similarly the Lochlonnaigh built another camp at
Duibhlinn from which they plundered Leinster and Ui Neill and their
districts and churches to Sliabh Bladhma. And after that they
plundered Cluain Eidhneach and Cluain Ioraird and Cluain Mic Nois; and
Fearghus, son of Fothach, king of Connaught, died; and Turgesius,
chief of the Lochlonnaigh, built a dun and a fortress on Loch Ribh;
and they plundered Cluain Mic Nois again, and Cluain Fearta of
Breanainn and Tir da Ghlas and Lothra and many other stone fortresses.
And after that Gormghall, son of Din Dathaidh, bishop of Lann Leire,
died. And Niall Caille, king of Ireland, gave the Lochlonnaigh battle
on Magh Iotha wherein many of them fell by him. And it was soon after
this that Niall Caille, king of Ireland, was drowned at Callan, as we
have said.

The tyrant Turgesius of Norway with his army of Fionnlochlonnaigh held
the supremacy of Ireland thirteen years, after he had been harassing
the country for seventeen years; and during that time he was
oppressing and coercing Ireland, a large fleet having come from Norway
to help him; and they put into harbour in the north of Ireland; and
they plundered that country and got hostages, thence, and they sent
boats manned to spoil Loch nEachach and Loch Ribh, as we have said, in
accordance with what Columcille prophesied in the stanza already given.

Bearchan of the Prophecy also foretold that a tyrant of the
Lochlonnaigh would be king of Ireland, and similarly that every church
in Ireland would have an abbot of the Lochlonnaigh. Thus does he speak
in the following stanza:

The Gentiles will come over the stuttering sea,
They will commix with the men of Ireland;
An abbot of their race will rule each church;
Of them will be a king of Ireland.

When the nobles of Ireland saw that Turgesius was upsetting the
country, and that he had it in his power, and that he was enslaving
and tyrannising over it, these nobles assumed a magnanimous courage
and a valorous steadfast spirit, and they underwent great hardship and
distress in their conflict with these tyrants. Here follow some of the
defeats which the Gaels inflicted on them, namely, their defeat by the
Cineal Conaill at Eas Ruadh where many of them were slain; and their
defeat by the Dal gCais at Ard Breacain; and when Saxolbh, an earl of
the Lochlonnaigh with his party was slain by the Ui Colgan; and when
Olchobhar, son of Cionaoth, king of Munster, and Lorcan, son of
Ceallach, king of Leinster, won the Battle of Sciath Neachtain over
them, wherein they slew Earl Tomar, tanist to the king of Lochlonn,
together with twelve hundred of the nobles of the Lochlonnaigh.
Moreover, the same Olchobhar and the Eoghanacht of Cashel overthrew
them near Cashel, where five hundred of them fell at Dun Mhaoile Tuile.
Three hundred and sixty of them fell by the Ui Fidhghinnte, and two
hundred by the Ciannachta, and twelve hundred at Drom da Chon by
Tighearnach, king of Loch Gabhair; and also Maoilseachlainn, son of
Maolruanuidh, king of Meath, overthrew them in the Battle of Glaslinn
in which seventeen hundred Lochlonnaigh were slain.

Though there were many battles and skirmishes fought between the Gaels
and Turgesius with his Lochlonnaigh, still by reason of the numerous
fleets and the many hosts that came to his aid from Norway and from
other countries in the north of Europe, he conquered the Gaels and
reduced them to subjection and to slavery to himself and to his
foreigners.

Here is a short account of the slavery of the Gaels under the
Lochlonnaigh, and of the rent and tribute imposed on them, to wit, a
Lochlonnach king over every cantred in Ireland, and a chief over every
district and an abbot over every church, a steward over every townland,
and a mercenary or hired soldier over every house, while the
householder had not the disposal of as much as a hen of his own
property; and were there but one stripper in the house neither the
babe one night old nor the sick person would get her milk, but it was
kept for the soldier, and if he were not satisfied he took the
householder with him to the assembly in pledge for his maintenance.
The Lochlonnaigh exacted an ounce of gold each year from every man in
Ireland or else the nose from his head. And neither lord nor lady wore
a mantle or dress but the cast-off clothes and mantles of the
Lochlonnaigh; they were not permitted to give instruction or frequent
church -- but the Lochlonnaigh were in their churches and in their
duns -- with no professors or clergy, without books or jewels in the
abbey-churches and monasteries through fear of them; without a filé,
without a philosopher, without a musician according to the laws of the
country; without the daughter of a king or lord or chief wearing silk
or embroidery; without the son of a king or a chief learning feats of
agility or casting; with no feast or banquet held among friends, but
what remained after the foreigners had been sated therefrom.

The severity of the servitude to which the Lochlonnaigh had brought
the Gaels was the cause of great trouble to all the men of Ireland;
and the remnant of their clergy that survived, and that were wont to
hide themselves in woods and in secret places leading pious lives in
wretchedness, earnestly prayed God to release them from the tyranny of
Turgesius. They fasted also against him, and directed each of the
faithful laity who were subject to them to do the same. And God heard
their prayer, and put Turgesius in the power of the Gaels as we shall
here immediately relate.

While Turgesius thus held oppressive sway, and while the Gaels were
submissive to him in unwilling obedience, he built a fortified
residence for himself near the duinlios of Maoilseachlainn, son of
Maolruanaidh, king of Meath; and on a certain day when he came to the
house of Maoilseachlainn he cast eyes on Maoilseachlainn's daughter, a
beautiful marriageable maiden; and aged and self-indulgent as he was,
he requested her father to give the maiden to him as his mistress. "My
lord," replied Maoilseachlainn, "I am certain that thou wouldst not be
content with my daughter as thy wedded wife, but wouldst deem it
sufficient to have her for a time. I therefore beseech thee not to ask
for her publicly lest she may be baulked of a husband; and as thy
fortress happens to be near this lios in which I reside, I will send
my daughter privately to meet thee, together with the fifteen most
beautiful and loveable maidens in all Meath; and I am certain that
when thou shalt see these ladies thou wilt pay neither heed nor
attention to my own daughter, so far do they excel her in beauty."
Turgesius approved of this, and they fixed a certain night on which
the maiden with her attendant ladies was to be sent to meet Turgesius
to his fortress. About this time there was a gathering and assembly of
all the Lochlonnach chiefs in Ireland to meet Turgesius at Ath Cliath,
with the view to take counsel as to maintaining and preserving their
sway in the country; and while they were there Turgesius made known to
some of the chiefs the agreement he had come to with Maoilseachlainn,
and promised women to those of them who would go with him; and fifteen
of the most daring and lustful of these chiefs went with him, and they
did not rest or tarry till they reached the fortress of Turgesius
together with their lord.

As to Maoilseachlainn he sent privately for fifteen of the most daring
beardless youths that were in Meath, and directed that they be dressed
in women's clothes, and wear a short sword each at the waist, and that
they be thus sent disguised as women to accompany his daughter. And
when the night came on which she was to be sent to meet Turgesius
according to promise, the maiden set out, attended by her ladies, and
went close up to the fortress, and sent a private message to Turgesius
to inform him that herself and her ladies were near the house for the
purpose of paying him a visit; and when he heard this, he directed the
chiefs who were with him to go to their rooms, saying that he would
send them women as he had promised. Thereupon they piled their arms
into one heap on the table which was in the hall, and went to their
rooms, each of them occupying a separate bed, waiting for these ladies
to be distributed among them.
Now at this time Maoilseachlainn with a body of soldiers was with his
daughter, and he directed a number of those youths who were with her
disguised as women, the moment Turgesius should lay hands on his
daughter for the purpose of detaining her with him, to seize him by
force and take him captive, and another party to take possession of
the arms that were in the house, and to spring upon the chiefs who
were within; and he said that he himself with his body of soldiers
would be near the house, and that he would rush into the house at the
first cry to help them to slay the Lochlonnaigh. Thereupon the maiden
with her ladies went in by a back door of the house and reached the
room of Turgesius; and when they had come into his presence, he
glanced at the maiden and her ladies and none of them pleased him but
herself, and then he laid hands on her to detain her with him. When
the youths who were with her saw this, a party of them seized
Turgesius by force and made him captive; the remaining party seized
the arms and held them in their possession, and then Maoilseachlainn
with his party of soldiers came in, and they sprang on the party of
Lochlonnaigh that were in the fortress, and slew them all, both chiefs
and underlings except Turgesius alone; and when they had stripped the
fortress bare they led Turgesius to the duinlios of Maoilseachlainn
where they kept him for a time in captivity.

Now when all the Lochlonnaigh who were in Ireland heard that their
chiefs were slain, and that Turgesius the tyrant had been captured by
Maoilseachlainn, king of Meath, they grew dispirited and discouraged,
so that every party of them who were in the interior of the country
far from seaports used to escape secretly by night and make for their
ships for the purpose of leaving Ireland; and those parties of them
that were in the seaports used to fly to their ships to protect
themselves from the onslaught of the Gaels who were in pursuit of
them; so that the Lochlonnaigh were all banished from Ireland on that
occasion except a small remnant of them who remained under the rule of
the Gaels. And after they were banished Maoilseachlainn drowned
Turgesius in Loch Ainninn, and this deed led to the nobles of Ireland
choosing with one accord Maoilseachlainn as high king of all Ireland,
since the country had been freed by him from the slavery of the
Lochlonnaigh.

Buchanan says that Greaghoir, king of Alba, with a numerous host came
to plunder Ireland in the year of the Lord 877, and that he slew Brian
and Conchubhar, two guardians of the king of Ireland, as the king of
Ireland was a child. But this cannot be true; since we do not read in
the seanchus that there was ever any king of Ireland, from the time of
Slainghe to the Norman Invasion, but a king who obtained the
sovereignty of Ireland by the choice of the people, by the excellence
of his exploits, and by the strength of his hand. And moreover, it was
Turgesius the tyrant who was king of Ireland at that time.



XIX.

Maoilseachlainn, son of Maolruanuidh, son of Donnchadh, son of
Domhnall, son of Murchadh, son of Diarmaid, son of Airmeadhach Caoch,
son of Conall Guithbhinn, son of Suibhne Meann, son of Colman Mor, son
of Diarmaid, son of Fearghus Ceirrbheoil, of the race of Eireamhon,
held the sovereignty of Ireland sixteen years. Arog, daughter of
Cathal, son of Fiachraidh, king of Feara Cul, was the mother of this
Maoilseachlainn.

When the Lochlonnaigh had been banished by Maoilseachlainn, as we have
said, and by the nobles of Ireland, the Fionnlochlonnaigh took counsel
together in Norway as to how or by what means they might obtain a
footing in Ireland in the hope of attaining to the mastery of Ireland
once more. The plan they adopted was to get ready three leaders, who
were brothers and of the noble blood of Norway, with a view to sending
them with a fleet to Ireland on pretence of trading, and with many
desirable commodities and many valuable jewels to bestow on and sell
to the men of Ireland, in order to secure peace and alliance with
them; so that they might thus deceitfully get a hold on the country
and harass it once more. The Polycronicon refers to this affair thus:
"After the death of Turgesius there came from the regions of Norway
seeking for peace and on the pretext of trading three brothers,
Amhlaoibh, Sitric and Iomhar to this island with their followers, and
by the consent of the Irish who were fond of ease they set in order or
built three seaports for their own residence, namely, Port Lairge, Ath
Cliath and Luimneach. And after that, as the companies who came with
them increased, they often made sudden attacks on the natives."[505]

From these words it is to be inferred that it was by the deceit of
these three leaders the Fionnlochlonnaigh from Norway found an
opportunity once more of depredating Ireland. And they grew in
strength once again in Ireland for two reasons. The first of these
reasons was the abundance of help they got from Norway in soldiers and
ships time after time; and the second reason was the disagreement and
the constant dissension that existed among the Gaels themselves at
that time, and in which they mutually spent much of their force. And,
moreover, they were accustomed to give free quarters man for man to
the Lochlonnaigh, whence came to pass that these obtained sway once
more in Ireland, and that they held the Gaels once again in servitude
from this time till the death of Brian, as we shall show from the
annals of Ireland in the following narrative.

While the Fionnlochlonnaigh were harassing Ireland in this manner a
large fleetful of Dubhlochlonnaigh came from Dania or Denmark to Ath
Cliath, and they plundered the coast of the country and slew many
people; and thereupon the Fionnlochlonnaigh assembled to meet them,
and a battle was fought between them at Linn Duachuill where the
Fionnlochlonnaigh were defeated and a thousand of them were slain; and
the Dubhlochlonnaigh in consequence obtained great sway in Ireland.
And soon after this Amhlaoibh, son of the king of Lochloinn, came to
Ireland to become chief ruler of the Danes or Dubhlochlonnaigh, and he
imposed a rent-tax on a great number of the men of Ireland.

It was about this time that Olchobhar, son, of Cionaoth, king of
Munster, died, also Flaithnia, bishop of Biorar, and Cormac, bishop of
Latrach Briuin, and Niall, son of Giollan, this latter having lived
thirty years without food or drink. It was about this time that a
great assembly or convention of the men of Ireland was held at Rath
Aodha mic Bric under Maoilseachlainn, king of Teamhair, and Etgna,
comhorba of Patrick, to make peace between the men of Ireland, and it
was there Cearbhall, king of Osruighe, made submission to the comhorba
of Patrick.

It was there also that Maolguala, son of Donnghal, king of Munster,
and Cearbhall, king of Osruighe, made peace with Leath Cuinn. After
this the people of Normandy stoned to death Maolguala, king of Munster.
It was about this time that Maoilseachlainn, king of Ireland, fought
the Battle of Drom Damhuighe, wherein he wreaked great slaughter on
the Lochlonnaigh of Ath Cliath; and Domhnall, son of Ailpin, king of
the Picti, died. Soon after this Maoilseachlainn, king of Ireland,
died.

Aodh Finnliath, son of Niall Caille, son of Aodh Oirndighe, son of
Niall Frasach, son of Fearghal, son of Maolduin, son of Maoilfithrigh,
son of Aodh Uairiodhnach of the race of Eireamhon, held the
sovereignty of Ireland sixteen years. Gormflaith, daughter of
Donnchadh, son of Domhnall, was mother of Aodh Finnliath, and
Maolmuire, daughter of Cionaoth, son of Ailpin, king of Alba, his wife,
mother of Niall Glundubh.

It was in the reign of Aodh Finnliath that the following events took
place, to wit, Conchubhar, son of Donnchadh, half-king of Meath, was
slain by Amhlaoibh, son of the king of Lochloinn at Cluain Ioraird.
After that this Amhlaoibh went with a numerous host of Lochlonnaigh to
Foirthren in Alba, and pillaged and plundered the Picti and carried
off hostages from them. It was about this time that Aodh Finnliath,
king of Ireland, fought a great battle against the Lochlonnaigh of
Loch Feabhail, and took away with him forty heads severed from the
bodies of their leaders after he had slain twelve thousand of their
number; and he robbed and plundered the fortress, spoiling it both of
cattle and treasure. Soon after this Conall, bishop of Cill Scire,
died; and the dun of Amhlaoibh, king of Lochloinn, was burned in
Cluain Dolcain by the son of Gaoithin and by the son of Ciaran, son of
Ronan; and they slew a hundred leaders of the Lochlonnaigh. After that
Amhlaoibh plundered and spoiled Ard Macha, and slew a thousand Gaels
and took much wealth and a large tribute therefrom. It was about this
time that Ceannfaolaidh, son of Moichthighearn, who was thirteen years
of age, died, and Donnchadh son of Dubh dha Bhuireann, held the
sovereignty of Munster fourteen years; and a battle was fought between
the Picti and the Dubhlochlonnaigh in which many of the Picti were
slain. After this Rudhruighe, son of Moirmhinn, king of Britain, came
to Ireland, fleeing from the Dubhlochlonnaigh, and the relics of St.
Columcille were brought from Alba to Ireland to save them from the
same people.

It was about this time, according to Cormac son of Cuileannan, that
Lorcan son of Lachtna, was king of Thomond; and when the Dal gCais
possessed only Thomond, the northern side of the palace of Cashel from
the extreme corner to the door belonged to them; and they had twelve
cantreds of land to share among them, to wit, from Leim Chon gCulainn
to Bealach Mor in Osruighe and from Sliabh Echtghe to Sliabh Eibhlinne,
and it was they were in the van of the Munster host when going to meet
the enemy, and in the rear when returning from them, as Cormac son of
Cuileannan says in this stanza:

They are first marching into the enemy's country,
They are last when returning,
Through the greatness of their valour in every adversity,
This it is that distinguishes the Dal gCais.

Aodh Finnliath, king of Ireland, died at Drom lonascluinn in the
district of Conall; and Tighearnach, son of Muireadhach, bishop of
Drom Ionasclainn, died at this time.

Flann Sionna, son of Maoilseachlainn, son of Maol ruanuidh, son of
Donnchadh, son of Domhnall, son of Murchadh, son of Diarmaid, son of
Airmeadhach Caoch, son of Conall Guithbhinn, son of Suibhne Meann of
the race of Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of Ireland thirty-eight
years. Lann, daughter of Dunghal, son of Fearghal, king of Osruighe,
was the mother of Flann, son of Maoilseachlainn.

It was in the reign of Flann Sionna, king of Ireland, that the
following events took place. For this king plundered and wasted all
Munster and carried off captives therefrom. It was in his reign too
that Domhnall, son of Muireigen was slain by his own companions, and
Fiachna, son of Ainbhioth, son of Aodh Roin, who was king of Ulster
for one year, and Donnchadh, son of Dubh dha Bhuireann, king of
Munster, died. It was about this time that Cill Dara and Cluain
Ioraird were plundered by the Lochlonnaigh; and Flonn Sionna, king of
Ireland, convened the fair of Taillte; and Dubhlachtna, son of
Maolguala, son of Donnghal, who was king of Munster seven years, died;
and Sitric, son of Iomhar, was slain by a party from Normandy; and
Aidheit, son of Laighneach, who was king of Ulster, was treacherously
slain by his own companions; and Ard Macha was wasted by the
Lochlonnaigh of Loch Feabhail, and there they seized on Cumuscach,
king of Ulster, and Aodh mac Cumuscaigh, his son; and Domhnall, son of
Constantin, king of Alba, died.



XX.

It was about this time that Cormac, son of Cuilennan, son of Sealbhach,
son of Ailghionan, son of Eochaidh, son of Breasal, son of Aonghus,
son of Natfraoch, son of Corc, son of Lughaidh Gaot, son of Oilill
Flann Beag, son of Fiachaidh Muilleathan, son of Eoghan Mor, son of
Oilill Olom, held the sovereignty of Munster seven years. And great
was the prosperity of Ireland while Cormac reigned over Munster. For
Ireland was filled with divine favour and worldly prosperity and
constant peace in his time, so that cattle were without a herd and
flocks without a shepherd during his reign; and cemeteries were
protected in his time, and many churches and monasteries and public
schools to teach letters, law and seanchus were built in his time; and
there was much tilled land, many bees, many beehives, much fasting and
prayer and piety of every kind; and many guest houses were being built
and many books were being written in his time. And every good deed he
asked others to do he did himself first, as almsgiving, mercy, prayer,
Mass and every other such good action. And, moreover, he was fortunate
in this that the party of Lochlonnaigh who were in Ireland for
purposes of plunder abandoned the country while he reigned over
Munster.

Now it happened that Cormac son of Cuileannan, was dwelling at Cashel
on the approach of Easter, and he made proclamation throughout the
Eoghanachts asking them to send to him to Cashel food and provisions
with a view to the noble festival, and they refused him. But when the
Dal gCais heard this they sent abundance of food and provisions to
Cormac so that he was grateful to them. Cormac again sent messengers
to the race of Eoghan asking them to send him jewels and valuables
with a view to bestowing them on strangers since they did not send him
food, but what the race of Eoghan did was to send him the worst arms
and apparel they had, and hence he was displeased with them. Now when
the Dal gCais heard this they sent him the choicest arms and apparel
and jewels to make gifts of, and he was grateful to them and gave them
his blessing, as he himself says in this stanza:

May our sincerest wish be given them,
To the powerful race of Tal,
Fair sovereignty enduring for ever,
Heroism, honour, comeliness, cleric virtues.

We read in the seanchus that there were forty kings on the throne of
Munster from the time of Aonghus, son of Natfraoch, to Mathghamhain,
son of Cinneide, and that during that time the Dal gCais possessed
only Thomond (except Lorcan, who reigned a year and a half after
Cormac son of Cuileannan, according to O Dubhagain, and died at the
end of that time), namely, from Slighe Dhala which is called Bealach
Mor Osruighe to Leim Chon gCulainn in the west of Corca Baiscinn; and
it was the same Dal gCais who used to serve in the wars for the king
of Cashel against Leinster and Leath Cuinn. Hence some poet says in
this stanza:

It is the right of the host of the race of Lughaidh
To lead in battle the Munster hosts,
And to be in the rear afterwards,
Coming from proud unknown lands.

Now when Cormac son of Cuileannan, had been ten years on the throne of
Munster in peace and prosperity, as we have said, he was egged on by
some of the nobles of Munster, and in particular by Flaithbheartach,
son of Ionmhainen, abbot of Inis Cathach, who was of the royal blood,
to exact head tribute from the province of Leinster since it belonged
to Leath Mogha. Accordingly he assembled and brought together the
Munster forces, and when their nobles had come together they resolved
to go and demand head tribute from the Leinstermen by right of the
partition which was made between Mogh Nuadhat and Conn. But Cormac was
reluctant to go on this expedition as he had a foreboding that he was
to fall in the adventure. Still he consented to go. and just before he
set out he left legacies for the sake of his soul to the principal
churches of Ireland, to wit, an ounce of silver and an ounce of gold
and his trappings and his steed to Drom Abhrad, that is Ard Fionain. A
chalice of gold and silver and a satin chasuble to Lis Mor; a chalice
of gold and silver and four ounces of gold and a hundred ounces of
silver to Cashel; three ounces of gold and a missal to Imleach
Iobhair; an ounce of gold and an ounce of silver to Gleann da Loch;
trappings and a steed, an ounce of gold, and a satin cope to Cill
Dara; twenty-four ounces of silver and of gold to Ard Macha; three
ounces of gold to Inis Cathaigh; three ounces of gold and a satin
chasuble to Mungairid and the blessing of Cormac.

High, indeed, was the testimony Cormac bore to the community of
Mungairid, as we read in the poem which begins: O servant bind our
provisions, in which he gives the number of the monks who were in the
community serving the six temples that were in the church. The cathair
of Neasan, the Deacon, that church is called. Here is the number of
the monks that were in it, to wit, five hundred learned monks for
preaching, six hundred psalm-singers to attend choir, and four hundred
aged men for contemplation.

As to Cormac when he was about to set out for Leinster he sent for
Lorcan, son of Lochtna, king of Dal gCas, and when he reached the
palace at Cashel, Cormac bade him welcome, and he made it known to the
nobles of The race of Eoghan who were with him that it was Lorcan who
had the true title to the kingdom of Munster after him according to
the will of Oilill Olom, by which it was ordained that the sovereignty
of Munster should each alternate generation be held by the race of
Fiachaidh Muilleathan and the race of Cormac Cas. But the wish of
Cormac was not given effect to in this matter.

Now as to Cormac when he and Flaithbheartach, son of Ionmhainen, had
got together a large army of Munster-men, they proceeded to Leinster
to demand hostages or rent for the king of Munster, as the people of
Leinster belonged to Leath Mogha. While the Munster host were in one
camp before setting out on that expedition, Flaithbheartach, son of
Ionmhainen, abbot of Inis Cathaigh, went on his horse through the
laneway of the camp, and his horse fell under him into a deep trench
and that was an ill-omen for him. This caused a large number of his
followers and of the entire host to abandon this march, as they
regarded the holy man's fall as a bad omen before their setting out on
an expedition.

Now noble envoys from the Leinstermen and from Cearbhall, son of
Muireigen, came to interview Cormac first, and brought him an offer of
peace from the Leinstermen, to wit, that there should be general peace
in Ireland until the coming Bealltaine, for a fortnight of autumn was
just then over, and hostages were to be given into the hands of
Maonach, abbot of Disirt Diarmada, who was a holy, wise, pious man,
and the Leinstermen were to give Cormac and Flaithbheartach a large
amount of valuables and wealth in consideration of that peace. Cormac
was well pleased to make this peace, and went and made known to
Flaithbheartach that there had come to him envoys from the king of
Leinster asking for peace until the coming Bealltaine, and offering
both of them valuables and wealth from the Leinstermen if they
returned to Munster in peace. When Flaithbheartach heard this he
became greatly enraged and said: "From thy feeble courage it is very
easy to judge how miserable thy mind and spirit," and he poured out
much abuse and insult on Cormac on that occasion.

Cormac answered him thus: "I know well," said he, "what will come of
this, to wit, battle will be given to the Leinstermen and I shall be
slain, and it is likely that thy death will also come of it." And when
Cormac had said these words he went into his own tent troubled and sad,
and when he sat down a vessel of apples was brought to him and he
began to distribute them among his people, saying: "My beloved
people," said he, "I shall not distribute apples among you from this
time forth for ever." "O beloved lord," said his people, "thou hast
made us sad and sorrowful, and thou has often forboded ill for
thyself." "How is this, O people of my heart," said Cormac, "for it is
no great wonder that even though I should not give you apples with my
own hand there will be some one else with me to give them to you."
After this Cormac ordered that a guard be set round him, and that the
pious man Maonach, namely the comhorba of Comhghall, be brought to him
so that he might make his confession and his will in his presence; and
he partook of the Body of Christ in his presence, and he renounced the
world before Maonach, for Cormac felt sure that he himself would be
slain in that battle, still he did not like his people to know this.

Now he ordered that his body be taken to Cluain Uama, if it could be
taken there with general convenience, and if not that it be taken to
the churchyard of Diarmaid, son of Aodh Roin, that is Disirt Diarmada
where he was a student for a long time. However, he preferred to be
buried at Cluain Uama with the son of Leinin. But Maonach preferred he
should be buried at Disirt Diarmada where there was a community of the
monks of Comhghall, and Maonach was then Comhghall's comhorba, and he
was a pious wise man, and he endured great hardship and labour in his
endeavour to arrange peace between the Leinstermen and the king of
Munster on that occasion.

Now many Munstermen deserted the expedition without leave when they
heard that Flann, son of Maoilseachlainn, king of Ireland, was in the
camp of the Leinstermen with a numerous host of infantry and cavalry.
Thereupon Maonach said: "Good people of Munster you should be acting
wisely in giving the good hostages offered you into the hands of
virtuous people until Bealltaine, to wit, the son of Cearbhall, king
of Leinster, and the son of the king of Osruighe." All the Munstermen
replied with one voice that it was Flaithbheartach, son of Ionmhainen,
who forced them to go to Leinster.

After this contention the Munstermen proceeded eastward over Sliabh
Mairge to Droichead Leithghlinne. Now Tiobraide the comhorba of Ailbhe
and a large party of clerics rested at Leithghlinn as well as the
camp-followers and the baggage horses. After this the Munstermen
sounded their trumpets and gave the alarm of battle and proceeded to
Magh nAilbhe. They rested there in the bosom of a wood and fastness
awaiting the enemy. The Munstermen divided themselves into three equal
battalions with Flaithbheartach, son of Ionmhainen, and Ceallach, son
of Cearbhall, king of Osruighe, in command of the first battalion,
Cormac, son of Cuileannan, king of Munster, in command of the second
battalion, and Cormac, son of Mothla, king of the Deise, and a party
of Munster nobles in command of the third battalion. Now in this array
they reached Magh nAilbhe, and they were complaining of the multitude
of the enemy and of the smallness of their own host. For authors write
that the Leinstermen had a host four times as numerous as the
Munstermen. Pitiful indeed was the cry from this battle as the learned
relate, that is, the cry of the Munstermen who were being slain, and
the cry of the Leinstermen who were exulting over that slaughter.

Now the sudden defeat of the Munstermen was owing to two causes,
namely, Ceileachair, kinsman of Ceann Gheagain, one time king of
Munster, mounted his horse, and when he had mounted he said: "O
freemen of Munster," said he, "fly this awful battle and leave the
clerics themselves to fight, as they accepted no other offer but to
give battle to the Leinstermen." With that Ceileachair and a multitude
with him quitted the battlefield. Another cause of the defeat of the
Munstermen was that when Ceallach, son of Cearbhall, saw his people
being smitten stoutly in the battle he suddenly mounted his horse and
said to his followers: "Mount your horses," said he, "and dismiss
those that are opposed to you," and though he said this it was not to
fighting he referred, but to flight. It followed from these two causes
that there was a general rout of the men of Munster. Alas, great was
the slaughter throughout Magh nAilbhe on that occasion. For clerics
were no more spared than laics, but were slain equally with them on
either side; and when they spared a cleric or a laic, it was not
through mercy but through avarice they did so, in the hope of getting
ransom-money on their account.

Cormac son of Cuileannan went to the forefront of the leading
battalion. But his horse jumped into a drain under him and he got
unhorsed, and a party of his followers who were fleeing from the
battle saw him and came to his aid and placed him on his horse. Then
did Cormac notice a freeborn foster-son of his own, whose name was
Aodh, a man learned in wisdom, in law, in history and in Latin, and
king Cormac spoke to him thus: "Beloved son," said he, "do not stay
with me, but escape as best thou canst; and I told thee that I should
be slain in this battle." Cormac advanced, and much blood of men and
steeds lay along his path, and the hind legs of the horse under him
slipped through the slipperiness of the way which was marked with
blood. Thereupon the horse fell backwards and Cormac fell under it and
his neck and back were together broken in that fall; and as he fell he
said: "Into Thy hands, O Lord," etc. He died on the spot, and the
unruly folk came and assailed him with javelins and his head was cut
off.[506]

Dr. Hanmer says in his chronicle that it was by the Lochlonnaigh that
Cormac son of Cuileannan, and Cearbhall son of Muireigen, king of
Leinster, fell in the year of the Lord 905. But this statement of
Hanmer's is false, for Cearbhall did not fall on this occasion, and it
was not the Lochlonnaigh who fought the battle but Flann Sionna, king
of Ireland, as is evident from the historic tract called the "Battle
of Bealach Mughna," in which battle the son of Cuileannan fell.

Now in the very beginning of this battle Ceallach, son of Cearbhall,
king of Osruighe, and his son were slain. Many were the good clerics,
the kings, the chiefs and the warriors that were slain in this battle.
There were slain there Foghartach son of Suibhne, king of Ciarraidhe,
and Oilill son of Eoghan, a young prudent noble, and Colman, abbot of
Ceann Eiteach, chief judicial ollamh of Ireland, and a large crowd
with them. The following are the nobles who fell there, namely, Cormac,
king of the Deise, Dubhagan, king of Fear Maighe, Ceannfaolaidh, king
of Ui Conaill, Conn of Adhar, Aineislis of Ui Toirrdhealbhaigh,
Eidhion king of Eidhne, who had been banished to Munster, Maolmuaidh,
Madagan, Dubh dha Bhuireann, Conall, Fearadhach, Aodh king of Ui
Liathain, and Domhnall king of Dun Cearmna. And those who won the
victory over the Munstermen are Flann, son of Maoilseachlainn, king of
Ireland, and Cearbhall, son of Muireigen, king of Leinster, and Tadhg,
son of Faolan, king of Ui Cinnsealaigh, and Teimheanain, king of Ui
Deaghaidh, Ceallach and Lorcan two kings of the Cineals, and Inneirghe,
son of Duibhghiolla, king of Ui Drona, Follamhain son of Oilill, king
of Fothorta Feadha, Tuathal son of Ughaire, king of Ui Muireadhaigh,
Odhran son of Cinneide, king of Laoighis, Maolcallann son of Fearghal,
king of the Forthuath, and Cleircen, king of Ui Bairrche.



XXI.

After this Flann Sionna, king of Ireland, came with a large royal host
of cavalry to place Diarmaid, son of Cearbhall, on the throne of
Osruighe in the room of his brother Ceallach, son of Cearbhall, who
reigned in Osruighe before him and who fell in this battle as he was
helping Cormac, to whom as king of Leath Mogha he was subject as to
the payment to him of tribute. It was then that a party came to Flann
Sionna, king of Ireland, bringing with them the head of Cormac, son of
Cuileannan, and they said to Flann: "Life and health be thine, O
slaughtering powerful king; behold we have the head of Cormac, king of
Munster, for thee, and according to the custom of the other kings lift
thy thigh and put the head under it and press it beneath thy thigh.
For it was the custom of the kings that preceded thee, when they had
slain a king in battle to cut off his head and to press it beneath
their thighs." But instead of thanking this party he reproached them
severely for this deed, and said that it was a pity to behead the holy
bishop and added that he would not press it; and Flann took the head
in his hand and kissed it, and thrice turned round in full circle with
the blessed head of the holy bishop.

And then the head was reverently carried from him to the body, at
which was Maonach, son of Siadhal, comhorba of Comhghall, and he took
the body of Cormac to Disirt Diarmada, and it was there buried with
honour.

What heart but must rue this deed, the slaying and hewing of the holy
man, the wisest of the men of Ireland in his time, a man learned in
Irish and in Latin, and a most virtuous chaste, pure, prayerful, pious
archbishop, leader in teaching in true wisdom and good morals and high
king of the two provinces of Munster!

And Flann Sionna, king of Ireland, returned, having left Diarmaid son
of Cearbhall on the throne of Osruighe, and having made peace between
himself and his kinsmen. The Leinstermen similarly returned in the
flush of victory. After this Cearbhall son of Muireigen, king of
Leinster, proceeded on his way to Cill Dara bringing with him in
charge a large body of Munstermen and with them Flaithbheartach, son
of Ionmhainen. Then Flaithbheartach was brought into Cill Dara, and
the Leinster clergy fell to reproaching him greatly, for they knew
well that it was through his fault the battle was fought.

But on the death of Cearbhall, king of Leinster, Flaithbheartach was
set free; and a year after Muireann banchomhorba of Brighid
accompanied him out of the town and sent a large party of Leinster
clergy to escort him till he reached Magh nAirbh, and when he had thus
arrived in Munster he went into his own monastery to Inis Cathaigh,
and there he passed some time in virtue and devotion, and came out of
Inis Cathaigh again to assume the sovereignty of Munster after the
death of Dubh Lachtna, son of Maolguala, who was king of Munster seven
years after Cormac; and he was for some years after that king of
Munster, as is stated in the old book of the Annals of Cluain
Eidhneach Fionntain in Laoighis which gives an account of the Battle
of Bealach Mughna, as we read in the historic poem which Dallan, the
ollamh of Cearbhall, king of Munster, composed in which he gives an
abridged summary of this battle, and in which he enumerates the nobles
and gives the numbers of the hosts that fell therein. But I shall set
down here only the first stanza of the poem, since I have mentioned
the nobles by name above. Here is the stanza:

Cormac, of Feimhean, Foghartach, Colman,
Ceallach of hard combats, With six thousand, fell
In the Battle of proud Bealach Mughna.
After this Flann Sionna, king of Ireland, died.

Niall Glundubh, son of Aodh Finnleith, son of Niall Caille, son of
Aodh Oirndighe, son of Niall Frasach, son of Fearghal, son of Maolduin,
son of Maoilfrithrigh, son of Aodh Uairiodhnach of the race of
Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of Ireland three years. He renewed the
fair of Taillte. It was this Niall who went with a force of Gaels to
give battle to the Lochlonnaigh of Loch da Chaoch in Ulster, and many
Lochlonnaigh and Gaels were slain in that battle. It was also in the
reign of Niall that the Battle of Ceann Fuaid was won over the
Leinstermen by Iomhar, a Lochlonnach chief, wherein fell six hundred
Leinstermen under Maolmordha, son of Muireigen, king of Iarthar Lithfe,
under Ughaire son of Oilill, under Mughron son of Cinneide, king of
the Three Comanns and of Laoighis, and under many other nobles not
mentioned here.

It was about this time that Oitir, a Lochlonnach chief, with a
numerous host went from Loch da Chaoch to Alba, and Caus, son of Aodh,
gave them battle, wherein Oitir and many Lochlonnaigh fell. If was in
the reign of Niall Glundubh that a great fleet of Lochlonnaigh came to
Ireland together with Sitric and the children of Iomhar, and they
seized on the town of Ath Cliath in spite of the men of Ireland.

Niall Glundubh, king of Ireland, assembled the main host of Leath
Cuinn and gave battle to the Lochlonnaigh at Ath Cliath, wherein he
himself was slain together with Conchubhar, son of Maoilseachlainn,
royal heir to the sovereignty of Ireland, and Aodh, son of Eochagan,
king of Ulster, and Maoilmithidh, son of Flannagan, king of Breagha,
Maolcraoibhe O Duibhshionnaigh, king of Oirghiall, and many other
leaders and men as well.

Donnchadh, son of Flann Sionna, son of Maoilseachlainn, son of
Maolruanuidh, son of Donnchadh, son of Domhnall, son of Murchadh, son
of Diarmaid, son of Airmeadhach Caoch, son of Conall Guithbhinn, son
of Suibhne Meann of the race of Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of
Ireland twenty years. Gormfhlaith, daughter of Flann, son of Conaing,
was the mother of this Donnchadh, and his wife was Sadhbh, daughter of
Donnchadh, son of Ceallach, king of Osruighe. And according to the
book of Ard Macha this Donnchadh, son of Flann, king of Ireland, went
with a large party to build a wall or fence round Saighir Chiarain by
the direction of his wife, namely, Sadhbh, daughter of Donnchadh, son
of Ceallach; for she felt envious at there being a wall or fence round
every principal church in Ireland, while her own church, that is
Saighir, was without a wall; for the burying place of the kings of
Osruighe was at Saighir Chiarain at that time. Accordingly the men of
Meath came to Donnchadh's mound beside Saighir to the west, and they
set themselves to build the fence round the church day by day; and at
this time the body of Donnchadh, son of Ceallach, king of Osruighe,
was brought to Saighir to be buried; and after it was buried, when the
darkness of night had set in, nine hairy jet-black crosans came upon
the grave and set to choir-chanting as crosans are wont to do ever
since, and their eyes and their teeth were whiter than snow, and all
their other limbs blacker than blacksmith's coal.[507]

They had come, it seems, bringing with them a lay for the king of
Osruighe. And all who saw them grew sick a day and a night at the
sight. Here is the lay:

The people of Donnchadha Mor son of Ceallach,
A proud quarterage,
Melodious bands who are calling out
Are we when on a hosting:

Hosts hunting, full plains,
Houses for drinking,
Fair young women, hospitable princes,
Great nobles;

The shout of his companies and his troops,
The quarterage of a good host;
Ranks of skirmishers in the summer sun,
Drinking cups, feast-shouts;

Harps and pipes in harmony,
Filés of Faibhle
With a fair new poem they used to come
To the gracious king of Raighne;

Dod dor dod dan, O son of the king of Raighne,
With prosperity,
Where are the goblets where the friendship
That thy father had?

May a pang seized us for the man
Whom all chanted for,
Excellent the course on which he was
In the fair world;

Baptais baptain on his soul 
Since it is heard,
Great his reward after going to the other world,
We are his people.

Now this band used to keep chanting this lay from nightfall till
morning every night over the grave of Donnchadh, so that a doubt arose
in the minds of clergy and laity, for they were surprised that demons
should be openly attending the body of that most virtuous king. Indeed
among the pious practices of the king were frequent confession and the
receiving of the Body of Christ and fervent prayers; and among his
exercises of holy zeal was to send food and provisions to be given to
God's poor in each principal church in Osruighe on each of the
apostles' feasts. Moreover, he used to place an orphan or a poor man
to be maintained for God's sake in every household throughout Osruighe,
and had besides three purses or three leather bags, to wit, a bag in
which each person of the household put a tithe of the food he ate, and
a bag in which each put his Michael's portion, and a third bag in
which a portion of beeswax was put, which was at 'the disposal of the
housewife to dispense to the poor who had got no share of the tithes
or of the Michael's portion.

As to the clerics, they fasted and prayed for three days that it might
be made known to them why the demons attended the king's body; and an
angel of God appeared in a vision to a servant of God of the race of
Fiachaidh son of Niall, who was in that assembly. "Ye have done well
in keeping that fast," said the angel, "now these are nine of the
company of Ui Coingheoidh, and this is the third time they have come
to Ireland from hell; and since they could not find an occasion
against this king during his life, they are causing a disturbance over
his body after his death; and do ye have Mass said and water blessed
to-morrow," continued the angel, "and let it be sprinkled on the grave
and throughout all the churchyard, and all the demons will go away."

This was done and the company of Ui Coingheoidh appeared in the air
above, in the form of jet black birds, and they did not venture to
light on the churchyard ground because of its having been blessed; and
they said that the fasting and the blessing of the grave by the clergy
were necessary, "for we would be after his body on earth since we have
not power over his soul in heaven." And thereupon they went out of
sight of all and they did not see them ever since. It was about this
time that the crosan Fionn O Cionga and Mac Rionntach O Connorain
lived, and it was they who learned by rote the above mentioned lay
from the company of Ui Coinghaoidh while they were chanting it above
the grave of Donnchadh, son of Ceallach, king of Osruighe, and the two
referred to practised crosantacht as an art until death.



XXII.

It was in the reign of Donnchadh son of Flann Sionna, king of Ireland,
that the following events took place. For it was in the beginning of
his reign that Ceallachan, son of Buadhachan, who is called Ceallachan
of Cashel held the sovereignty of the two provinces of Munster ten
years. Now Cinneide, son of Lorcan, came to Gleannamhain to an
assembly of the nobles of Munster before Ceallachan was inaugurated,
and Cinneide sought to come between Ceallachan and the sovereignty of
Munster. But Ceallan's mother came from Cashel, for it was there she
dwelt with her tutor, Patrick's comhorba, and coming into the assembly
she asked Cinneide to remember the agreement come to between Fiachaidh
Muilleathan and Cormac Cas that the descendants of both should
alternately inherit Munster, and this is expressed by this stanza on
the woman's words:

Remember, O pleasant Cinneide,
The agreement of Fiachaidh and Cormac Cas!
How they left Munster to be shared
Justly among their fair offspring.

And as a result of the woman's discourse Cinneide left the sovereignty
of Munster to Ceallachan.

After this the Lochlonnaigh seized on Ceallachan by treachery, and the
siol Eoghain and the Dal gCas rescued him in spite of them. But when
Ceallachan and the Munster nobles had defeated the Lochlonnaigh in
many battles and had driven them out of Munster, Sitric, son of
Turgesius, who was their leader, hit upon the plan of arranging a
match with Ceallachan, to wit, to give him his own sister Beibhionn,
daughter of Turgesius, to wife, and to allow him to possess free the
two provinces of Munster, without retribution or claim respecting them
on the part of the Lochlonnaigh; in order that when Ceallachan should
go under his own protection to marry his sister, himself and all the
Munster nobles who were with him might be slain; and he communicated
the secret of this plot to Donnchadh, son of Flann, king of Tara, who
was at enmity with Ceallachan through his not having paid him the rent
for Munster, and hence he consented to Sitric's carrying out his
treacherous design on Ceallachan and the Munster nobles. Thereupon
Sitric sent envoys to Ceallachan to give tidings of the match, and
when they came into his presence, what he proposed to do was to take a
large host with him when going to marry the lady. "That is not right,"
said Cinneide, son of Lorcan, "for it is not right to leave Munster
without defence; and what thou shouldst do is to leave a force to hold
Munster and to take four score lords' sons with thee on going to marry
the lady."

And this was the counsel they adopted. And as Ceallachan was going on
this journey; the night before he arrived in Ath Cliath, Mor, daughter
of Aodh, son of Eochaidh, daughter of the king of Inis Fionnghall,
wife of Sitric, asked why he was making a match with Ceallachan,
seeing he had slain so many Lochlonnach nobles. "It is not for his
good this match is arranged by me," he answered, "but with a view to
practising treachery against him."

At these words the lady started, as she had been long secretly in love
with Ceallachan from the time she saw him at Port Lairge; and she rose
early the next morning and went secretly along the path on which she
thought Ceallachan was coming; and when he came up to her she took him
aside and informed him of the plot which Sitric was hatching against
him in order to kill him; and when Ceallachan thought of returning he
was unable to do so, as the fields on either side of the road were
full of companies of Lochlonnaigh ambushed for the purpose of
capturing him. As he made an effort to return they sprang upon him
from all sides, and a body of nobles who were with him were slain, and
these in their turn slew a number of the Lochlonnaigh. But the bulk of
the host bore down on Ceallachan and there captured himself and Donn
Cuan, son of Cinneide, and they were taken to Ath Cliath as prisoners,
and thence to Ard Macha, where nine Lochlonnach earls with their
detachments detained them.

As to the company of Munster nobles who escaped from this conflict,
they proceeded to Munster and told the news to Cinneide, who thereupon
got ready two hosts to go in quest of Ceallachan, that is, a land
force and a sea force, and he made Donnchadh, son of Caomh, king of
the two Fearmaighes, leader of the land force, and Cinneide proceeded
to encourage him, telling him that eleven of his ancestors were kings
of Munster, to wit, Airtre, Cathal son of Fionghaine, Fionghaine son
of Cathal, Cu gan Mhathair, Cathal who was called Ceann Geagain, Aodh,
Flann Cathrach, Cairbre, Criomhthann, Eochaidh, and Aonghus son of
Natfraoch. Besides, Cinneide sent ten hundred of the Dal gCais along
with him with three leaders over them, to wit, Coscrach, Longargan and
Conghalach, as says the poem: Let twenty hundred go northwards.

Here is the stanza of this poem which quotes the words of Cinneide:

Let Coscrach, of the battles, go there,
And Longargan, the lovable,
Let Conghalach, from the lake, go;
I mean my three brothers.

Moreover, Cinneide sent thither five hundred more of the Dal gCais
with Sioda, son of Sioda of the clann Cuilein, and five hundred more
of the Dal gCais with Deaghaidh, son of Domhnall, besides the fighting
men that went thither from the other free-born tribes of Munster. The
second great force he sent by sea with Failbhe Fionn, king of Desmond,
as their leader.

As to the land-force they proceeded from Munster to Connaught; and
they sent skirmishers to Muaidh and to Iorrus and to Umhall to bring
cattle preys to the Munster camp, and the camp were not long waiting
for the return of the skirmishers when they saw a host in good array
approach them, and their number was ten hundred, and a single youthful
warrior at their head; and when they came up, Donnchadh, son of Caomh,
asked what force was that. "A body of Munstermen," he replied, "to wit,
the Gaileanga and the Luighne of the race of Tadhg son of Cian, son of
Oilill Olom, and the men of Dealbhna, of the race of Dealbhaoth, son
of Cas, son of Conall Eachluaith, who are giving you a helping hand
through brotherly sympathy in opposing the foreigners and in rescuing
Ceallachan from them. And there are three valiant leaders at the head
of this force, to wit, Aodh, son of Dualghus, having all the Gaileanga
under him, Diarmaid, son of Fionnachta, having the Luighnigh under him,
and Donnchadh, son of Maoldomhnaigh, at the head of the men of
Dealbhna; and as a testimony of this is the historical poem which
begins with this stanza:

The clanna Cein are there,
And the Dealbhaoith all together
Coming to the hosting,
And they will fight on your side.

Now this host was thus constituted. Five hundred of them had swords
and shields, and five hundred were archers. The Munster host and this
force who had come to help them proceeded thence to Tir Chonaill and
they spoiled the country. Muircheartach, son of Arnaladh, came to
Donnchadh son of Caomh, and asked him to restore the cattle preys with
good will; and Donnchadh replied that he would only give him what
remained of the preys after the hosts had been satisfied. Upon this
Muircheartach left the host and sent envoys secretly to the sons of
Turgesius to Ard Macha informing them that the Munster host were in
quest of Ceallachan and intended to rescue him.

As to the sons of Turgesius, they set out from Ard Macha, nine earls
with their host of Lochlonnaigh, and Ceallachan and Donn Cuan with
them as prisoners. And the Munster host proceeded to Ard Macha and
slew all that came in their way of the Lochlonnaigh, and when on the
next day they heard that Sitric and his host had gone to Dun Dealgan
with Ceallachan they set out in pursuit of them, and when Sitric
observed them coming near the town he himself and his host betook
themselves to their ships, having Ceallachan and Donn Cuan with them,
and the Munster host came on the verge of the strand in front of them
and held a parley with the Lochlonnaigh. And thereupon they saw a
large fleet approach them in the harbour, and the Munstermen knew that
it was Failbhe Fionn and his fleet that were there.

Failbhe and his fleet proceeded by direct route to meet the
Lochlonnaigh, and he made an attack on the ships in which were Sitric
and Tor and Maghnus, and he boarded Sitric's ship, having a sword in
either hand, and set to cutting the ropes that bound Ceallachan to the
mast, with the sword that was in his left hand, and set Ceallachan
free, and let him down on the ship's deck, and then gave Ceallachan
the sword he held in his left hand. Ceallachan went from Sitric's ship
to that of Failbhe; and Failbhe continued to hew down the Lochlonnaigh
until they overpowering him, slew him and cut off his head. Fianghal,
a leader of his followers, took his place in the conflict, and seizing
Sitric by the breast by force, cast both of them overboard, and they
went to the bottom and thus were drowned.

Seaghdha and Conall, two other leaders, came on and seized Sitric's
two brothers, to wit, Tor and Maghnus, and threw them overboard, so
that the four were drowned in that manner. And in like manner acted
every other company of the Gaels; they sprang on the Lochlonnaigh and
broke them up, made gaps through them, slew them, and threw them into
disorder, so that there escaped from them only a few who were saved by
the swiftness of their ships, and they went on land with Ceallachan
who had thus been rescued from Lochlonnach captivity by the valour and
prowess of the Munstermen; and thence they proceeded to Munster with
Ceallachan, and he resumed the government of his own country.

And as they were setting out from Ath Cliath for Munster, Murchadh son
of Flann, king of Leinster, sought to give them battle for having
slain so many Lochlonnaigh in rescuing Ceallachan from them. But when
they saw how brave and valiant the Munstermen were, they allowed them
to pass without giving them battle.



XXIII.

But when Ceallachan returned to Munster he considered how severely the
Lochlonnaigh oppressed Munster, and he himself and the nobles of
Munster resolved to attack them with a view to banishing them; and
they first made a sudden attack on Luimneach, and Ceallachan and his
host slew five hundred of them and took away hostages from them. After
this he plundered Corcach and brought hostages and treasures therefrom.
He also plundered Cashel, and three hundred Lochlonnaigh were slain
there. Thence he went to Port Lairge and took possession of the town
and plundered it, and he inflicted a severe defeat on Sitric, son of
Iomhar, and slew five hundred of his people; and Sitric himself took
flight in his fleet; and Ceallachan returned to Domhnall O'Faolain,
king of the Deise, and gave him his own sister Gormfhlaith, daughter
of Buadhachan, to wife. Soon after that Ceallachan died, and after his
death Feargraidh, son of Ailghionan, son of Donnghal, held the
sovereignty of Munster till his own tribe slew him by treachery. After
this Mathghamhain, son of Cinneide, held the sovereignty of Munster
twelve years, and in his time Echthighearn, son of Cinneide, was chief
of Thomond.

It was Mathghamhain, son of Cinneide, king of Munster, and his brother
Brian, son of Cinneide, who was then a stripling, who won the Battle
of Sulchoid over the Lochlonnaigh wherein Teitill Treinmhileadh
Ruamonn and Bearnard Muiris of Luimneach and Torolbh and twelve
hundred Lochlonnaigh were slain, and Mathghamhain and Brian and the
Dal gCais pursued them as they retreated in through the streets of
Luimneach, and many of them were slain in the streets and in the
houses, and they gave up much gold and silver, valuables and goods;
and also their duns and fortresses were burned and thrown down. Soon
after this Donnabhan seized on Mathghamhain by treachery in his own
house and gave him over to the son of Bran and to the foreigners in
violation of the protection of Colam, son of Ciaragan, the comhorba of
Bairre; and the son of Bran, slew Mathghamhain in violation of the
saint's protection.

It was in the time of Donnchadh, son of Flonn Sionna, king of Ireland,
of whom we are treating, that the following events took place, to wit,
the death of Ciaran, bishop of Tuilen, and the going of this Donnchadh
to plunder and spoil Connaught. However, many of his followers were
slain in Duibhthir Atha Luain, where Cionaoth, son of Conchubhar, king
of Ui Failghe fell. It was about this time that Cluain mic Nois was
plundered by the Lochlonnaigh, and they went thence on Lough Ribh and
plundered the country on either side of it. The Lochlonnaigh also
plundered and spoiled Eininse, and two hundred Gaels were slain there.
After this twelve hundred Lochlonnaigh were drowned in Lough
Rudhruighe, and the Lochlonnaigh of Ath Cliath seized on Faolan, son
of Muireadhach, king of Leinster, and his children; and Dun Sobhairce
was plundered by the Lochlonnaigh of Port Lairge. Soon after this the
Ultonians made great slaughter on the Lochlonnaigh in which eight
hundred of them, together with three of their leaders, to wit, Albdan,
Aufer and Roilt, fell by Muircheartach, son of Niall.

About this time there was a large trading business carried on with
Ireland when the Lochlonnach earl Oilfinn came with the Lochlonnach
forces of Luimneach and Connaught to the fair of Ros Cre on the feast
of Peter and Paul; and the people at the fair stood up against them,
and three or four thousand Lochlonnaigh were slain there, and the earl
himself was slain with them, according to Finghin Mac Carrthaigh in
the booklet which he has written giving a brief account of Irish
affairs from the beginning to this. time. At this period Tadhg, son of
Cathal, was king of Connaught twenty years; and Sitric, son of Iomhar,
king of the Fionnlochlonnaigh and the Dubhlochlonnaigh, died. About
this time the Connaughtmen wrought great slaughter on the Lochlonnaigh
of Loch Oirbsean; and Conaing, sort of Niall, wrought dreadful 
slaughter on the Lochlonnaigh of Loch nEeachach wherein two hundred of
them fell. After this a party of Lochlonnaigh came on Loch Eirne and
they plundered churches and districts; and Gothfraidh, chief of Loch
Cuan, plundered Ard Macha; Cill Chuilinn was plundered by Amhlaoibh,
son of Gothfraidh, and he took thence ten hundred prisoners. Oileach
Neid was plundered by the Lochlonnaigh, and Muircheartach, son of
Niall, was captured there, but God set him free by a miracle. Soon
after this Aralt, son of Iomhar, chief of the Lochlonnaigh of
Luimneach, was slain by the Connaughtmen; and Amhlaoibh, son of
Gothfraidh, king of the Fionnlochlonnaigh and of the Dubhlochlonnaigh,
died, and Lorcan, son of Faolan, king of Leinster, was slain by the
men of Normandy. It was at this time that the son of the prince of
Wales, whose name was Rodoricus, came to plunder Ireland; and he was
slain by the Irish according to Hanmer in the year of the Lord 966. It
was about this time that Ath Cliath was plundered by Conghal, son of
Maoilmithidh, and one hundred and forty Lochlonnaigh were there slain,
and their valuables and their goods were taken from them. After this
Donnchadh, son of Flann Sionna, king of Ireland, died.

Conghalach, son of Maoilmithidh, son of Flanagan, son of Ceallach, son
of Conaing, son of Conghal, son of Aodh Slaine, of the race of
Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of Ireland ten years. Muire, daughter
of Cionaoth, son of Ailpin, king of Alba, was the mother of this
Conghalach. It was in his reign the following events took place. For
it was then that Etimonn, king of Sacsa, and Blathchuire, son of
Iomhar, king of Normandy, died; and Conghalach, son of Maoilmithidh,
king of Ireland, fought the battle ,of Muine Brogain against the
Lochlonnaigh where seven thousand of them fell, as well as many Gaels
on the other side.

The fourth year of the reign of this Conghalach, son ,of Maoilmithidh,
Brian Boroimhe, son of Cinneide, assumed the sovereignty of Munster;
and the second year after he had become king of Munster he gave notice
to Maolmhuaidh, son of Bran, king of Ui nEachach, that he would give
him battle at Bealach Leachta to avenge his brother Mathghamhain who
was treacherously slain by the followers of the son of Bran. The son
of Bran assembled a great host of foreigners and of Gaels; so that he
had one thousand four hundred Lochlonnaigh and a large battalion of
Gaels. Still Brian and the Dal gCais defeated them, so that many .of
them, of whom we have no mention, were slain, and those who were not
slain were captured by Brian. After this Domhnall O Faolain, king of
the Deise, and Iomhar of Port Lairge made war on Brian, and they
plundered the greater part of Munster. But when Brian came up to them
and a battle took place between them at Fan mic Connrach, he defeated
the Lochlonnaigh and the king of Deise, and Brian and the Dal gCais
pursued the defeated host to Port Lairge, and Domhnall O Faolain and
most of the foreigners of Port Lairge were slain by Brian, on that
occasion. He plundered and burned the town.

When Brian had been eight years king of Munster the whole of Leath
Mogha were forced to give him hostages. But after the death of
Domhnall Claon, son of Domhnall, king of Leinster, both the
Lochlonnaigh and the Gaels of Leinster refused to submit to him. Brian
assembled the main host of Munster to oppose the foreigners and the
Leinstermen, and the Battle of Gleann Mama was set on foot between
them. And Brian defeated the Lochlonnaigh and the Leinstermen, and
four thousand of them were slain in that battle. In short, Brian
defeated the Lochlonnaigh in twenty-five battles, from the first
battle he fought against them to the last, that is the Battle of
Cluain Tarbh, in which himself was slain.

After this Conghalach, son of Maoilmithidh, king of Ireland, went to
plunder and spoil Munster, and he slew two sons of Cinneide, son of
Lorcan, to wit, Echthighearn and Donn Cuan. After that Gothfriadh, son
of Sitric and the Lochlonnaigh of Ath Cliath plundered Ceanannus and
Domhnach Padraig and Ard Padraig and Cill Scire and many other
churches, and they seized on three thousand people in this place and
took away with them much gold and silver and booty. It was about this
time that Eithne, daughter of Fearghal, queen of Ireland, that is, the
wife of Conghalach, son of Maoilmithidh, and Maolcolum, son of
Domhnall, king of Alba, and Gaoithinne, bishop of Dun Leathghlaise,
and Tadhg, son of Cathal, king of Connaught, died. Soon after this,
Conghalach son of Maoilmithidh, king of Ireland, was slain at Ard
Macha by the Lochlonnaigh of Ath Cliath and by the Lagenians.

Domhnall, son of Muircheartach, son of Niall Glundubh, of the race of
Eireamhon, held the sovereignty of Ireland ten years. It was in this
king's reign that Cill Dara was plundered by Amhlaoibh, son of Sitric,
and the Lochlonnaigh of Ath Cliath; and Domhnall son of Muircheartach,
king of Ireland, went to spoil and plunder Connaught, and took preys
of cattle and hostages from Fearghal O Ruairc, who was then king of
Connaught.

It was also about this time that the principal church of Tuaim Greine
and its tower were built by Cormac Ua Cillin, bishop of Tuaim Greine;
and Fearghal O Ruairc, king of Connaught, was slain by Domhnall, son
of Conghalach, son of Maoilmithidh; and Brian, son of Cinneide, king
of Munster, plundered and burned Luimneach against the Lochlonnaigh.
After this, Domhnall O Neill with a numerous host went into Leinster
and plundered the country from the Bearbha eastwards to the sea, and
encamped there for two months in spite of the Lochlonnaigh and the
Leinstermen; and Maoilfinnein, son of Uchtan, bishop of Ceanannus and
comhorba of Ulltan, died, and Ceanannus was plundered by Amhlaoibh
Cuaran, and the Lochlonnaigh of Leinster, who took thence a large prey
of cattle and much booty; and they inflicted a great and dreadful
defeat on the Ui Neill when many fell on either side. It was about
this time that the Battle of Cill Mona was won by Domhnall, son of
Conghalach, and the Lochlonnaigh of Ath Cliath over Domhnall, son of
Muircheartach, king of Ireland, wherein fell Ardghal, son of Madagan,
who was king of Ulster seventeen years, and Donnagan, son of Maolmuire,
king of Oirghiall, with many other nobles. Soon after this Beacan,
bishop of Finne, and Cionaoth O Hartagain, primate of Ard Macha, died;
and Ughaire, son of Tuathal, king of Leinster, was captured by the
Lochlonnaigh of Ath Cliath. After this Inis Cathaigh, which was in the
hands of the Lochlonnaigh, was plundered by Brian, son of Cinneide,
king of Munster, and there fell eight hundred of. the Lochlonnaigh;
and three Lochlonnach chiefs were captured there, to wit, Iomhar,
Amhlaoibh and Duibhgheann; hence the poet says:

The slaughter at Inis Cathaigh
Was thy work, no wastrel's deed,
In which thou didst slay the leaders of the foreigners
Around Iomhar and around Duibhgheann.

It was about this time that the Battle of Biothlann was won from the
Leinstermen by the Lochlonnaigh of Ath Cliath, wherein Ughaire, son of
Tuathal, king of Leinster, was slain. Soon after this Domhnall, son of
Muircheartach, king of Ireland, died at Ard Macha.



XXIV.

Maoilseachlainn, son of Domhnall, son of Flann Sionna, son of
Maoilseachlainn, son of Maolruanuidh, of the race of Eireamhon, held
the sovereignty of Ireland twenty-three years. Dunlaith, daughter of
Muircheartach, son of Niall, was the mother of this Maoilseachlainn,
and Gluiniarann was the king of the Lochlonnaigh in Ireland. It was in
the reign of this Maoilseachlainn that the following events took place.
For it was Maoilseachlainn himself who won the Battle of Tara over the
sons of Amhlaoibh and the Lochlonnaigh of Ath Cliath, wherein Raghnall,
son of Amhlaoibh, heir apparent to the sovereignty of the Lochlonnaigh,
with five hundred Lochlonnaigh were slain. After this Maoilseachlainn,
king of Ireland, and Eochaidh, son of Ardghal, who was thirty-five
years king of Ulster, went to spoil and plunder Ath Cliath against the
Lochlonnaigh, and they encamped there three days and three nights, and
brought thence as many as were held as captives by the Lochlonnaigh,
to wit, Domhnall Claon, king of Leinster, and the sureties of the Ui
Neill in general, and they forced the Lochlonnaigh to acknowledge
their independence, and to allow them have their lands from the
Sionainn to the sea free of Lochlonnach tribute or impost. It was
about this time that Amhlaoibh, son of Sitric, chief leader of the
Lochlonnaigh in Ireland, was banished and exiled to I Columcille in
Alba, the Gaels having driven him out of Ireland.

Maoilseachlainn, king of Ireland, went to plunder and spoil the Dal
gCais, and he cut down the tree of Magh Adhar. But, O reader, see
whether he escaped punishment from Brian, as will appear later on. And
Gleann da Loch was plundered by the three sons of Cearbhall, son of
Lorcan. But the three were slain in one night soon after through the
power of Caoimhghin who had lived and blessed there. It was about this
time that Mor, daughter of Donnchadh, son of Ceallach, queen of
Ireland, and Iorard mac Coise, primate of Ard Macha, died; and
Domhnach Padraig was plundered by the Lochlonnaigh of Ath Cliath and
by Muircheartach O Conghalaigh. But God avenged this deed on them, for
their death took place at the end of that very month. After this,
Maoilseachlainn, king of Ireland, carried off by force a collar or 
ring of gold from a Lochlonnach leader called Tomair and a sword from
another leader called Carlus.

Nevertheless, when the nobles of Leath Mogha and of the greater part
of Connaught considered that it was Brian son of Cinneide who was
undergoing the labour and hardship of expelling the Lochlonnaigh from
Ireland, and that Maoilseachlainn, who was the king of Ireland, gave
himself up to luxury and comfort and ease, a line of action that was
useless for the defence of Ireland at that juncture, Brian and the
nobles who were with him resolved for these reasons to send envoys to
Maoilseachlainn, king of Ireland, to inform him that it was not right
that anyone should hold the sovereignty of Ireland but one who should
devote his energies to banishing the foreigners from the country, and
that, as it was Brian who was undergoing the labour of banishing them,
it was right he should get the sovereignty of Ireland for having
relieved the country from the oppression of the foreigners. They also
asked of the king to meet them at Magh da Chaomhog, but he did not
agree to this. After this Brian, son of Cinneide, assembled and
brought together the nobles of Leath Mogha both Lochlonnaigh and Gaels,
for as many of the Lochlonnaigh as were in Leath Mogha were forced to
submit to him at this time, and he marched with them to Tara of the
Kings.

Thereupon he sent envoys to Maoilseachlainn who was king of Ireland,
asking him to send him sureties for his being obedient and submissive
to him as king of Ireland, or to meet him in battle. So Brian gave
Maoilseachlainn his choice of these courses. Maoilseachlainn's answer
to the envoys was that if Brian gave him a month's respite to summon
to him to one place the forces of Leath Cuinn he would give either
hostages or battle to him, and he charged the envoys not to permit
Brian to waste or plunder Meath, but that he should, remain at Tara
during that month, and that he himself would give him either battle or
hostages as soon as he had got a reply from Leath Cuinn. The envoys
returned to Brian and told him the answer they had got from
Maoilseachlainn. "Then," said Brian, "I grant them that respite."

Now what Maoilseachlainn resolved on was to send Giolla Comhghaill O
Sleibhin, his own ollamh, to Aodh O Neill, and Eochaidh, son of
Ardghal, king of Ulster, and Cathal O Conchubhair, king of Connaught,
asking them to come without delay to do battle with him against Brian
and the Dal gCais, and pointing out that if all of these did not come
to maintain the freedom of Tara for their own race, who possessed it
such a long time, he himself would give sureties to Brian for his
submission to him, as he was not strong enough to fight him. "And
indeed," added Maoilseachlainn, "it will be no greater shame for me
not to defend Tara than it will be for the clanna Neill and for the
host of Leath Cuinn in general." The ollamh went with this message to
the nobles of Leath Cuinn, and he made known to them the object of his
journey and his mission. But Aodh O Neill's answer to him was, "When
the Cineal Eoghain possessed Tara," said he, "they defended it
themselves, and let him who holds it now stand out for its freedom;"
and he added that he would not set the Dal gCais at enmity with him by
defending a sovereignty for another. The ollamh came back to
Maoilseachlainn and repeated Aodh O Neill's answer to him. However,
Maoilseachlainn went himself to Aodh and entreated him to go with him
to do battle against the Dal gCais, and he said to him, "Hold Tara for
thyself," said he, "and I will give thee hostages for the delivering
up to thee of Tara, for I prefer this to Brian's having it. But if
thou wilt not come with me I must submit to Brian, as I am not strong 
enough to fight him."

Aodh O Neill assembled and brought together to one place to him the
Cineal Eoghain, and told them of Maoilseachlainn's visit to their
country and of the offers he had made himself, on condition of his
going with him to fight Brian and the Dal gCais. The Cineal Eoghain
made answer, and said there was nothing but deceit in
Maoilseachlainn's promise to him, "for he is certain that himself is
older and better than thou art, and hence that thou would'st not
demand the kingdom of Ireland from him during his life. But," they
added, "he would like that we and thou should go with him to fight the
Dal gCais." Nevertheless Aodh asked them to take counsel amongst
themselves on that question, and to give a favourable answer to
Maoilseachlainn, "lest," he added, "his visit to us may not mean the
loss of a kingdom to us." Then the Cineal Eoghain secretly took
counsel and deliberated amongst themselves on this question, and it
was their opinion that if they went to fight the Dal gCais it was not
likely that even a small number of them would return from that
conflict. For this reason they declared that it would be necessary for
them, to obtain property for their children after them, "for we should
have hope neither of property nor of wealth for ourselves," added they,
"if we were to go and fight the Dal gCais, the bravest and stoutest
race in fields of battle, and a race, too,. that never fled from the
Lochlonnaigh; it is certain that neither would they flee from us."
Therefore they came to the resolution of demanding from
Maoilseachlainn one half of Midhe and of the demesne of Tara for
themselves and for their children after them in consideration of their
going with him on that expedition, and they made known to
Maoilseachlainn that this was what they had resolved on. When
Maoilseachlainn heard this he became furious and returned home from
them with indignation, and summoned to him the clann Colmain and made
known to them the answer he had got from Aodh O Neill and the Cineal
Eoghain.

Upon this the resolution they came to was that Maoilseachlainn should
go straight to Brian's house, where his camp had been fixed for a
month previously at Tara, the men of Meath supporting him there.
Maoilseachlainn then proceeded to Tara accompanied by two hundred and
twenty horsemen, and thus alighted on the green of Tara, and went
immediately to Brian's house without either surety or protection,
relying on the generosity of Brian himself and of the Dal gCais; and
he told Brian all that had befallen him from beginning to end, and
said that if he himself were able to fight Brian, battle was what he
would give him; but as he was not, he had come now to give him
sureties and hostages. When Brian heard this he said, "Since thou hast
come into my house without surety or protection I grant thee a year's
respite, during which I shall demand neither sureties nor hostages
from thee, and I will go myself to visit these northerns, to wit, Aodh
O Neill and Eochaidh, son of Ardghal, king of Ulster, that I may learn
what answer they will give me; and if they give me battle then do thou
not go against me with them." Maoilseachlainn promised that he would
not go against him, and said that he would not advise Brian to go
northwards on that occasion, but that he had better repair to his
house until another time, "for my doing homage to thee is enough for
thee this time." They agreed on this point, and the Dal gCais were
glad of it, or they had nearly consumed their provisions; and as Brian
was returning home he bestowed twelve hundred horses on
Maoilseachlainn, and gave a large amount of gold and silver to his
followers as well.

A year after this, Brian son of Cinneide, assembled and brought
together the general forces of all Leath Mogha both Gaels and
Lochlonnaigh. There came there the Lochlonnaigh of Ath Cliath and of
Port Lairge, of Loch Garman, of Ui Eachach Mumhan, Corca Luighdheach,
and Ui Cinnsealaigh, and Brian proceeded with this gteat host to Ath
Luain, and the nobles of Connaught gave hostages for their submission
to him as high king.

Now Brian sent envoys to Maoilseachlainn asking him to send hostages
to him to Ath Luain, and Maoilseachlainn himself came and gave him
hostages and sureties. It was then that Brian brought together the
main forces of Munster, of Connaught, and of Leinster, and of Meath,
and he went with them to Dun Dealgan where he received the hostages
and sureties of all Ulster. And it was in this way that Brian Boraimhe
obtained the kingdom of Ireland, by the strength and bravery of his
feats of valour and championship, driving the foreigners and the
Danair out of the country, and not by treachery as others assert. For
it was not the custom in Ireland that the son should succeed the
father in the sovereignty of Ireland, as is plain from the history up
to this point, but the sovereignty of Ireland was given to him who was
the most powerful in action and exploit. And since Brian was the most
powerful in action of the Irish in his own time, the majority of the
nobles of Ireland chose him to be sovereign of the country, and as
many of them as did not consent that the sovereignty of Ireland should
be given to him were forced to submit to him against their will, and
Maoilseachlainn was obliged to abandon the sovereignty of Ireland and
cede it to Brian as we have said.



XXV.

Brian Boraimhe, son of Cinneide, son of Lorcan, son of Lachtna, son of
Corc, son of Annluan, son of Mathgamhain, son of Toirrdhealbhach, son
of Cathal, son of Aodh Caomh, son of Conall, son of Eochaidh
Bailldhearg, son of Carrthann Fionn, son of Blod, son of Cas, son of
Conall Eachluaith, son of Lughaidh Meann, son of Aonghus Tireach, son
of Fear Corb, son of Mogh Corb, son of Cormac Cas, son of Oilill Olom,
of the race of Eibhear, held the sovereignty of Ireland twelve years.
Beibhionn, daughter of Archaidh, son of Murchadh, son of Maonach, king
of West Connaught, was the mother of Brian. The descent of Beibhionn
was as follows: Cianog, daughter of Ciocharan, a Connaught-man, bore a
son and daughter to a Leinster chief called Criachan through the
prayer of Caireall, abbot, and of seven hundred monks with him, who
prayed together to God that this couple who were barren a long period
of their time may have progeny, and God heard the prayer of Caireall
and of his community, and Cianog bore a son and daughter to Criachan.
The son's name was Maoilmithidh and the daughter's name was Osnadh,;
and the daughter was given in marriage to Archaidh, son of Murchadh,
son of Maonach, king of West Connaught, and she bore him Beibhionn,
that is the mother of Brian Boraimhe, son of Cinneide.

It was in the reign of Brian that the following events took place, to
wit, Sitric, son of Amhlaoibh, went to spoil Ulster in a large fleet,
and he plundered Cill Chleite and Inis Cumhscraigh and took many
sureties and much wealth therefrom. After this Naomhan, son of
Maoilciarain, chief artificer of Ireland, and Raghnall, son of
Gothfraidh, son of Aralt, king of the Isles, a Lochlonnach, died. It
was about this time that Brian Boraimhe, son of Cinneide, king of
Ireland, went with a numerous host to Cineal Eoghain in Ulster and
thence to Meath, and they remained a night at Taillte, thence they
went to Ard Macha, and remained there a week, and Brian left twenty
ounces of gold on the altar of Ard Macha.

They proceeded thence to Dal nAruidhe, and Brian got sureties for the
keeping of peace from the entire province of Ulster. Soon after this
Brian went with another large host to Cineal Eoghain and Tir Chonaill
and brought many hostages thence as sureties for maintaining peace.

It was about this time that Maolruanuidh, son of Ardghal, king of
Ulster, died, also Clothna, son of Aonghus, chief poet of Ireland, and
Cathal, son of Conchubhar, who was king of Connaught twenty years, and
he died in Iorras Domhnann. After this Murchadh, son of Brian, with
the men of Munster and Leinster and the Ui Neill of the south, and
Flaithbheartach, son of Muireadhach, with the young men of the Fochla
went to plunder and spoil Cineal Luigdheach and brought thence three
hundred in captivity.

Brian, son of Cinneide, king of Ireland, made a hosting to Magh
Corainn and brought with him Maolruanuidh O Maoldoraidh, king of
Cineal Conaill, to Ceann Choradh in captivity. Murchadh son of Brian
spoiled and burned the province of Leinster as far as Gleann da Loch,
and thence to Cill Mhaighnionn. It was about this time that the
Lochlonnaigh with a large fleet went to Munster and plundered and
burned Cork; and God requited them for this, for Amhlaoibh, son of
Sitric, king of the Lochlonnaigh, and Mathghamhain, son of Dubhghall,
son of Amhlaoibh, were treacherously slain by Cathal, son of Domhnall,
son of Dubh da Bhuireann, soon afterwards. After this the Lochlonnaigh
and the Leinstermen went into Meath, and they plundered Tearmonn
Feichin and took thence many captives, and God took vengeance upon
them soon afterwards, as is plain from the above account of the
incursion which Murchadh, son of Brian, made into Leinster, in which
he spoiled the Leinstermen and the Lochlonnaigh, as we have said.

As to Brian, son of Cinneide, when he was king of Ireland and had
crippled the Lochlonnaigh, very great were the benefits he conferred
on Ireland as we read in the books of the seanchus. Here follow
briefly some of these benefits.

In the first place he restored and built churches, and gave every
cleric his own temple according to his rank and his right to it. He
built and set in order public schools for the teaching of letters and
the sciences in general, and he also gave the price of books and
expenses to each one who could not defray the expenses and who desired
to devote himself to learning. He also gave freedom to the lords and
territorial chiefs of the people; and all the spoil he had taken from
the Lochlonnaigh he gave to the Gaels, and he freed all the Gaels from
every species of oppression to which the Lochlonnaigh subjected them;
and every territory which he took from the Lochlonnaigh by the
strength of his arm, he gave it not to any of his own tribe, but gave
each territory to the tribe in Ireland to whom it belonged of right.

It was Brian, too, who gave the men of Ireland distinct surnames by
which each separate sept of them is distinguished from the rest. It
was Brian also who built the church of Cill Dalua and the church of
Inis Cealltrach, and restored the tower of Tuaim Greine. Moreover,
Brian built many bridges and causeways and highways, and he built and
repaired duns and fortresses and river banks and islands. He also
built Cashel of the Kings and Ceann Abhrad, Inis Locha Ce and Inis
Locha Gair, Dun Eochair Mhaighe, Dun Iasc and Dun Tri Liag, Dun gCrot
and Dun Cliach, Inse an Ghaill Duibh and Inis Locha Saighlionn, Ros na
Riogh, Ceann Choradh, an Bhoraimhe, and the royal fortresses of
Munster generally. It was also in the reign of Brian that a lone lady
travelled from Tonn Tuaidhe to . Tonn Cliodhna in the south, carrying
with her a wand with a gold circlet or ring on it, and she was neither
robbed nor violated, by reason of the rigour of Brian's rule in
Ireland; and hence the poet composed this stanza:

From Toruidh to pleasant Cliodhna,
Having a circlet of gold by her side,
In the reign of bright-limbed, intrepid Brian,
A lone lady went round Erin.

Ireland was thus rich, prosperous, peaceful during the twelve years
that Brian reigned over her, and for him the poet composed this
stanza:

The boiling of the sea, a rapid flood,
Was Brian of Breagha over Banbha of variegated flowers.
Without sadness, without calumny, without suspicion,
Twelve years lasted his prosperity.

It is very easy to see from this character which the seanchas give of
Brian that it would not be right to call him a tyrant, for it was not
according to his will or his strength that he governed the country
during his reign, but according to the country's constitution and law.
For a tyrant is one who governs and rules according to might and not
according to right; and since it was not thus Brian acted, but
according to right and the constitution, he cannot be called a tyrant.

Or if he should be called a tyrant (usurper) for supplanting
Maoilseachlainn in the sovereignty of the country, having been chosen
by the majority of the Irish nobles, let the reader judge whether it
be more just to call him a tyrant (usurper) than to call the majority
of the kings of Ireland who sprang from the children of Milidh tyrants
(usurpers). For not one in every seven of them gained the sovereignty
who did not do so by killing the king who came before him; and since
they are not called tyrants (usurpers), being of the royal blood, for
killing the king who came before them, in the same way, since Brian
was of the royal blood he should not be called a tyrant (usurper) for
having supplanted Maoilseachlainn, whom, though he was in his power,
he did not kill, as other kings killed those who came before them in
the sovereignty of Ireland, as we have said.

Here follow the tribute and dues that Brian Boraimhe claimed from the
provincial kings of Ireland outside of Munster for the upkeep of the
house of Ceann Choradh as stated by Mac Liag, chief ollamh of Ireland,
in the poem which begins: Boraimhe town of the kings. In the first
place he got from the province of Connaught eight hundred cows and
eight hundred hogs; he got from Tir Chonaill five hundred mantles and
five hundred cows; he got from Tir Eoghain three score cows and three
score pigs and three score bars of iron; he got from the clann
Rudhruighe of Ulster thrice fifty cows and thrice fifty hogs; he got
eight hundred cows from Oirghialla; three hundred hogs, three hundred
beeves and three hundred bars of iron from the province of Leinster;
three score cows, three score pigs and three score bars of iron from
Osruighe; he got from the Lochlonnaigh of Ath Cliath thrice fifty vats
of wine; and he got from the Lochlonnaigh of Luimneach a tun of red
wine every day in the year. And when Brian sat in his royal seat it
was the king of Munster that sat at his right hand, just as it was
customary with all the kings of the race of Eireamhon to place the
kings of Ulster at their right hand. None of the men of Ireland were
permitted to bear arms in Brian's house, but the Dal gCais alone as
the above-mentioned poem says in this stanza:

None of the men of Erin,
Only the Dal gCais of battle triumphs,
Were permitted to use their arms there
In the same house with the king of Erin.

It is to be inferred from the amount of meat and wine that was fixed
for the support of the household of the court of Ceann Choradh, that
with the exception of Cormac son of Art, and Conaire Mor son of
Eideirsceol, there was none among the kings of Ireland who had a
larger household and more followers and who kept up a more princely
house than Brian.

When Brian Boraimhe was residing at Ceann Choradh without strife or
discord he besought the king of Leinster, Maolmordha, son of Murchadh,
to send him three masts of excellent wood from Fiodh Gaibhle. The king
of Leinster had the masts cut down and went with them himself to Ceann
Choradh where Brian then was; and he ordered the Ui Failghe to carry
one of the masts and the Ui Faolain another and the Ui Muireadhaigh
the third, and a war of words arose between them as they were going up
Sliabh an Bhogaigh; and thereupon the king of Leinster himself put his
shoulder under the mast assigned to the Ui Faolain, wearing a satin
tunic which Brian had given him sometime before, and which had gold
borders to it and a silver clasp. And so greatly did the king of
Leinster exert himself in bearing up the mast that the clasp of his
tunic snapped; and when they reached Ceann Choradh the king of
Leinster took off his tunic and gave it to his sister Gormfhlaith,
daughter of Murchadh (that is Brian's wife), to fix a clasp in it. The
queen took the tunic and cast it into the fire that was in front of
her, and proceeded to reproach her brother for being in slavery or
subjection to anyone on earth, "a thing," said she, "which neither thy
father nor thy grandfather brooked; "and she added, that Brian's son
would make the same demand of his son. Now Maolmordha kept in mind the
queen's remarks; and the next day Murchadh, son of Brian, and Conaing,
son of Donn Cuan, happened to be playing chess, or according to others
it was the comhorba of Caoimhghin of Gleann da Loch that was playing
with Murchadh. Maolmordha, the king of Leinster, set to instruct
Murchadh, and taught him a move which caused the game to go against 
him. "It was thou who gayest advice to the Lochlonnaigh which caused
them to be defeated at the Battle of Gleann Mama," said Murchadh. "If
I gave them advice which caused them to be defeated there," said
Maolmordha, "I will give them another advice through which they will
defeat thee in turn." "I defy thee to do so," said Murchadh.

Maolmordha was enraged at this and he went to his sleeping apartment,
and could not be got to come to the drinking hall that night, and he
took his departure early the next morning without bidding farewell to
Brian.

Now when Brian heard that the king of Leinster left the mansion
without bidding him farewell, he sent a page of his household to
detain him that he might give him wages and gifts. The place at which
the page overtook him was at the end of the plank bridge of Cill Dalua
on the east side of the Sionainn, as he was mounting his steed, and he
delivered to him the message Brian had sent him. Maolmordha, the king
of Leinster, turned on the page and gave him three blows with the yew
wand he held in his hand, so that he broke the bones of his skull, and
it was in a litter that he was carried to Brian's house. The page's
name was Cogaran and from him are the Ui Cogarain of Munster.

A party of the household of Ceann Choradh desired to pursue the king
of Leinster and not to allow him to go to Leinster until he had
submitted to Brian. Brian, however, said that it would not be
permitted to practise treachery against him in his own house. "But,"
added he, "it is from the door-post of his own house that justice will
be required of him."

Maolmordha, king of Leinster, went into his own country, and summoned
and brought together to him the Leinster nobles, and told them that
himself and all his province had been dishonoured and treated to
abusive speech at Ceann Choradh. Accordingly what they agreed on was
that they themselves and a Lochlonnach force should go against Brian,
so that the Battle of Cluain Tarbh was set on foot between them; and
since Brian had not left in Ireland as many of the Lochlonnaigh as
could fight a battle, having left only the party he suffered, on the
excuse of trading, to remain in Ath Cliath, in Loch Garman, in Port
Lairge, in Corcach and in Luimneach, for the purpose of attracting
commerce from other countries to Ireland, what the king of Leinster
and the Lochlonnaigh decided on was to send to the king of Lochloinn
for a force with which to meet Brian in battle on Magh nEalta at
Cluain Tarbh. And when the message reached the king of Lochloinn he
sent his two sons Carolus Cnutus and Andreas with a host of twelve
thousand Lochlonnaigh to help the king of Leinster to fight the Battle
of Cluain Tarbh, and when they landed at Ath Cliath the king of
Leinster sent word to Brian to give notice that he would give him
battle at Cluain Tarbh.

As to Brian, son of Cinneide, king of Ireland, he assembled the forces
of Munster and Connaught and proceeded to Ath Cliath to fight the
Battle of Cluain Tarbh, as we have said. And there went thither with
him the race of Fiachaidh Muilleathan with their branches of
descendants a great bulky stately host. Thither went also the
descendants of Cas, son of Conall Eachluaith, to wit, the Ui Bloid and
the Ui Caisin, and the descendants of Aonghus Chinn nAthrach, and the
Cineal Baoth and the Cineal Cuallachtaigh, the Cineal Failbhe, and the
clann Eachach under Ceallach, son of Duibhgheann, and the clann
Choilein under Meanman, son of Eisidh, son of Sidh, son of Maolcluiche,
and the Cineal Fearmhaic under Maolmeadha, son of Baodan. Thither went
also the sons of Cinneide son of Lorcan, Annluan, Lachtna, Coscrach,
Lorcan, Seanchan, Ogan, Maolruanuidh and Aingidh, Murchadh son of
Brian, and his son Toirrdhealbhach and five brothers of Murchadh, to
wit, Tadhg, Donnchadh, Domhnall, Conchubhar and Flann. Thither went in
like manner the sons of Donn Cuan son of Cinneide, to wit, Longargan,
Ceileachair, Cinneide, Fianghalach, Innreachtach, Eochaidh, son of
Innreachtach, and Duibhgheann son of Eochaidh and Beallan and as many
of the servants and followers of these as came with them. Thither also
went a great host of Connaughtmen under Tadhg son of Murchadh O
Ceallaigh, king of Ui Maine, and under Maolruanuidh na Paidre O Eidhin,
king of Eidhne, with many of the Connaught nobles, through a feeling
of kinship with Brian, for Beibhionn, his mother, was a Connaught-
woman. In like manner Maoilseachlainn son of Domhnall, with the
strength of Meath under him, went to meet Brian to help him.

And when they came together to one place on Magh nEalta they prepared
and arranged themselves for battle on either side, the king of
Leinster and the Lochlonnaigh on one side, the two sons of the king of
Lochloinn, to wit, Carolus Cnutus and Andreas being their leaders;
Brian with the nobles of Munster, Connaught and Meath on the other
side, with Murchadh, son of Brian, as their leader. Maoilseachlainn,
however, did not wish to help them.

The battle was bravely fought between them, and the Lochlonnaigh and
the Leinstermen were defeated; and the two sons of the king of
Lochloinn and the nobles of the fleet who came with them fell there,
together with six thousand and seven hundred Lochlonnaigh. There also
fell the men of Ath Cliath and another company of the Lochlonnaigh of
the fleet about four thousand. In like manner fell the king of
Leinster and most of the nobles of Leinster together with three
thousand one hundred Leinstermen.

Now on the other side fell Murchadh, son of Brian, the heir apparent
to the throne of Ireland, and the majority of the Munster and
Connaught nobles around him together with four thousand men. And a
party of Lochlonnaigh who were fleeing into the country from the
slaughter came upon Brian's tent, and some of them knew that it was
Brian who was in it, and Bruadar, their leader, who was of the party,
went towards Brian, and they slew him, but Brian's people slew Bruadar
and his people. Here follow other supporters of Brian who were slain
in that battle, to wit, Toirrdhealbhach, son of Murchadh, son of Brian,
and Conaing, son of Donn Cuan, son of Cinneide, and Mothla, son of
Domhnall, son of Faolan, king of Deise Mumhan, Eochaidh son of
Dunadhach, prince of the clann Scannlain and Niall Ua Cuinn, and Cu
Doiligh son of Cinneide, three companions of Brian, and Tadhg, son of
Murchadh O Ceallaigh, king of Ui Maine, and Maolruanuidh na Paidre O
Heidhin, king of Eidhne, and Geibheannach, son of Dubhagan, king of
Feara Muighe, and Mac Beathaidh, son of Muireadhach Claon, king of
Ciarraidhe Luachra, Domhnall, son of Diarmaid, king of Corca Baiscinn,
Scannlan, son of Cathal, king of the Eoghanacht of Loch Lein, and
Domhnall, son of Eimhin, son of Cainneach, and Mormhaor Marr, that is
Muireadhach Mor of Alba, and many other nobles that are not mentioned
here. The year of the Lord when the Battle of Cluain Tarbh was fought
was 1034[508], the Friday before Easter. Here is the seancha's setting
forth of the number of years that had elapsed from the birth of Christ
to the death of Brian:

Four years and thirty,
With a thousand without deceit,
From the springing up of a Physician to help us
To the death of Brian in Breagha.

And Brian's age at that time was eighty-eight years, as the poet says
in this stanza:

The life of Brian with victories
Up to the conflict with shouts,
Four score years
And eight are counted.

Moreover, Murchadh, son of Brian, was sixty-three years when he fell
in this battle.



XXVI.

Now when the Battle of Cluain Tarbh was over and Brian and Murchadh
with many Gaels slain, and the Lochlonnaigh and the Leinstermen
defeated and the majority of them slain in that battle, and when the
Dal gCais and race of Fiachaidh Muilleathan, had reached Mullach
Maistean on their return journey, then the race of Fiachaidh formed
themselves into a distinct host and separated from the Dal gCais; and
as the Dal gCais were weak in hosts and contingents, they formed the
resolution of sending envoys to Donnchadh, son of Brian, to ask
hostages from him and to point out to him that his father and his
father's brother had hostages from them, and they said they had a
right to the sovereignty of Munster in alternate succession. "It was
not with your consent ye were under my father or kinsmen," said
Donnchadh, "it was they who made ye submit against your will and the
men of Ireland with you." And Donnchadh added that he would give
neither hostages nor sureties to them or to anyone else, and said that
if he had enough of men to fight them he would not let them go without
getting hostages from them for their being submissive to him as they
were to his father.

When the Desmond host heard this message they arose promptly and
suddenly, and seized their arms and went to give battle to the Dal
gCais. Donnchadh, son of Brian, then directed his people to put their
wounded men into Raith Maistean with a third of the host in charge of
them, "and let the other two-thirds," added he, "meet that party in
battle." Now the Dal gCais numbered then only one thousand, the
remnant of a slaughter, while the Desmond host were three thousand
strong. When the wounded heard this speech of Donnchadh's they arose
quickly and put moss in their wounds and sores, and they grasped their
weapons in their hands, and their counsel was to engage in the battle.
When the race of Fiachaidh Muilleathan observed this courage on the
part of the Dal gCais, both sound and wounded, they ceased to speak of
engaging in the battle, and marched onwards to their homes without
getting hostages from the Dal gCais.

As to the Dal gCais they marched on thence to Ath I on the brink of
the Bearbha and began to drink water there. Donnchadh Mac Giolla
Phadraig, king of Osruighe, was there to meet them with his full host
and reserves, to wit, the Leinstermen and the Ossorians, on Magh
Cloinne Ceallaigh, and he had set a watch on the Dal gCais to find
what way they would take, by reason of his great enmity against them.
For Brian had tied and bound Donnchadh's father and kept him a year in
bondage, and had spoiled and wasted all Osruighe and slain many of its
people. Hence Mac Giolla Phadraig kept up the enmity against the Dal
gCais, and he sent envoys to them to Ath I, to ask them to send him
hostages as a condition of his allowing them to pass from that place
unmolested. But Donnchadh son of Brian's answer to the envoys was that
he would not give hostages. "Then," said the envoys, "Mac Giolla
Phadraig would have to be met in battle." "He will get battle," said
Donnchadh, "and it is a pity that I did not meet the death my father
met, before I was overtaken by the misfortune of these people
demanding hostages from me." The envoys told him not to get angry,
seeing that he was not strong enough to fight Mac Giolla Phadraig.
"Now if it were the custom to give affront to any envoys whatever on
accoont of their message," said Donnchadh, "I would have your tongues
plucked out of your heads, for if I had but a single page as a
following I would not refuse battle to Mac Giolla Phadraig and to the
Ossorians."

Then Donnchadh son of Brian set the third of the host in charge of
their wounded and the remaining two-thirds to give the battle. When
the wounded heard this, they sprang up suddenly, and their wounds and
gashes burst open, and they filled them with moss, and they seized
their lances and their swords and came in this guise into the midst of
their comrades, and they besought the son of Brian to send men into
the wood to fetch strong stakes which were to be stuck in the ground,
"and let us be tied to these," said they, "and let our arms be given
into our hands and let our sons and kinsmen be placed beside us, to
wit, two unwounded men around each of us wounded, so that we may act
together with the greater earnestness. For the unwounded man will be
ashamed to leave his post until the wounded man of our company who is
bound leaves it." They were arrayed in that way; and that array into
which the Dal gCais put themselves was a surprise for the mind, and a
very great wonder.

When the Leinstermen and the Ossorians observed this extraordinary
courage rising in the Dal gCais they conceived fear and terror of them,
and what they said was; "It is not a retreat in disorder or panic that
may be expected from the Dal gCais," said they, "but the fighting of a
close firm battle in self-defence. For this reason we will not give
them battle, for they are indifferent as to whether they shall endure
death or life." Mac Giolla Phadraig replied: "It is cowardly of you to
say that, seeing that you are numerous enough to eat yonder company if
they were cooked food." "That is true," they replied, "but though it
be true, none of these will be slain without his having slain five or
six, and how is it to our advantage to be slain with them?" "Since you
do not wish to give them battle," said Mac Giolla Phadraig, "harass
them by pursuit;" and the Dal gCais were less pleased at this than
they would have been to give them battle. After this the Dal gCais
proceeded unto their own country in want and in difficulties, and only
eight hundred and fifty reached home with the son of Brian, for they
lost a hundred and fifty through this harassing pursuit of the
Ossorians on their failing to give battle.

The following is the account of the Battle of Cluain Tarbh which
Maoilseachlainn son of Domhnall, king of Meath, gave a month after the
battle was fought; for the clann Cholmain were asking him for tidings
of the battle. Thereupon Maoilseachlainn said that he had never seen
such a battle or an approach to it. "For," said he, "if God's angel
from heaven were to give you an account of it his account would seem
incredible. Now I and my host were looking at them at the distance
only of a fallow field and a fences But when these battalions had
faced one another and stood breast to breast, they set to flail and to
lash one another; and like unto a heavy flock of white sea-gulls over
the coast, when the tide is coming up into the land, were the white
showers of shields above their heads; and if we wished to go to the
assistance of either side it was not in our power to do so, for our
lances and our arms were bound and fastened above our heads by the
firm closely set wisps of hair which the wind blew to us from the
heads and beards of the warriors as they were being hacked and cut
down by the edge of the swords and strong weapons on every side, so
that we found it difficult to keep the handles of our weapons from
getting entangled in one another. And we thought that those who were
in the fight did not suffer more than we did who had to look on
without running wild and mad."

Observe, O reader, that though it was as part of the host of Brian
that Maoilseachlainn and the men of Meath came to the field of battle,
still through a plot between himself and the Lochlonnaigh, he did not
come into the battle array amongst Brian's host, but what he did was
to remain with his host beside the battle, as the Lochlonnaigh had
directed him.

Neither the Cineal Eoghain nor the siol Conaill were at the battle,
but it was not that they did not offer to come there, but that Brian
said in his high courage that it was without them he gained any
success he had ever gained, "and so it will be now," said he.

Maoilseachlainn held the sovereignty again after Brian nine years. It
was in his reign that the following events took place. Maoilseachlainn,
king of Ireland, with a numerous host, together with O Neill and O
Maoldoraidh, went to Ath Cliath, and they plundered and burned the
town against the remnant of the Lochlonnaigh who lived at that time
not having fallen by Brian at the Battle of Cluain Tarbh. Thence they
proceeded to Ui Cinnsealaigh, and they spoiled and burned the entire
country, and many people were slain there. After that Maoilseachlainn
went to Ulster and brought thence many captives. It was about this
time that Donnagan, king of Leinster, and Tadhg O Riain, king of O
Drona, and many other persons were slain by Donnchadh Mac Giolla
Phadraig in the field of Leithghlinn; and Mac Liag, high ollamh of
Ireland, died. Maoilseachlainn, king of Ireland, made a hosting in
Osruighe, and there slew Dunghal Mac Giolla Phadraig, son of Donnchadh,
and many other persons with him.

It was this Maoilseachlainn of whom we are treating who founded the
monastery of St. Mary's in the town of Ath Cliath in the year of the
Lord 1039. And this Maoilseachlainn was a pious man in his latter days.
For when the power of the Lochlonnaigh had been broken at the Battle
of Cluain Tarbh so that they had only the wardenship of seaport towns,
while it was their wont to make incursions into the country at times
to spoil and ravage, as they were not numerous enough to give battle
to the Gaels, Maoilseachlainn began to restore schools and to build
and set in order churches, after the example of Brian. We also read
that he maintained three hundred students at his own expense.

It was in the reign of this Maoilseachlainn that Brian, son of
Maolmordha, son of Murchadh, who was king of Leinster two years, was
treacherously blinded by Sitric son of Amhlaoibh, in Ath Cliath. The
same Sitric plundered and spoiled Ceanannus, slaying many people there
and taking many captives thence. It was about this time that Ughaire
son of Dunlaing, son of Tuathal, son of Ughaire, son of Oilill, son of
Dunlaing, who was king of Leinster three years, inflicted a great
defeat on Sitric son of Amhlaoibh, and the Lochlonnaigh of Ath Cliath,
and dreadful slaughter was made of the Lochlonnaigh there. And Donn
Sleibhe, son of Maolmordha, son of Muireigen, burned the house of
Ughaire, so that Ughaire was burned in it at Dubhloch Leasa Cuile.
After this, Sitric son of Iomhar, leader of the Lochlonnaigh of Port
Lairge, was slain by the king of Osruighe, and Maoilseachlainn, king
of Ireland, died at Cro-inis in Loch Ainninn.

Although the seanchas enumerate high kings as having ruled Ireland
after Maoilseachlainn, I do not think that there was a king over the
country without opposition until the Norman Invasion, notwithstanding
that some of them assumed the sovereignty of Ireland. Here is the
testimony of the seancha on this point in this stanza:

After prosperous Maoilseachlainn,
Son of Domhnall, son of Donnchadh,
To no tribe remained a fair king,
And no one king ruled Erin.



XXVII.

Donnchadh, son of Brian Boraimhe, held the sovereignty of Leath Mogha
and the greater part of Ireland fifty years according to Finghin Mac
Carrthaigh, in the booklet he has written on the History of Ireland,
and others learned in the seanchus; and I think this opinion is more
likely to be true than the opinion of those who say that Donnchadh
reigned only twelve years. For Finghin's opinion is in accordance with
the number of years that are from the death of Brian to the Norman
Invasion, while the latter opinion is not. Hence I think that
Finghin's opinion is the true one, which says that fifty years was the
length of Donnchadh's reign. It was in the reign of Donnchadh that
Harolt Conan, prince of Wales, fled to Ireland where he found shelter
in the year of the Lord 1050. It was in Donnchadh's time that the
following events took place. For it was then that Mathghamhain O
Riagain, king of Breagha, took captive Amhlaoibh, son of Sitric,
leader of the Lochlonnaigh in Ireland, and got a ransom of twelve
hundred cows and six score steeds on his account.

It was about this time, also, that Flaithbheartach O Neill went on a
pilgrimage to Rome the year of the Lord then being 1073. After this
Tadhg, son of Lorcan, king of Ui Cinnsealaigh, died at Gleann da Loch
while he was there as a penitent; and Gormfhlaith, daughter of
Murchadh son of Flann king of Leinster, mother of Sitric, son of
Amhlaoibh, leader of the Lochlonnaigh of Ireland, died, and she was
the mother of Donnchadh, son of Brian Boraimhe. It was about this time
that Cluain Fearta Breanainn was plundered by Art Coileach O Ruairc,
king of Breithfne; and on the same day, Donnchadh, son of Brian, came
upon him and made dreadful slaughter of his people in vengeance for
that sacrilege they had committed. Soon after this, Cathal, son of
Ruaidhri, king of west Connaught, went on a pilgrimage to Ard Macha.
After this, Port Lairge was plundered and burned by Diarmaid son of
Maol na mBo, king of Leinster, and Cluain Mic Nois was plundered by
the Conmhaicne; and God and Ciaran avenged this on them, that is, most
of their people and their cattle died soon afterwards.

It was about this time that Carrthach, son of Saoirbhreathach, king of
Eoghanacht Chaisil, was burned, together with many other nobles, in a
fire-house by the son of Longargan, son of Donn Cuan. After this
Donnchadh, son of Brian, was deposed from his sovereignty, and went on
a pilgrimage to Rome, where he died in the monastery of St. Stephen.
And as to what many assert that the Pueraigh Eustasaigh and the
Pluingceadaigh are descended from Donnchadh, I have found neither lay
nor letter to prove that any of them were descended from him, except
one stanza which is in the poem beginning: I will confer a favour on
the clann Tail, which Maoilin Og Mac Bruaideadha a contemporary of our
own has composed. Moreover as to the tradition that exists among many
of the rustics who say that when Donnchadh went on a pilgrimage to
Rome he had intercourse with the daughter of the emperor who was there
then, and that she bore him a son, and that from that son might have
sprung the three septs we have mentioned; this story cannot be true,
for before setting out on that expedition he was a very old decrepid
man of over eighty years of age, and it is not likely that an
emperor's daughter would covet intercourse with such a veteran, and,
moreover, it would have been unbecoming in him who went for the sake
of pilgrimage and penance to covet any woman whatever.

And from what I have said, I judge that Donnchadh did not have
intercourse with the emperor's daughter, and that she did not bear him
a son from whom the septs referred to could have sprung.

The truth of this statement will be the more readily admitted as we
read in an old book of annals, which was copied from the Speckled Book
of Mac Aodhaghain about three hundred years ago, that Donnchadh, after
having performed his pilgrimage to Rome, went to live in the monastery
of St. Stephen in Rome, and that he took upon himself the yoke of
piety, and passed the remainder of his life until death in penance in
the same place.

We also read in the chronicles of the Normans, where the Norman nobles
who came first to Ireland are enumerated, that it was at the beginning
of the Norman Invasion that Robert le Power, from whom sprang the
Pueraigh and the Eustasaigh in Ireland, first came, and the same
authors say that the Pluingceadaigh are of Lochlonnach origin.

Toirrdhealbhach, son of Tadhg, son of Brian Boraimhe, held the
sovereignty of Munster and of the greater part of all Ireland twelve
years. Mor, daughter of Giolla Brighde O Maolmuaidh, king of Cineal
Fiachaidh and and of Feara Ceall, was mother of this Toirdhealbhach O
Briain. It was in his reign that the following events took place. For
it was then that Conchubhar, son of Maoilseachlainn, king of Meath,
was treacherously slain by his own brother's son, to wit, Murchadh,
son of Flann, and his head was forcibly carried off from where he was
buried at Cluain Mic Nois to Ceann Choradh by Toirrdhealbhach O Briain
the Friday before Easter, and the same head was taken back northwards
to Cluian Mic Nois the next Sunday, and this happened through the
wonder-working of Ciaran.

It was in the reign of this Toirrdhealbhach that William Rufus, king
of England, by the permission of Toirrdhealbhach O Briain, king of
Ireland, sent to Ireland for timber with which to roof Westminster
Hall in the year of the Lord 1098; and the year before that the first
bishop, his name was Malcus, was consecrated at Port Lairge, by
Anselmus, archbishop of Canterbury. It was about this time that
Dearbhforgaill, daughter of Tadhg Mac Giolla Phadraig, wife of
Toirrdhealbhach O Briain, king of the greater part of Ireland, died.
After this Toirrdhealbhach O Briain, king of the greater part of all
Ireland, died after he had reigned twelve years.

Muircheartach, son of Toirrdhealbhach, son of Tadhg, son of Brian
Boraimhe, held the sovereignty of Leath Mogha and the greater part of
all Ireland twenty years. Caileach Dhe, daughter of O Heidhin, was
mother of Muircheartach O Briain and mother of Ruaidhri O Conchubhair.
It was in his reign that the following events took place. In the first
place it was he bestowed Cashel on the Church as an offering to God
and to Patrick the first year of his reign, in the year of the Lord
1106; and about this time there was a general assembly of the men of
Ireland, both lay and cleric, around Muircheartach O Briain, king of
Leath Mogha in Fiadh Mic Aonghusa. Here follows the number of clerics
that were at this assembly, namely, Maolmuire O Dunain, archbishop of
Munster, and Ceallach son of Aodh, comhorba of Patrick, that is the
vicar-general of the primate, and eight bishops, three hundred and
sixty priests and seven score deacons, and many clerics that are not
enumerated here. And they made regulations and laws and customs for
the Church and the laity. After this, Maolmuire O Dunain, archbishop
of Munster, died.



XXVIII.

It was also in the time of this Muircheartach that a synod or National
Council was convened in Ireland at Raith Breasail in the year of the
Lord 1100, according to an old book of annals of the church of Cluain
Eidhneach Fionntain in Laoighis, in which are recorded the principal
things done at that synod; and Giolla Easpuig, bishop of Luimneach,
who was the Pope's legate in Ireland at that time, was president of
that council. Now here follow the regulations that were made therein:

Just as twelve bishops were fixed under Canterbury in the south of
England, and twelve bishops in the north under the city of York, a
similar arrangement was made at the synod of Raith Breasail in Ireland,
to wit, twelve bishops in Leath Mogha and twelve bishops in Leath
Cuinn and also two bishops in Meath. It was at this synod that the
churches of Ireland were given up entirely to the bishops free for
ever from the authority and rent of the lay princes. It was there also
were regulated the sees or dioceses of the bishops of Ireland. Here is
the full number of the bishops of Leath Cuinn: six in the province of
Ulster, including the primate; five in the province of Connaught, and
two in Meath. And this gives the full twelve bishops of Leath Cuinn
excluding the primate. The following are the dioceses of the province
of Ulster, to wit, Ard Macha, the see of the archbishop of Ard Macha
and primate over the bishops of all Ireland, Clochar, Ard Sratha,
Doire, Cuinneire, and Dun da Leathghlas; the sees of Meath, Daimhliag
and Cluain Ioraird; the sees of the province of Connaught, namely,
Tuaim da Ghualann, Cluain Fearta Breanainn, Conga, Cill Aladh, and Ard
Charna; the sees of Munster, Cashel held by the archbishop of Leath
Mogha, Lios Mor or Port Lairge, Corcach, Raith Mhaighe Deisceirt,
Luimneach, Cill Dalua, Imleach Iobhair. These were the seven sees
which were decreed to Munster at this synod. Five sees in Leinster,
Cill Chainnigh, Leithghlinn, Cill Dara, Gleann da Loch, Fearna or Loch
Garman. Adding these five sees to the seven sees of Munster they make
twelve sees in Leath Mogha. The reason why Ath Cliath is not counted
here is that it was not customary with its bishop to receive
consecration except from the archbishop of Canterbury in England.

Hanmer states falsely that the archbishop of Canterbury had
jurisdiction over the Irish clergy from the time of Augustine the monk
until the Norman Invasion. For you will not find that the prelates of
Canterbury had. jurisdiction over the Irish clergy except in the time
of Lanfrancus Ranulphus and Anselmus; and even then the portion of the
clergy of Ireland over whom they had jurisdiction were the clergy of
Ath Cliath, Port Lairge, Loch Garman and Luimneach who were descended
from the remnant of the Lochlonnaigh who were called Normani, and it
was through a feeling of friendship for the people of Normandy who
sprang from their own race that the prelates of these places gave
jurisdiction and authority to the archbishop of Canterbury over them,
as is clear from the booklet written by Dr. Ussher, for they
considered if there were to be an election by the people between
themselves and one of the Gaels who sought the same dignity, that
their side would not have an equal chance, as in the election the Gael
would have a larger popular vote than any of them.

I think that although the old book does not so state, it was six
bishops that were in Munster and six in Leinster, with the archbishop
of Cashel over them all as chief prelate of Leath Mogha after the
manner of the temporal sovereignty as we have said above in treating
of this matter in the reign of Laoghaire.

Here follow the sees or dioceses and their boundaries as they were
regulated in this synod of Raith Breasail.

The see of the archbishop of Ard Macha, from Sliabh Breagh to Cuaille
Ciannachta and from Bior to the Abhann Mhor.

The see of Clochar, from the Abhann Mhor to Gabhail Liuin and from
Sliabh Beatha to Sliabh Largha.

The see of Ard Sratha, from Sliabh Largha to Carn Glas and from Loch
Craoi to Beann Foibhne.

The see of the bishop of Doire or Raith Both, from Eas Ruadh to Srubh
Broin and from Carn Glas to Srubh Broin.

The see of the bishop of Cuinnire, from Beann Fhoibhne to Torbhuirg,
and from Port Murbhoilg to Ollorbha and to Cuan Snamha Aidhne, and
from Gleann Riogh to Colbha Gearmainn.

The see of the bishop of Dun da Leathghlas, its boundary is not found
in the old book.[509]

The see of the bishop of Daimhliag, from Sliabh Breagh to Carn Duin
Cuair and from Lochan na hImrime eastward to the sea.

The see of Cluain Ioraird, from Clochan westward to the Sionainn, and
from Iubhar Coillte to Cluain Conaire.

The see of Cluain Fearta, from the Sionainn to Buireann and from
Echtghe to the Succa.

The see of Tuaim, from the Succa to Ard Charna, and from Ath an
Tearmainn to the Sionainn.

The see of Conga, from Abhann Ui Bhriuin northwards to Neimhtheann,
and from Ath an Tearmainn westward to the sea.

The see of Cill Aladh, from Neimhtheann to Eas Ruadh, and from Cill
Airdbhile to Sraith an Fhearainn.

The see of Ard Charna or of Ardachadh, from Ard Carna to Sliabh an
Iarainn, and from Ceis Chorainn to Iobhar Coilltean. If the Connaught
clergy agree to this division, we desire it, and if they do not, let
them divide it as they choose, and we approve of the division that
will please them, provided there be only five bishops in Connaught.

The see of the archbishop of Cashel, from Sliabh Eibhlinne to the
Siuir and from Cnamhchoill at Tiobrad Arann eastward to Grian Airbh,
that is Cros Ghreine.

The see of Lios Mor or Port Lairge, from Mileadhach on the brink of
the Bearbha at Cumar na dtri nUisceadh to Corcach, and from the Siuir
southward. to the sea.

The see of Corcach, from Corcach to Carn Ui Neid, and from the Abhann
Mhor southwards to the sea.

The see of Raith Mhaighe Deisceirt, from Baoi Bheirre to Ceann Beara,
and from the Feil to Dairbhre.

The see of Cill Dalua, from Slighe Dhala to Leim Chon gCulainn, and
from Echtghe to Sliabh Uidhe an Riogh, and from Sliabh Uidhe an Riogh
to Sliabh Caoin or Gleann Caoin.

The see of Luimneach, the Maoilchearn eastward, Ath ar Choinne, Lodan
and Loch Gair, and the Laitheach Mhor from Aine westward, and Ard
Padraig to the south and Bealach Feabhradh and Tulach Leis, the Feil
westward and Tairbeart and Cuinche in Thomond, and Crossa in Sliabh
Uidhe an Riogh and the Dubhabhann. Whoever shall go against these
boundaries goes against the Lord and Peter the Apostle and St. Patrick
and his comhorba and the Christian Church. And the Church of Mary in
Luimneach is its principal church.

The see of Imleach Iobhar, from Cluain Caoin to the Abhann Mhor, and
from Cnamhchoill at Tiobrad Arann to Abhann Ealla.

The see of Cill Chainnigh, from Sliabh Bladhma to Mileadhach, and from
Grian Airbh to Sliabh Mairge.

The see of Leithghlinn, from Sliabh Bladhma to Sliabh Uidhe Laighean,
from Sliabh Mairge to Bealach Carcrach, and from Bealach Mughna to
Teach Moling and its termon lands.

The see of Cill Dara, from Ros Fionnghlaise to Nas Laighean, and from
Nas to Cumar Chluana Ioraird and to Sleibhte Ghlinne da Loch.

The see of Gleann da Loch, from Grianog to BeigEire, and from Nas to
Reachruinn.

The see of Fearna or Loch Garman, from Beig-Eire to Mileadhach on the
west of the Bearbha, and from Sliabh Uidhe Laighean south to the sea;
and if the Leinster clergy agree to this it is our pleasure, provided
they have only five bishops.

The blessing of the Lord and of Peter the Apostle and of St. Patrick
be on everyone of these twenty-five bishops who shall let no Easter
pass without consecrating oil.

And there are many other good decrees of this holy synod which we have
not set down here for brevity.

The cross of the comhorba of Peter and of his legate, that is Giolla
Easpuig, bishop of Luimneach,

The cross of Giolla Ceallaigh the comhorba of Patrick and primate of
Ireland,

The cross of Maoiliosa O Ainmire, archbishop of Cashel,

The crosses of all the bishops and of all the laity and clergy who
were at this holy synod of Raith Breasail against whomsoever shall
transgress these decrees, and the malediction of them all on
whomsoever shall oppose them.



XXIX.

We read in the chronicle of Hackluite that when Muircheartach O Briain
held the sovereignty of Ireland the people of the Isles sent envoys to
him to request him to send some one of his kinsmen of the royal blood
to rule over the Isles during the nonage of Olanus or Amhlaoibh son of
Gothfruidh, who had an hereditary right to be king of the Isles; and
Muircheartach sent a nobleman of his own kindred named Domhnall son of
Tadhg O Briain to rule over them, and he held sovereignty over them
three years, when he began to tyrannise over them, and for this reason
the people of the isles sent him back to Ireland.

We read in the same author that Maghnus, son of Amhlaoibh, son of
Aralt, who was king of Norway, sent envoys to Muircheartach O Briain,
and sent his own shoes with them, to command Muircheartach to place
the shoes on his shoulders; and when the envoys had come into his
presence they gave him their message. Muircheartach took the shoes
from them and put them on his shoulders; and when the nobles who were
with him saw this, they became greatly enraged, and they reproached
him for having done this deed. "I prefer to do this," said
Muircheartach, "to Maghnus's plundering any province of Ireland."
After this Maghnus got ready a large fleet and came from Norway to
Ireland to injure and ruin that country, and when he had come near
Ireland he came to land himself with a wing of the fleet through his
great hurry to work havoc; and when they had landed, the inhabitants
of the country were in readiness for them; and when Maghnus and his
detachment came on land the inhabitants sprang upon them, and Maghnus
and his party were slain on that expedition. And when the men of the
fleet he had left behind heard that Maghnus their leader was slain,
they returned to Norway.

This Muircheartach O Briain of whom we are treating after he had spent
five years in trouble died repentant at Ard Macha, and was buried at
Cill Dalua in the principal church.

Toirrdhealbhach Mor, son of Ruaidhri O Conchubhair, held the
sovereignty of the greater part of Ireland after Muircheartach O
Briain for the space of twenty years. It was in his reign the
following events took place. This Toirrdhealbhach built three chief
bridges in Connaught, to wit, the bridge of Ath Luain and the bridge
of Ath Crochdha on the Sionainn and the bridge of Dun Leoghdha on the
Succa. This Toirrdhealbhach made a hosting into Munster and plundered
Cashel and Ard Fionain, and when he was marching to spoil Ard Fionain
a body of Munstermen came upon the rear of the host and slew Aodh O
hEidhin, king of Ui Fiachrach, and Muireadhach O Flaithbheartaigh,
king of west Connaught, and many other nobles not enumerated here.

Thereafter this Toirrdhealbhach with a large land and sea force went
to Corcach, and set to plunder all Munster; and he divided Munster
into two parts, and gave the southern part to Donnchadh Mac Carrthaigh,
and the northern half to Conchubhar O Briain, and he took thirty
hostages from them both. It was about this time that Cormac's church
was consecrated at Cashel in the presence of many clerics and nobles
of Ireland, the year of the Lord at that time being 1134. After that
Cormac Mac Carrthach, king of Munster, was treacherously slain by
Toirrdhealbhach O Briain, that is, his own son-in-law and gossip; and
Maolmaodhog, that is Malachias, who was archbishop of Ireland and of
Alba, died, the year of the Lord then being 1135. Toirrdhealbhach O
Conchubhair with the strength of Connaught, Leinster and Meath, and of
Feara Teabhtha and of O Ruairc's country, made another hosting into
Munster, and they made a free circuit of Munster until they reached
Gleann Maghair, where they met Toirrdhealbhach O Briain, king of
Munster, and the son of Conchuhbar O Briain, and the men of Munster
with them. They were three battalions in all. The Battle of Moin Mhor
was fought between them and the Dal gCais, and the Munstermen were
defeated there and a countless number of them fell. Toirrdhealbhach O
Briain was banished to Tir Eoghain, and Toirrdhealbhach O Conchubhair
divided Munster between Tadhg O Briain and Diarmaid son of Cormac Mac
Carrthaigh.

Soon after this, Toirrdhealbhach O Conchubhair, king of the greater
part of Ireland, died, and he was sixty-eight years of age at that
time, and he was buried at the high altar of Ciaran at Cluain Mic
Nois; and great was the legacy he left to the clergy for his soul's
sake, to wit, five hundred and forty ounces of gold, and forty marks
of silver, and all the other valuables he had, both goblets and
precious stones, both steeds and cattle, clothes, chess and backgammon,
bows and quivers, sling and arms, and he himself gave directions how
each individual church's share should be given to it according to its
rank. It was about this time that Tadhg O Longargain, bishop of Cill
Dalua, died.

Muircheartach, son of Niall, son of Lochlann, held the sovereignty of
Leath Cuinn and of the greater part of Ireland eighteen years till he
fell by the men of Fearnmhagh and by O Briuin. And it was in the
seventh year of this man's reign that an assembly and general council
of the church of Ireland was convened at Ceanannus na Midhe in the
year of the Lord 1152, to set forth the Catholic faith and to purify
it and to correct the customs of the people, and to consecrate four
archbishops and to give them four pallia. For there had been up to
then in Ireland only two archbishops, to wit, the primate of Ard Macha
and the archbishop of Cashel. And those who presided at this council
on behalf of the Pope, were Giolla Criost O Conairce, bishop of Lios
Mor, and head of the Irish monks, as legate, and a cardinal with him,
whose name was John Papiron, for the purpose of making rules and
regulations in Ireland, and for doing a thing which Ireland regarded
with greater concern that this, to wit, the giving of four pallia. For
Ireland thought it enough to have a pallium in Ard Macha and a pallium
in Cashel, and particularly it was in spite of the church of Ard Macha
and the church of Dun da Leathghlas that other pallia were given
besides one to Ard Macha and one to Cashel, as the old book of annals
of the church of Cluain Eidneach in Laoighis, which gives a summary of
the transactions of this council, explains the matter.

Now, when the council met in session they made praiseworthy
regulations and customs on the occasion of the giving of these four
pallia. Here follow the words of the old book of chronicles which was
written in Cluain Eidhneach Fionntain in Laoighis.

In the year 1152 from the Incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ, being
a bissextile and embolismal year, a famous council was held at
Ceanannus in the season of spring about the time of "Laetare
Jerusalem" Sunday, in which Lord John Cardinal Priest of St. Lawrence
in Damascus, presiding over twenty-two bishops and five bishops elect,
and over many abbots and priors, on behalf of the holy apostles Peter
and Paul, and of the Apostolic Lord Eugenius, entirely rooted out and
condemned simony and usury, and commanded by Apostolic authority the
payment of tithes. He gave four pallia to the four archbishops of
Ireland, to wit, to those of Dublin, Cashel, Tuaim and Ard Macha.
Moreover, he appointed the archbishop of Ard Macha as primate over the
other bishops as was meet. And this Cardinal John, immediately after
the council was over, took his departure, and on the ninth of the
calends of April set sail. The following are the bishops who were
present at this council, to wit, Giolla Criost OConairce, bishop of
Lios Mor and legate of the Pope in Ireland; Giolla Mac Liag, comhorba
of Patrick and primate of Ireland; Domhnall O Longargain, archbishop
of Munster; Greine, bishop of Ath Cliath; Giolla na Naomh Laigneach,
bishop of Gleann da Loch; Dunghal O Caolluidhe, bishop of Leithglinn;
Tostius, bishop of Port Lairge; Domhnall O Foghartaigh, vicar-general
to the bishop of Osruighe; Fionn, son of Cianan, bishop of Cill Dara;
Giolla an Choimdheadh O hArdmhaoil, vicar to the bishop of Imleach;
Giolla Aodha O Maighin, bishop of Corcach; Mac Ronain, comhorba of
Breanainn, bishop of Ciarraidhe; Torgestius, bishop of Luimneach;
Muircheartach O Maoilidhir, bishop of Cluain Mic Nois; Maoiliosa O
Connachtain, bishop of East Connaught; Ua Rudain, bishop of Luighne;
Mac Craith O Mugroin, bishop of Conmhaicne; Etras O Miadhchain, bishop
of Cluain hIoraird; Tuathal O Connachtaigh, bishop of Ui Briuin;
Mureadhach O Cobhthaigh, bishop of Cineal Eoghain; Maolpadraig O
Banain, bishop of Dal nAruidhe; Maoiliosa Mac an Chleirigh Chuirr,
bishop of Ulidia. On the day before the Nones of March this synod
closed in which the bishoprics of Ireland were set in order and
determined.
After this council had concluded Domhnall O Longargain, archbishop of
Munster, died, and some time after this Muircheartach, son of Niall,
who was in the sovereignty of Leath Cuinn and of the greater part of
Ireland at that time, died, having been slain by the men of Fearnmhagh
and by O Briuin, as we have said above.



XXX.

Ruaidhri O Conchubhair assumed the sovereignty of Connaught and the
greater part of Leath Cuinn, because the king of Oirghiall, the king
of Meath and the king of Breithfne submitted to him, and, moreover, he
is called king of Ireland in the seanchus. Still he was only a king
with opposition, that is, a king to whose possession of the
sovereignty of Ireland a great many of the Irish nobles were opposed.
And it was while Ruaidhri reigned in this manner that the wife of
Tighearnan Caoch O Ruairc (Dearbhforgaill was her name, and she was
daughter to Murchadh Mac Floinn, king of Meath, and not wife of the
king of Meath as Cambrensis says) sent messengers in secret to
Diarmaid Mac Murchadha asking him to come to meet her and take her
with him as his wife from Tighearnan and she told the messengers to
make known to Diarmaid. that Tighearnan had gone on a pilgrimage to
the cave of Patrick's Purgatory, and that, therefore, he would have an
opportunity of quietly carrying her with him to Leinster. There had
been indeed an illicit attachment between them for many years
previously.

As to Diarmaid, when this message reached him he went quickly to meet
the lady, accompanied by a detachment of mounted men, and when they
reached where she was, he ordered that she be placed on horseback
behind a rider, and upon this the woman wept and screamed in pretence,
as if Diarmaid were carrying her off by force; and bringing her with
him in this manner, he returned to Leinster. As to Tighearnan, when he
returned to Breithfne and heard that it was against her consent his
wife was taken from him, he made a complaint of this outrage to
Ruaidhri O Conchubhair and to his. friends in general.

Upon this Ruaidhri made a muster of the men of Connaught, Breithfne,
Oirghialla and Meath, and set out with a large host to waste Leinster
to avenge this evil deed Diarmaid had done.

When Diarmaid heard that Ruaidhri was marching to waste Leinster, he
assembled and brought together the nobles of Leinster from all sides,
and when they came to one place their answer to Diarmaid was that they
would not go to defend the evil deed he had done, and thereupon many
of them deserted him and put themselves under the protection of
Ruaidhri, and made known to him that Diarmaid before that time had
committed many acts of injustice and tyranny against them.

As Diarmaid was not strong enough to fight Ruaidhri, the latter set
about spoiling the territories of all the Leinstermen who sided with
Diarmaid; and he went on to Fearna and levelled Diarmaid's house, and
broke his fortress, and banished him out of Ireland altogether. And
Diarmaid went to Henry II., king of England, who was then in France;
and when he had come into the king's presence, the latter welcomed him
and showed him much friendship; and when he made known to the king the
cause of his visit, the king wrote friendly letters to be taken by him
to England, in which he gave permission to all who so wished to go
with him to Ireland to help him to recover his own territory. Diarmaid,
on this, bade farewell to the king, and proceeding to England arrived
at Bristol, and caused his letters to be read there publicly; and he
made large promises to those who would go with him to Ireland to
recover his own territory.

It was there he met Richard Fitz Gilbert, son of earl Stranguell; and
he made a compact with him, to wit, to give his own daughter, that is,
Aoife, daughter of Diarmaid, to wife to him, and with her the
inheritance of Leinster after his own death, Richard to be obliged to
follow him to Ireland to recover his territory for him. After they had
made a compact on these conditions, Diarmaid went to Wales to a prince
who was there called Ralph Griffin, who ruled the country under king
Henry, and made his case known to him. At that time the prince kept in
prison a powerful nobleman of great achievements called Robert Fitz
Stephen, for having disobeyed the king, and there was no relief
forthcoming to him unless he chose to go to Ireland to aid Mac
Murchadha by the strength of his arm in the recovery of his territory.
And when the bishop of St. David's and Maurice Fitz Gerald heard that
Mac Murchadha had visited this prince requesting him to free Robert
Fitz Stephen from his captivity, they themselves came to request him
in like manner to set Robert at liberty, and let him go to Ireland
with Mac Murchadha. Now that bishop and Robert Fitz Stephen and
Maurice Fitz Gerald were uterine brothers.

The prince then released Robert on condition that he would follow Mac
Murchadha to Ireland the next summer. Diarmaid, on the other side,
promised Robert Fitz Stephen Loch Garman and the two cantreds next it,
as his property for ever, in return for his coming to help him to
fight his enemy; and after this compact was made, Diarmaid bade
farewell to these people and proceeded with only a small force to
Ireland. Having landed in a place where he had many enemies and few
friends, he went secretly to Fearna Mor Maodhog, putting himself under
the protection of the clergy and community of Fearna; and he stayed
with them sad and wretched during the time that elapsed until the
coming of summer.

As to Robert Fitz Stephen he came to fulfil his promise to Mac
Murchadha, and the number of the host that came with him to Ireland
was thirty knights, three score esquires and three hundred foot; and
the place where they landed was at Cuan an Bhainbh on the south coast
of the County of Loch Garman in the place which is called
Baginbun[510], and it was then the year of the Lord 1170, and the
seventh year of the reign of Ruaidhri O Conchubhair. There was also a
distinguished knight with Robert Fitz Stephen at that time, to wit,
Herimont Morti, a knight of the party of the earl of Stranguell, whom
he sent before him to Ireland to study the country, and when they
landed Robert sent word to Diarmaid to make it known to him that he
had arrived in Ireland.

When Diarmaid heard this he rejoiced, and went to meet them with five
hundred warriors; and when they had come together they proceeded by
agreement to attack Loch Garman with a view to getting possession of
it; and when they were approaching the town, the burgesses came to the
decision of submitting to Diarmaid, and of giving him four of the
nobles of the town as hostages for their maintaining peace and paying
him rent and tribute and for their being obedient to him as their lord.
It was then that Diarmaid bestowed Loch Garman and the two cantreds
next it on Robert Fitz Stephen, and, moreover, he bestowed the two
cantreds next again to these on Herimont Morti, according to the
promise he had made them in Wales; and after he had fulfilled this
promise Diarmaid assembled his own people and the foreigners to one
place; and the number of the host that assembled there was three
thousand men, counting Gaels and foreigners; and they proceeded thence
of one accord to plunder and spoil Osruighe; and the king of Osruighe
at that time was Donnchadh, son of Domhnall Reamhar, an inveterate
enemy of Diarmaid, and as they had come to waste Osruighe, while
Donnchadh could not defend himself, he, with the nobles of his country,
decided to give Diarmaid hostages for the payment to him of head rent;
and thus Diarmaid was prevented from wasting the country.

Now when the nobles of Ireland heard of the arrival of Diarmaid and of
these foreigners and of all the successes with Ruaidhri O Conchubhair,
king of Connaught, who then held the sovereignty of Ireland; and what
they agreed upon was to give him an auxiliary force from every
province of Ireland; and when these forces had assembled in one place
Ruaidhri marched with them to Ui Cinnsealaigh in the hope of driving
Diarmaid and the foreigners from Ireland; and when Ruaidhri went into
Leinster, Diarmaid and the foreigners, and as many of the Leinstermen
as followed him, went into the dark fastnesses of the woods near
Fearna Mor Maodhog to shield themselves from the great force of
Ruaidhri's hosts. But as Ruaidhri saw that they were not going to give
him battle he sent envoys to Robert Fitz Stephen asking him to quit
the country, saying that he had neither right nor hereditary claim to
be in it. Robert said, in reply to the envoys, that he would not
desert the lord with whom he had come to Ireland. The envoys returned
with this answer to Ruaidhri, and when he heard it, and heard also
that Mac Murchadha would not on any account forsake the foreigners, he
resolved to make a sudden attack with all his forces regular and
contingent on Diarmaid and the foreigners and upset and destroy them.

When the Leinster clergy saw that the country was in danger of being
thrown into disorder and destroyed by this conflict, they did their
best to bring about peace between Ruaidhri and Diarmaid; and these
were the terms in which this peace was concluded, to wit, Diarmaid to
have the province of Leinster which he had inherited, and to be
obliged to be obedient and faithful to Ruaidhri, as every king of
Leinster was bound to be to the kings of Ireland, and in pledge for
the fulfilling of the terms of this peace Diarmaid gave one of his
sons named Art to Ruaidhri as a hostage. Moreover Ruaidhri promised to
give his own sister to Diarmaid to wife; and on these terms they
separated from one another in peace; but Diarmaid promised Ruaidhri
not to bring any more of the foreigners to Ireland; and soon after
this Maurice Fitz Gerald came to Ireland in the beginning of the
summer according to the promise he had given to Mac Murchadha, and
also because of the reward which Mac Murchadha had promised to himself
and to Robert Fitz Stephen the previous autumn on condition of their
coming to Ireland to help him to recover his own territory; and the
number of the hosts who came with Maurice on that occasion was ten
knights, thirty esquires and one hundred foot, and the place where
they landed was at Loch Garman.



XXXI.

When Mac Murchadha and Robert Fitz Stephen heard that Maurice had come
to Ireland, they went to meet him to Loch Garman; and it was then Mac
Murchadha called to mind all the outrages that the people of Ath
Cliath had committed on himself and on his father before him.
Accordingly Mac Murchadha brought together this host with a view to
marching to plunder Ath Cliath, and he left Robert Fitz Stephen
building a fortress in the place which is now called Carrick, which is
two miles outside of Loch Garman, and Mac Murchadha and Maurice Fitz
Gerald with the majority of these foreigners proceeded to Fine Ghall,
and they plundered and burned that country.

Now when the burgesses of Ath Cliath heard that the country round them
was plundered and spoiled, they took counsel together, and the
decision they came to was to send valuables and large presents of gold
and silver to Mac Murchadha with a view to obtaining peace and a
settlement from him, and with these treasures they sent him hostages
over the walls of the town, and they promised to pay Mac Murchadha all
claims and dues they owed him up to then.

Now when Mac Murchadha saw that he was succeeding in all his
undertakings, he reflected in his mind that his ancestors before him
possessed the sovereignty of Ireland, to wit, Cathaoir Mor, Conchubhar
Abhradhruadh, Labhruidh Loingseach, Laoghaire Lorc, and Ughaine Mor
and every other king of that race that had held the sovereignty of
Ireland before him, and he said to himself that the strength or might
of all these kings to hold Ireland was not greater than his own. Hence
Mac Murchadha took Maurice Fitz Gerald and Robert Fitz Stephen aside
and unfolded to them his design in this matter and asked their advice
as to what he should do. They answered him with one voice, and said it
would be very easy for him to carry out this design were he to send
envoys to England to ask for more men; however Mac Murchadha asked
them to send envoys from themselves inviting their kinsmen and
friends; and he promised to give his own daughter to wife to Maurice
Fitz Gerald or to Robert Fitz Stephen, whichever of them would accept
her, and his princedom from his own death onwards. But neither of them
consented to accept her, for both remembered that Mac Murchadha had
promised that lady and the sovereignty of Leinster with her to the
earl of Stranguell in return for his bringing with him his forces to
recover his patrimony for him; and Maurice and Robert requested Mac
Murchadha to send a letter to the earl requesting him to come over in
fulfilment of the promise he had made him in England, "and make known
to him," added they, "that thou art ready to fulfil thy promise to him,
and will give him thy daughter to wife and the sovereignty of Leinster
from thy death on; and, moreover, as to the four divisions of Ireland
that thou dost not possess, make known to him that thou hast hopes of
their becoming subject and paying rent to thee."

Mac Murchadha sent envoys and letters to the earl of Stranguell in
reference to this affair, and when the envoys had come into his
presence and he had read the letters, and when, moreover, he had heard
of the conquests Mac Murchadha and Robert Fitz Stephen and Maurice
Fitz Gerald had made in Ireland, he went to where the king of England
was, and asked leave of him to go and make conquests wherever he liked.
But when the king understood the mind and intention of the earl, he
did not give him full consent, neither did he give him a refusal. But
the earl went away with the permission he had got, and he got himself
and his followers ready to go to Ireland, and before he could himself
get ready to go on this expedition he sent Raymond le Gros, son of
William Fitz Gerald, an elder brother of Maurice Fitz Gerald, with an
armed party before him to Ireland, and on reaching that country the
place where he put into port was Dun Domhnaill, four miles south of
Port Lairge; and according to the chronicle of Stanihurst the number
of his followers was ten knights and seventy foot. And when they had
landed they built a strong embankment of stones and clay in that place.

Now when news reached Port Lairge and Maoilseachlainn O Faolain, king
of the Deise, that these foreigners had arrived in their neighbourhood,
they were all seized with hatred and fear of them, and they came to
one place to take counsel in reference to this matter, and the
decision they came to was to attack. the strangers in the stronghold
in which they were, and to slaughter and destroy them.

After this they came (with their forces) to one place, and their
number was three thousand men when going to oppose these foreigners.
When Raymond saw them approach him he went out quickly and unwisely
with his small party to meet that large host with a view to engaging
them in battle and conflict. But when he saw that he was not strong
enough to fight them, he retreated to the fortress he had himself
raised. When the Gaels saw the foreigners retreating, they followed
them vehemently and boldly to the fortress. But when Raymond de la
Gros observed that his enemy were boldly in pursuit of him he turned
on them and made indescribable slaughter upon that great host of Gaels,
so that apart from all he slew of them he maimed and wounded five
hundred of them on the spot.

Now after the feast of St. Bartholomew in the succeeding autumn in the
year of the Lord 1170, the earl of Stranguell came to Ireland, and the
full number of the host that came with him was two hundred knights and
a thousand esquires and bowmen and men of valour of every description;
and it was at Port Lairge they put into port. And when the news spread
over the country that the earl of Stranguell had come to Ireland, Mac
Murchadha and the nobles of Leinster and Robert Fitz Stephen and
Maurice Fitz Gerald and Raymond de la Gros came to meet and join the
earl with joy and in high spirits, and on the morrow they went by
common consent to capture Port Lairge; and when they arrived at the
town they made a united assault on it with a view to capturing it, and
having it in their power; and notwithstanding the evils and hardships
endured by the townspeople in maintaining and defending themselves,
they sprang on them over the walls of the town, and slew of the
townspeople as many as they came upon, and they captured
Maoilseachlainn O Faolain, king of the Deise, and it was through Mac
Murchadha's intercession that his life was spared.

Now Mac Murchadha took his daughter, whose name was Aoife, to meet the
earl at this time, and she was married to him, and when they had made
and ratified that match on both sides, the earl left a strong garrison
in Port Lairge and marched at once with his host against Ath Cliath;
and there was no man on earth whom the people of Ath Cliath hated more
to see coming towards them than Mac Murchadha accompanied by these
foreigners; and Mac Murchadha on his part was full of rage and enmity
against them. For it was they who slew his father; and they buried him
with dishonour and contempt, and buried a dead dog in the same grave
with him as an insult to him. When the people of Ath Cliath saw these
foreigners and the strength of Leinster, a large army, making towards
them, they were seized with fear and alarm, and sent an envoy, to wit,
Labhras O Tuathail, archbishop of Ath Cliath, to the earl to request
peace and a settlement from him. And the archbishop promised the earl
gifts and hostages from the people of Ath Cliath in consideration of
their obtaining peace and protection.

But while the settlement was being made between them, Raymond de la
Gros and Myles Cogan, with a company of young knights, were on the
other side of the town, and they found an opportunity of breaking and
gapping the walls of the town, and they entered the town suddenly, and
there slew every person they laid hold of. But when the foreigners and
Mac Murchadha had thus captured Ath Cliath, they remained in it only a
short time, and the earl left Myles Cogan and a company of men to hold
the town. Now there were enmity and ill will between O Ruairc, king of
Breithfne, and Mac Murchadha, and the latter took this great host of
foreigners and Gaels to Breithfne, and they spoiled and burned the
country and gained great advantages over O Ruairc and over all whom
they fell in with in Ireland.



XXXII.

When Ruaidhri, son of Toirrdhealbhach O Conchubhair king of Connaught
and of the greater part of Ireland, saw that Mac Murchadha had broken
the peace that had up to then existed between them, he sent envoys to
him to reproach him for violating the terms of peace which had been
agreed on between them, by his having brought over these foreigners
without his own consent or advice. And when the envoys came into the
presence of Mac Murchadha they said: "Now we know," said they, "that
thou hast neither regard nor respect for thine oaths, nor for thy son
whom thou didst give as a hostage for the maintenance of peace; and
the king of Connaught, Ruaidhri O Conchubhair, tells thee that if thou
wilt not dismiss those foreigners who are with thee, he will send thee
thy son's head, and that he will not rest till he has sent thyself a
second time to England to banishment and exile." Mac Murchadha replied
that he would not dismiss his foreigners on the advice of Ruaidhri,
and added that he would bring over more foreigners in addition to them,
and that he would not make peace or agreement with anyone of the Gaels
until all Ireland should be his. The envoys returned to Ruaidhri and
made known to him Mac Murchadha's answer to them. When Ruaidhri heard
what Mac Murchadha had said he became enraged.

But now the fame and renown of these foreigners spread over all
Ireland, so that the men of Ireland conceived a horror and dread of
them. And tidings from the earl and from these foreigners reached
England, and when the king of England heard these tidings he issued a
command that neither ship nor bark from any land belonging to himself
should go to Ireland, and that no intercourse or exchange be carried
on with that country; and he also commanded those who had gone from
England to Ireland to return under penalty of being disinherited for
ever. When the earl saw that his followers were obliged to leave him
by reason of the king's proclamation, he and they took counsel
together on this matter, and what they resolved upon was to send
Raymond de la Gros to the king of England, to point out to him that it
was by his own will and consent that the earl and the foreigners had
come to Ireland to help one who had promised obedience and vassalage
to him, to wit, Diarmaid Mac Murchadha, king of Leinster; and that
whatever conquest they had made in Ireland and whatever benefits they
had derived from Mac Murchadha they desired to hold subject to his
will. Raymond conveyed this statement to the king of England, and it
was in Gascony he was at that time; and it was in that year that
Thomas, archbishop of Canterbury, was murdered the fifth day of
Christmas, and the year of the Lord at that time was 1171; and it was
at the Bealltaine of that year (i.e., the ensuing Bealltaine) that Mac
Murchadha, that is Diarmaid, king of Leinster, died; and he was buried
at Fearna Mor Mhaodhog.

As to the king, he returned to England, and when he had arrived there,
he sent one of his people, a knight named Herimont Morti, together
with Raymond de la Gros, to Ireland with letters to the earl of
Stranguell,[511] commanding the earl to repair to England without
delay; and when they had arrived in Ireland, Herimont delivered his
message to the earl, and the earl together with Herimont proceeded at
once to England, and when he had come into the king's presence he
promised that he would give Ath Cliath and Port Lairge and the ports
of Leinster to him and to his heirs after him, the remainder of the
province of Leinster to go to the earl himself and to his descendants.

Now when they had concluded this treaty between them, the king
proceeded to Ireland with a numerous host and put into port at Port
Lairge. There came with him five hundred knights, as well as a large
number of horsemen and foot-soldiers, the year of the Lord then being
1172. Now the king remained at Port Lairge after this, and the foreign
nobles who were in Ireland before him and the burgesses of Loch Garman
came to do him homage and pay him respect. There also came into his
presence the king of Corcach, to wit, Diarmaid Mor Mac Carrthaigh, and
he pledged himself to submit to him and become his vassal. The king
went thence to Cashel and Domhnall O Briain, king of Limerick, went
thither to meet him, and submitted to him, as Mac Carrthaigh had done.

After this the king of England placed a garrison of his own in Corcach
and in Luimneach. After this the Munster nobles came to him and did
him homage and paid him respect in like manner. The king returned to
Port Lairge, and the king of Osruighe came to him there and did him
homage and paid him respect as the other kings had already done. The
king proceeded thence to the town of Ath Cliath, and the Gaels of
Leinster came to him there to do him homage and pay him respect.

Now when Ruaidhri O Conchubhair, king of Connaught and of Ireland,
heard that his provincial kings and those who paid him rent and
tribute, and those to whom he himself gave wages and stipends, had put
themselves under the protection of the king of England he judged in
his own mind that it would be less an indignity for him to submit to
the king of England voluntarily than to do so against his will. And
then the king sent two of his people to meet Ruaidhri O Conchubhair,
and those who went were Hugo de Lacy and William Mac Aldelmel.
Ruaidhri went to meet them to the bank of the Sionainn, and he made
peace and friendly alliance with the king in their presence, and he
pledged himself to be obedient to him and to pay him respect. Murchadh
Mac Floinn, king of Meath, also came to him and gave himself up to him
as all the others had done; so that there was no king or leader or
lord in Ireland who did not at that time make submission to the king
of England and acknowledge him as their lord.

On the setting in of winter after this, the weather became very cold
and dreadfully inclement, so that neither ship nor bark could come to
Ireland with news from England to the king until the middle month of
spring had come. After this ships came to Ireland, and they brought to
the king news from England and from France which did not please him,
and above all he was informed that the Pope had sent two cardinals to
England to inquire how Thomas of Canterbury had been done to death,
and they had said that if the king did not appear in person to give
them satisfaction for this murder, they would subject to interdict
both himself and every land that sided with him. Though this was sad
news to the king, sadder still for him was the news that, reached him
afterwards from his son, namely, that his eldest son had taken
possession of the English crown in the hope of being able to hold it
in spite of his father. An indescribable sadness seized on the king by
reason of these tidings. Still he was more affected by the murder of
St. Thomas than by all that his children and his people had done
against him. Accordingly he summoned to him the nobles of his people
to take counsel with them, and he made known to them every danger that
hung over him, and the decision they came to was that he should send a
large party of his followers before him to England, himself to follow
them speedily. They acted accordingly, and the king remained behind to
garrison and fortify Ireland.

And when the king thought it time to go to England he left a party to
hold the country, to wit, Hugo de Lacy in Meath, together with twenty
knights, and, moreover, he granted the fee simple of Meath to Hugo and
to his descendants after him. He also entrusted the keeping of the
town of Ath Cliath to Robert Fitz Stephen and Maurice Fitz Gerald, who
had with them forty knights and their dependants. In the same way he
left William Fitz Aldelmel and Philip de Hastings and Philip de Brus
with twenty knights at Loch Garman to guard the town. He also left at
Port Lairge Humphrey Bolum and Hugo de Gandeville and Robert Fitz
Bearnard with forty knights. After this the king proceeded to England,
and when he had come into the presence of the cardinals he said that
he would grant them anything they desired as an eiric for the death of
St. Thomas though he was not in the secret of his taking off, and for
making peace between himself and the king of France with whom he was
in conflict at that time.



XXXIII.

If thou desirest to be informed, O reader, why Diarmaid Mac Murchadha,
king of Leinster, went to the king of England to France to complain
and protest against his expulsion from Ireland, instead of protesting
to the king of France or to some other king, know that it was because
Donnchadh, son of Brian Boraimhe, and the real nobles of Ireland were
at enmity with one another concerning the mastery of Ireland from the
time of Brian to that of Donnchadh, and hence they bestowed with one
accord the possession of Ireland on Urbanus, the second Pope of that
name, in the year of the Lord 1092; and the Pope of Rome had
possession of and authority and sovereignty over Ireland from that
time to the time when Adrianus, the fourth Pope of that name, assumed
the successorship of Peter in the year of the Lord 1154; and this Pope
was an Englishman, and his baptismal name was Nicholas Breakespeare;
and Stow says in his Chronicle that this Pope bestowed the kingdom of
Ireland on Henry II., king of England, in the first year of the said
Henry's reign, in the year of the Lord 1155. And the same author says
that the conditions on which the Pope bestowed Ireland on the king of
England were that he should build up the Faith which had fallen to the
ground in that country, and that he should correct the evil habits of
the people, and that he should maintain and protect every privilege
and every termon land that was in the country, and that the king
should pay Peter's penny every year for every house in Ireland to the
Pope. When Henry II. received this gift in writing from the Pope he
sent John, bishop of Salisbury, with this authorization to Ireland,
and he landed at Port Lairge, and when the Irish clergy heard that he
had come with the authorization of the Pope they came from all sides
to meet him, and when they had come to one place, John, the bishop we
have referred to, read the granting of Ireland by the Pope to Henry II.
and to his descendants, and the conditions laid down in the document;
and when the clergy had considered the conditions they all agreed to
them, and they gave their assent then with their signatures in writing
to this John; and he returned to England to the king, and the king
sent him to the Pope with this document, and when the Pope saw the
assent of the Irish clergy he sent a ring as a token of the possession
of Ireland to Henry II.

Bellarminus agrees with the above in his chronicle where he says:
"Adrianus, the fourth Pope of that name, a native of England, a wise
and pious man, bestowed the island of Ireland on Henry II., king of
England, on condition that he would plant virtues in that island and
root out vices, that he should see that Peter's penny was paid every
year from each house, and that he should preserve the rights of the
Church inviolate there. The bull in which these things are is to be
seen in the twelfth book of the annals of Cardinal Baronius."

The English chronicle of Stanihurst agrees with this where it says
that Henry II. procured a bull from Pope Adrianus in which he
commanded the clergy and the real nobles of all Ireland, under penalty
of excommunication, to pay homage and be obedient to Henry, king of
England, under pretext of his reforming the religion of the country
and improving the habits of the people; and this bull came from the
king to Ireland and was read at a general assembly of genuine nobles
and clerics at Cashel. We read also in the same author that Alexander,
the third Pope of that name, sent a cardinal called Vivianus to
Ireland to make known to the Irish the grant of Ireland to the king of
England and to his descendants, which he himself and the Pope who
preceded him had made on condition that he and every Pope who should
come after him would get out of Ireland each succeeding year Peter's
penny for every household in the country.

Judge, O reader, that the reason why Diarmaid Mac Murchadha went to
meet the king of England to France instead of going to meet any other
king was because of the grant the Pope had previously made of Ireland
to the king of England, and for that reason that it was the king of
England who had authority over Ireland from the Pope and that it was
his duty to demand amends or satisfaction for the injury done to Mac
Murchadha.

Here I must express astonishment at a condition in the bull of Pope
Adrianus in which he granted Ireland to Henry II. Here is the
condition according to Stow's Chronicle, to wit, that Henry II. was
bound to reform and build up the Catholic Faith which had fallen down
in Ireland. For it is not likely that the Pope would put that
condition in his bull unless some party had given him to understand
that the Faith had lapsed in Ireland. But whatever party told him this
told a lie. For it is plain that the faith Patrick brought to Ireland
did not lapse up to this time, and. many foreign authors of weight
bear testimony to this from age to age. For although, according to
Beda in the History of Sacsa, there was a contention between some of
the Irish clergy and the clergy of Sacsa concerning Easter, and,
moreover, though some of the Irish were stained with the Pelagian
heresy, still the greater number of the Irish were free from either
stain; and as regards the Faith, from the time of Brian down to the
Norman Invasion, it is clear that it was alive unimpaired in Ireland,
and hence that those who informed the Pope that it had lapsed in
Ireland when he bestowed that country on Henry II. lied. In testimony 
of this are the examples which we shall set down here.

In the first place it is plain, from the number of genuine Irish
nobles who, towards the close of their lives, betook themselves to the
principal churches of Ireland to end their days in penance, from the
time of Brian to the Norman Invasion, that the Faith was then alive in
Ireland. Here follow some of these, to wit, Flaithbheartach O Neil,
who was called Flaithbheartach of the Pilgrim's Staff; he first began
to do penance in Ireland, and after that he went to Rome on a
pilgrimage in the year of the Lord 1073; and Donnchadh, son of Brian
Boraimhe, who went on a pilgrimage to Rome and who ended his days in
penance in the monastery of St. Stephen; and Tadhg, son of Lorcan,
king of Ui Cinnsealaigh, who ended his days in penance in the church
of Caomhghin in Gleann da Loch; and Cathal, son of Ruaidhri, king of
west Connaught, who closed his days in penance at Ard Macha; and
Muircheartach O Briain, king of Leath Mogha, and of the greater part
of all Ireland, who went to Ard Macha and spent five years in penance
there until his death; and so it was with many others of the true
nobles of Ireland who closed their days in piety and as Catholics from
the time of Brian to the Norman Invasion. Hence did those persons lie
who told Pope Adrianus IV. that the Catholic Faith was not alive or in
a state of preservation in Ireland before the coming hither of the
Normans.

The second proof I advance to show that the Catholic Faith was in a
state of preservation before the Normans came to Ireland is that there
were many abbeys built there shortly before the Normans came, and that
the Gaelic nobles built them. In the first place Maoilseachlainn, king
of Meath and of all Ireland, built the abbey of St. Mary in the town
of Ath Cliath, in the year of the Lord 1139. Donnchadh O Cearbhaill,
king of Oirghialla, at the instance of Malachias, bishop of Dun, built
the abbey of Meillifont in the county of Lughmhagh in the year of the
Lord 1142. St. Malacias, bishop of Dun, built the abbey of Iobhar Cinn
Tragha in the county of Dun, the year of the Lord then being 1144. The
year of the Lord when the abbey of Buill was built was 1161. Diarmaid
Mac Murchadha, king of Leinster, built the abbey of the Bealach alias
Baltinglas in the year of the Lord 1151. The descendants of
Maoilseachlainn, king of Meath, built the abbey of Bectif alias De
Beatitudine in Meath in the year of the Lord 1151. The year of the
Lord when the abbey of Maigh in the county of Luimneach was built was
1151. The year of the Lord when the abbey of O Dorna in the county of
Ciarraidhe was built was 1154. Domhnall O Briain, king of Luimneach,
built the abbey of the Holy Cross in the county of Tiobrad Arann in
the year of the Lord 1169; and the said Domhnall O Briain built
seventeen other abbeys in Munster. The year of the Lord when the abbey
of Feara Muighe in the county of Corcach was built was 117o; and in
that period there were built many temples and abbeys in Ireland which
we do not mention here. Hence it is plain that the Catholic Faith was
alive in Ireland just before the Normans came hither.

The third proof that the Faith was alive in Ireland just before the
Normans came hither is that we read in the ancient annals of Ireland
that, from the time of Donnchadh, son of Brian, to the coming of the
Normans, the prelates and nobles of Ireland organized three national
councils in Ireland in which laws pertaining to the clergy and laity
were laid down and approved.

The first council was held at Fiadh Mic nAonghusa the first year of
the reign of Muircheartach O Briain in the year of the Lord 1105, and
in it laws and regulations were laid down, and religion was reformed
in Ireland.

Another national council was convened in Ireland the fifth year of the
reign of the said Muircheartach, when the nobles and the ecclesiastics
of Ireland came together at Raith Breasal, in the year of the Lord
1110, where sees or dioceses and their boundaries were regulated, and
a fixed number of bishops placed over them, as we have said.

The third national council held in Ireland by the clergy and the
genuine nobles of Ireland was at Ceanannus na Midhe, at which were
Christianus, that is Giolla Criost O Conaire, bishop of Lios Mor, the
Pope's legate in Ireland at the time, together with a cardinal called
John Papiron, for the purpose of presenting four pallia to four
archbishops in Ireland and of putting down simony and usury, and
enforcing the payment of tithes, and of putting down robbery and rape
and bad morals and evils of every kind besides.



XXXIV.

It is plain from the examples given above that the Catholic Faith was
alive in Ireland just before the Normans came hither; and as regards
the bad morals of the Gaels before the Normans came amongst them, it
is certain that there came with the Norman Invasion five leaders who
did more evil deeds than all the Gaels that lived from the time of
Brian to the Norman Invasion as regards the plundering of churches and
clerics, bloody deeds of treachery and violent tyranny. Here are their
names, the earl of Stranguell, Robert Fitz Stephen, Hugo de Lacy, John
de Courcy and William Fitz Aldelmel. It will be easy to see the truth
of this from what we shall hereafter state, and in particular from the
chronicle of Stanihurst, and moreover from the fact that the majority
of these persons on account of their own misdeeds left behind them no
son to take up his father's inheritance.

As a proof of this take the earl of Stranguell, Robert Fitz Stephen,
John de Courcy and some other leaders whom we shall not mention here
who came in the beginning of the conquest. And as regards Richard
Stranguell, according to Stanihurst's chronicle after he had committed
many robberies and sacrileges against the laity and the church, he
died in Ath Cliath seven years after he had come to Ireland, in the
year of the Lord 1177; and the only progenny by Aoife, daughter of
Diarmaid, that survived him was one daughter called Isabella, and that
daughter was married to William Maruscal, and she bore him five sons
and five daughters, and the sons died one after another, no offspring
or heir remaining after any of them, and the daughters were married to
a number of English nobles, and in that way the earl did not leave a
son to become his heir.

As regards Hugo de Lacy, when he received the government of Meath from
Henry II. he set to slay and behead the clann Colmain and the nobles
of Meath, as many of them as he could lay hold on, and as he was
building a fortified residence in Durmhagh in Meath a young nobleman
of Meath came in the guise of a clown to do work for him, and he slew
Hugo. The chronicle of Stanihurst says that the said Hugo was a
lustful and very avaricious man. It also states that young Hugo his
son and John de Courcy set about committing many robberies and murders
and deeds of violence upon the people of Meath to avenge the death of
Hugo. The same chronicle says that William Fitz Aldelmel was deceitful,
treacherous and of evil disposition, and also relates how he took by
treachery from the children of Maurice Fitz Gerald manors which were
their own property, and adds that he was ever envious of Maurice and
of his children. Moreover, we read in the ancient annals of Ireland
that when William Fitz Aldelmel was ruling in Luimneach on behalf of
the king of England there arose a conflict between two brothers of the
family of Conchubhar for the sovereignty of Connaught, to wit, Cathal
Croibhdhearg and Cathal Carrach; and William took the part of Cathal
Carrach against Cathal Croibhdhearg; and John de Courcy took the other
Cathal's part. This disagreement between the two Cathals was fed on
both sides by William and by John until the entire country was
destroyed and plundered by them, and till many of the nobles of
Connaught were beheaded in that conflict as a result of that
disagreement, and a battle took place between the two Cathals, the
foreigners helping them on either side, and Cathal Carrach and his
followers were defeated and himself was slain in that conflict.

After that William Fitz Aldelmel built a castle in Milioc Ui Mhadagain,
and left a large garrison there and went himself to Luimneach. Cathal
Croibhdhearg encamped in front of them to lay siege to them; but the
garrison escaped by night and followed William to Luimneach; and
Cathal Croibhdhearg razed the castle of Milioc. After this William
Fitz Aldelmel got together a host and invaded Connaught, and spoiled
and plundered churches and country districts, and made dreadful
slaughter on all he encountered of them, so that the Connaught clergy
cursed him, as we read in the ancient annals of Ireland which were
written about three hundred years ago in a chief book of seanchus
which was called the Leabhar Breac of Mac Aodhagain. And in the same
book we read that God, on account of his misdeeds, in a miraculous
manner, inflicted a foul deformity and an incurable disease on him
through which he died a loathsome death, and that he received neither
Extreme Unction nor Penance, and that he was not buried in any
churchyard but in a deserted grange.

After this a quarrel commenced between John de Courcy and young Hugo
de Lacy, and many of the men of Ulster and of Meath fell in the
conflict, and both these regions were plundered and spoiled by reason
of their quarrel. And the end of this quarrel was that John de Courcy
was treacherously taken prisoner by young Hugo de Lacy and that he was
delivered into the hands of the Normans; and Hugo de Lacy undertook to
prefer a charge of treason against him. He was sent as a prisoner to
England, where he was for a time in captivity. The king granted him a
pardon after that, and gave him leave to return to Ireland, and he
went to sea to proceed to Ireland, when a storm arose against him and
he was put back to land, and so it befel him fourteen times, putting
out to sea and being put back again to England, according to
Stanihurst's chronicle; and the fifteenth time he went to sea the
storm drove him to France, and he died in that country.

We read in the same narrative that a nobleman of the family of John de
Courcy who dwelt in Ireland was slain by young Hugo de Lacy and by
Walter de Lacy his brother, so that many quarrels and conflicts arose
between the nobleman's friends and the sons of Hugo de Lacy to whom we
have referred, so that king John was forced to go with a great host of
foreigners and Gaels to Meath to chastise these sons. And when they
heard this they proceeded to Carraig Fhearghusa, and the king pursued
them thither, and they took ship there and fled to France, and both
went in disguise as two gardeners to work in the garden of an abbot in
the abbey of S. Taurin in Normandy, and they passed some time in that
disguise, remaining concealed; and some time afterwards they made
their secret known to the abbot and asked him to beseech the king of
England to make peace with them and forgive them; and the abbot
obtained this for them, and they came to Ireland under these
circumstances, the king having restored them to their rank and to
their lands; and king John died after this in the year of the Lord
1216.

After this also in the time of Henry III. there arose a great war
between young Hugo de Lacy and William Maruscal, and they destroyed
all Meath, and many Gaels fell on either side helping them. A great
war also took place between Myler and Geoffrey Moireis and William
Maruscal; and many men of Leinster and Munster were destroyed between
them on either side.

Hanmer says in his narrative that William Maruscal was cursed by the
bishop of Fearna for his having taken from him two manors which he
possessed as his private property; and, having been excommunicated, he
died in England; and since his children did not wish to restore that
property the five sons died one after another, none of them having
left an heir. And the above-mentioned Myler went to Cluain Mic Nois
with a numerous host, where they encamped twelve nights, and they
plundered the town, carrying off cattle and food, and also they
plundered its temples and churches.

When indeed the Gaels observed the tyranny and injustice, the
spoliation and sacrilege the people I have referred to had committed,
and also how Lios Mor with its termon lands was plundered by Herimont
Morti and by Raymond de la Gros, according to Stanihurst's chronicle,
although the said Herveus or Herimont donned a monk's habit and built
the abbey of Dun Broith in the county of Loch Garman in the year of
the Lord 1179 to expiate the evil he had done in Ireland, and in like
manner how William Fitz Aldelmel plundered the church of Inis Cathach
and its termon lands, as well as many other churches, and, moreover,
that what these same Normans, through the excess of vanity, pride and
haughtiness that had grown up in them, paid attention to, was to keep
up constant dissension among themselves and to destroy and waste the
Gaels between each of their pairs of factions, and that they had no
mind, as the Gaels thought, to reform religion or to correct morals in
Ireland, -- observing these things the Gaels thought to rid themselves
of the oppression of these people. And accordingly a body of Gaelic
nobles went to the house of Conchubhar of Maonmhagh, king of Connaught,
who dwelt at Dun Leogha in Ui Maine, to make him ruler over them.

First Domhnall O Briain, king of Luimneach, and Ruaidhri Mac
Duinnsleibhe, king of Ulidia, and Domhnall Mac Carrthaigh, king of
Desmond, Maoilseachlainn Beag, king of Meath, and O Ruairc, king of Ui
Briuin and Conmhaicne, went to his house, and whatever the counsel
they adopted, Conchubhar was fatefully slain before they had put it
into execution.

It is plain from the facts we have stated above, that it was owing to
tyranny and wrong and the want of fulfilling their own law on the part
of the Norman leaders in Ireland that there was so much resistance on
the part of the Gaels to the Norman yoke. For I do not think there is
a race in Europe who would be more obedient to law than the Irish if
the law were justly administered to them. And this is the testimony
which John Davies gives of them in the last page of the first book
which he has written on Ireland. Thus does he speak: "There is no
nation under the sun that love equal and indifferent justice better
than the Irish or will rest better satisfied with the execution
thereof, although it be against themselves, provided they have the
protection and benefit of the law when upon . just occasion they do
desire it."

From the testimony of this author it is to be inferred that it was not
through evil disposition on the part of the Irish that they often
rebelled against the law, but through the rulers often failing to
administer the law justly to them.

Other leaders came to Ireland in the beginning of the Norman Invasion,
besides the five we have named above, who did not commit the deeds of
treachery that the said five committed, and who did much good in
Ireland by building churches and abbeys and giving church lands to
clerics for their support, together with many other good deeds besides,
and God gave them as a return for this that there are many descendants
after them at this day in Ireland, to wit, the Gearaltaigh and the
Burcaigh, the Builtearaigh and the Barraigh, the Cursaigh and the
Roistigh, the Puerigh and the Grasaigh, and the Prionndarghasaigh, the
Pleimonnaigh, the Puirsealaigh and the Priosdunaigh, the
Noinnsionnaigh and the Breathnaigh, the Toibinigh and the Suirtealaigh
and the Bloinnsinigh, the clann Feorais, the Conndunaigh, the
Cantualaigh, the Deibhriusaigh, the Dairsidhigh, the Diolmhainigh, the
Easmontaigh, the Leisigh, the Brunaigh and the Keitinnigh, and many
other descendants of the Norman nobles who sprang from other leaders
whom we shall not name here.[512]

THE END.


Endnotes
1. Sean-Ghaill: i.e. the first Norman invaders of Ireland in the
twelfth century and their descendants: distinguished carefully by
Keating from the Nua-Ghaill, i.e. the more recent English settlers,
and the planters of his own time.
2. Gaedhil: i.e. the Gael, the native inhabitants of Ireland.
3. Gall, foreigner, contrasted with Gael; applied to Danes, French,
Normans, and later to the English: see preceding notes.
4. Alba in Gaelic, a name which possibly in earlier times indicated
the whole island of Britain (gen. Alban).
5. The Gael, both of Ireland and Scotland, are usually called Scots by
early mediæval writers.
6. Cruithnigh, i.e. Picti.
7. Laighin, pl.; gen. Laighean.
8. Mumha.
9. Omnium virtutum ignari.
10. Horum quae commemoramus, dignos fide testes non habemus.
11. Apum est tanta multitudo, ut non solum in alveariis sed etiam in
arborum truncis et terrae caverns reperiantur.
12. Jus belli socialis.
13. Hibernia nunquam subiacuit externae ditioni.
14. Hibernia ab initio ab omni alienarum gentium incursu libera
permansit.
15. Cum suum Romani imperium undique propagassent, multi, procul dubio,
ex Hispania, Gallia, et Britannia hic se receperunt, ut iniquissimo
Romanorum iugo, colla subducerunt.
16. Ego animum via inducere possum ut hanc regionem in Romanorum
potestatem ullo tempore concessisse credam.
17. Ulaidh, pl.: dat. Ultaibh.
18. Est autem gene haec, gene inhospita.
19. Sunt sane homines hospitalissimi, neque illis ulla in re magis
gratificari potes, quam vel sponte ac voluntate eorum domos
frequentare.
20. Midhe.
21. Breithfne.
22. Siuir, Feoir, Bearbha.
23. Sliabh Bladhma.
24. Sliabh Aildiuin.
25. Ui Cairin.
26. i.e. the race of Conall; the tribe-name of the chiefs of
Tirconaill.
27. Oirghialla, pl.
28. Tuath Mhumha.
29. Cairbre.
30. Brandubh or Brandúth.
31. or Tuathghal.
32. i.e. Uí Cinnsiolaigh.
33. In the south of Co. Wexford.
34. Uisneach.
35. Innbhear Slainghe; i.e. the firth (or fiord) of Slaney: meaning
strictly the mouth of the Slaney, or Wexford Haven.
36. Loch-gCarman.
37. Ceatharlach.
38. Leithghlinn.
39. New Ross, Co. Wexford.
40. Fine Gall, i.e. Fingall.
41. Colonorum omnium ultimus qui in Anglica provincia habitat filiam
suam vel nobilissimo Hibernorum principi in matrimonium non daret.
42. riabhach, swarthy.
43. Ur Mhumha
44. Deas Mhumha.
45. mór, great.
46. Sacsa, England; i Sacsaibh, dat. pl., i.e. among the English.
47. In musicis solum instrumentis commendabilem invenio gentis istius
diligentiam, in quibus, prae omni natione quam vidimus
incomparabiliter est instructa.
48. Tam suavi velocitate, tam dispari paritate, tam discordi concordia,
consona redditur et completur melodia.
49. Mileadh, Latinised Milesius: Clanna Mhileadh (or Mhilidh), the
descendants of Milesius: i.e. the Gael.
50. In his detur sua antiquitati venia.
51. Non immerito haec insula Ogygia, id est perantiqua, Plutarcho
dicta fuit.
52. A profundissima enim antiquitatis memoria historias suas
auspicantur, adeo ut prae illis omnis omnium gentium antiquitas sit
novitas aut quodammodo infantia.
53. Lochlonn, the country of the Danes or Norsemen i.e. Vikings:
possibly a plural form like other ancient names.
54. Qui de purgatorio dubitat, Scotiam pergat, purgatorium Sancti
Patricii intret, et de purgatorii poenis amplius non dubitabit.
55. i.e. Giolla már or mór, see III above.
56. Seanchaidhe, i.e. an antiquary.
57. Fiann, coll., dat. Féinn, Fianna Eireann, the Fenians.
58. Athcliath (Duibhlinne); Loch-gCarman; Portlairge; Corcach;
Luimneach.
59. Written incorrectly Rory or Roderick O'Connor.
60. Bangor.
61. The Ards.
62. Dalnárry or Dalaradia, obsolete name of a district partly in
Antrim, partly in Down, from the tribe named.
63. Fragiles domos ad altitudinem hominis exitant, sibi pecorique
communes.
64. Prima eat, nequid falsi dicere audeat.
65. Deinde nequid veri dicere non audeat, neque suspitio gratiae sit
in scribendo, neque simultatis.
66. Si qui religiosi se consecrant, religiosa quadam austeritate ad
miraculum usque se continent, vigilando, orando, et jejuniis se
macerando.
67. Est autem terrae illius clerus satis religione commendabilis, et
inter varies quibus pollet virtutes, castitatis praerogativa
praeeminet atque  praecellit.
68. Hibernici etiam magna ex parte sunt religionis summe colentes.
69. Gallóglach i.e. a mercenary soldier in mediæval Ireland.
70. Gen haec corpore valida et in primis agilis, animo forti et elato,
ingenio acri, bellicosa, vitae prodiga, laboris, frigoris et inediae
patiens, veneri indulgens, hospitibus perbenigna, amore constans,
inimicis implacabilis, credulitate levis, gloriae avida, contumeliae
et iniuriae impatiens.
71. In laboribus ex omni hominum genere patientissimi, in rerum
angustiis raro fracti.
72. Tanaiste, i.e. the elected successor of the same family.
73. Gabhdil cinidh i.e. division of property between near kindred.
74. Eiric, i.e. blood-fine or satisfaction.
75. Ollamh, a sage, a doctor.
76. Tanaisteacht.
77. Cion comhgais lit. crime of relationship; an 'eric,' levied, as
described, by way of vicarious punishment.
78. Eineaclann, honour-price.
79. Breitheamh, a judge.
80. Habent hi magnates suos iuridicos, quos vocant Brehonos, suos
historicos qui res gestas describunt, medicos, poetas, quos bardos
vocant, et citharaedos, quibus singulis sua praedia assignata sunt, et
singuli aunt in unoquoque territorio, et d certis et singulis
familiis; scilicet, brehoni unius stirpis et nominis, historici
alterius, et sic de coeteris, qui suos liberos sive cognatos in sua
qualibet arte erudiunt, et semper successores habent.
81. Ollamh, a sage, professor, doctor.
82. Draoi, i.e. magus.
83. Feis, assembly, festival.	
84. Teamhair (Teamhrach, gen.), Tara.
85. Ard Macha.
86. Saltair, Psalterium, Duanaire.
87. Caiseal.
88. See O'Curry's 'MS. Materials' for an account of this and other
books mentioned.
89. Clonenagh in Queen's County.
90. Laoigheas.
91 i.e. of the Verses.
92. Céile De.
93. Gleann-da-loch.
94. Or the 'Dun,' the original Leabhar na hUidhre.
95. Cluain-mic-nois.
96. i.e. the headings of the separate tracts.
97. Aos here possibly means caste, or grade.
98. Seems to have been a treatise on verifying dates.
99. Dinnseanchus, Onomasticon, or topography.
100. Interpretation of names, perhaps Etymology.
101. Rudiments (of Grammar) probably.
102. Panegyric or Elóge.
103. Seanchus, antiquity, archæology compilation of ancient law or
history.
104. Hibernia, ab initio, ab omni alienarum gentium incursu libera
permansit.
105. The Septuagint.
106. Saltair na Rann.
107. Céile Dé.
108. Collection of poetry.
109. Foras feasa, groundwork or foundation of knowledge: elements of
history. Seanchus, historical narrative or compilation: ancient record.
110. Éire, gen Éireann the native name of Ireland.
111. i.e. Moynalty.
112. Explained as the country of the remote limits, or extreme bounds.
113. Ancestor of Mileadh, or Milesius; glas, grey or green.
114. Sons of, or families descended from, Mileadh.
115. Alba, gen. Alban, the native name of Scotland.
116. geasa, prohibitions, tabús.
117. Teamhair gen. Teamhrach.
118. 'Kinay or Keneth O'Hartagan,' H.
119. Loch gCarman, i.e. Wexford.
120. Or, possibly, Múich-inis, isle of mist or fog, which Haliday and
O'Mahony prefer. See Múich-chiach in the verses on Cashel, below.
Coneys gives Múig Inis; múig, gloom.
121. Cine Scuit: 'Scota, Scyta,' note in MS.
122. Ebro.
123. i.e. Heber.
124. Uaigh.
125. i.e. Grianán Ailigh, near Derry.
126. i.e. Dublin.
127. Great Island (Barrymore) in Cork Harbour.
128. Maaree, Clarin-bridge near Galway.
129 i.e. Gaillimh.
130. Tory Island, off Donegal.
131. Boinn.
132. Laighin (pl.): Ulaidh (pl.): Connachta (pl.). When the word
Cúigeadh (province, lit. fifth) is expressed before these names, they
are in the gen. pl.
133. In quinque enim portiones (inquit) fere aequales antiquitus haec
regio divisa fuit; videlicet, in Momoniam duplicem, Borealem et
Australem, Lageniam, Ultoniam, et Conaciam.
134. i.e. Rúry.
135. i.e. Drogheda.
136. An old name of Waterford Harbour: the confluence of three rivers.
137. A place near Cork, as above: (the way of Cú-glas).
137. The river Drowes, between Donegal and Leitrim (Bundrowse).
138. Dublin and Galway: Eisgir riadha, the Esker, a line of hills
between these points.
139. Inver Colpa, near Drogheda.
140. i.e. Limerick of Munster.
141. i.e. Dunseverick.
142. i.e. hundred fighter, or hundred-battled.
143. i.e. servant or devotee of Nuadha: called also Eogan Mór.
144. Conn's half.
145. Mógh's half.
146. i.e. the hill of Usna, in Westmeath.
147. i.e. Midhe.
148. Triocha or triocha-céd, a cantred, a district.
149. A townland, a farm-stead.
150. A plowland.
151. Meidhe.
152. A district.
153. Siona.
154. Athcliath (Duibhlinne).
155. The Rye Water.
156. Cloncurry.
157. A ford of the Boyne near Clonard.
158. Clonard.
159. The Togher or Causeway of Carbury, Co. Kildare.
160. Crannach, a place (of trees) near Géisill in King's Co.
161. Drumcullen, near Birr.
162. Owenacharra, near Ballymahon.
163. i.e. Loch Ree.
164. Loch Boderg, on the Shannon.
165. Mohill.
166. Athlone.
167. Scariff (?).
168. Drumlane.
169. Moy (?).
170. Clones.
171. A mountain, Co. Armagh.
172. Killeavy, Co. Armagh.
173. Liffey.
174. 'Teffia,' a district in Westmeath.
175. Magh Breagh, or Breaghmhagh, the plain between Liffey and Boyne.
176. Annagassan, in Co. Louth. This line is very obscure.
177. i.e. Connor or Conachar.
178. Teamhair.
179. i.e. vulg. Connaught.
180. i.e. Luimneach, as above.
181. Baile biadhtaigh, a division of land in ancient Ireland.
182. Clann, i.e. children, race, descendants: clanna, pl.
183. Connachta, a plural form, like Laighin, Ulaidh, Breagha, &c.
184. Erris, Co. Mayo.
185. Cruachan, i.e. Rathcroghan in Roscommon.
186. Drowes, as above.
187. Innbhear Cholptha (or Colpa), the 'inver,' i.e. 'fiord' or firth
of Colpa, the mouth of the Boyne.
188. Ulster, plural form.
189. i.e. Emania, or the 'Navan' fort, near Armagh.
190. i.e. Grianán Ailigh, near Derry.
191. Leinster, plural form.
192. Dark (or black) foreigners, probably from Gaul.
193. Gall here has its original meaning, a native of Gaul.
194. An ancient seat of the kings of Leinster, near Leighlin.
195. Nás (Laighean), i.e. Naas.
196. The eastern half of Munster, so named from a king: Eochaidh, gen.
Eachach.
197. i.e. Corcach gen. -aighe, dat. -aigh, fem.; Luimneach, gen. -nigh,
masc.
198. Dungrod, in the glen of Aherlow: Cathair-Dúin-iasgaigh is the
full name of Cahir.
199. Near Cork, as above.
200. Near Duntryleague, Co. Limerick. See Book of Rights, notes, pp.
92, 93.
201. Brúghriogh, i.e. Bruree.
202. Lughaidh, gen. Luighdheach.
203. These three names 'Fairy-ridge': 'Flagstone of the hundreds'; and 
'Woody ridge' were given to Carraig Chaisil, or the Rock of Cashel:
also called Carraig Phádraic or St. Patrick's Rock. Caiseal signifies
the enclosing wall or rampart of a monastery or city: caisléan (dim.),
a castle or stone fort. The derivation cíos-dil, quoted above, is not
tenable.
204. i.e. Muskerry Tire, also called Ormond.
205. The fort of the heroes.
206. Thomond. i.e. Thuadhmhumha.
207. Cuchulainn's Leap, now 'Loop Head'
208. One of the great ancient roads. Osraidhe, i.e. Ossory.
209. Now corruptly Slieve Aughty, near Loch Derg.
210. Sleive Eelim or Slieve Phelim
211. i.e. the present Co. Clare.
212. Dalcassians, i.e. the tribe of Cas.
213. Urmhumha, or Ormhumha, i.e. Ormond.
214. Gowran.
215. 'Knawhill,'(H.), Cleghile, near Tipperary.
216. i.e. Tiobruid Árann.
217. Now vulgarly the 'Devil's bit'. Éile comprised parts of Tipperary
and King's County.
218. A small island near Bunmahon, Co. Waterford.
219. lit. Middle of Munster.
220. Now Slieve Lougher, near Castleisland.
221. Near Kilfinane.
222. Desmond, i.e. Deasmhumha.
223. i.e. Iarmhumha: called Ciarraighe (Kerry).
224. A valley near Kenmare bay.
225. Gion, power: O'Reilly quotes go gion gaoi is cloidheamh.
226. i.e. Mizen Head.
227. Cloghastucan, a tall rock in the sea near Glenarm.
228. The mouth of the Ovoca river at Arklow.
229. Erris in Mayo.
230. Referred to in O'Curry's MSS. Mat., p. 163.
231. rann, verse, stave, stanza.
232. Probably Ardamine, Co. Wexford.
233. Ancient name of the mouth of the Bann.
234. Probably Dúnnamark near Bantry (Joyce).
235. Corkaguiney, Co. Kerry: O'Donovan and O'Mahony think Corca Luighe
is the name intended here, which is in West Cork.
236. Not satisfactorily identified: Carn Uí Néid is Mizen Head: see
Joyce.
237. Probably Ardamine, Co. Wexford.
238. Near Monaghan.
239. Tonntinna, a hill near Killaloe.
240. The barony of Ara, Co. Tipperary.
241. Loch Derg.
242. An old name of Waterford Harbour: the confluence of three rivers.
243. In Co. Waterford.
244. Now Seefin, near Kilfinane.
245. In Co. Roscommon.
246. Leanán-Síthe, a fairy follower, vulgo Lenaunahee.
247. Of Scripture.
248. Vulgo Lough Ree in Ormond, an expansion of the Shannon.
249. i.e. Cashel.
250. Or guided by an oracle (?).
251. i.e. Ireland: this probably has reference, as O'Mahony
conjectures, to an ancient usage observed in taking possession of land.
252. The Bay of Kenmare.
253. A small island in the Erne.
254. Only a mere guess can be made at these lines.
255. A plain in Co. Carlow.
256. Ben Edar, afterwards called Howth.
257. Old place-name in Donegal.
258. Foghmhorach, a sea-rover.
259. Old name of Malahide Bay, Co. Dublin.
260. or hairy-legged?
261. Now Loch Gara, in Mayo.
262. Old name of Sliabh Domhanghoirt, i.e. Sliav Donard.
263. Exact spot not known.
264. The Barony of Moygoish, in Westmeath.
265. Old name (now lost) between Armagh and Monaghan.
266. In Cremorne, Co. Monaghan.
267. Co. Armagh.
268. A district including Monaghan and Louth, 'Oriel.'
269. Old name of Dundrum Bay.
270. I.e. Strangford loch.
271. Old name of the lower Shannon.
272. Old name of Tralee Bay.
273. Tralee.
274. Loch Ceara, Co. Mayo.
275. Barony of Erris, Co. Mayo.
276. i.e. the Bush, in Antrim.
277. See note, p. 53.
278. Dalriada, or Rúta, in Antrim, from the river Bush north to the
sea.
279. River of Life (name of the district): Liffey: ancient name
Rurthach.
280. The descendants of Niall, northern and southern, indicating the
territory they inhabited.
281. Lee.
282. i.e. the district of Muskerry, Co. Cork.
283. The rivet at Sligo.
284. Old name for the Erne.
285. i.e. the Moy, river at Ballina.
286. The northern part of Co. Mayo; sometimes called 'Hy' Fiachra.
287. The Mourne, in Tyrone.
288. A second river Bush, between Tyrone and Donegal, is mentioned in
C, but not in other authorities.
289.Or Tyrconnell.
290.Territories lying east and west of the Bann, south of Cúlrathain
or Coleraine.
291. Perhaps slinne, from slin, a flat stone, or slate, is intended.
292. Barrow.
293. Old name of part of Strangford Loch.
294. The old plain of the flocks of Eder, extending inland from Howth.
295. Moynalty.
296. These two lines are very obscure and the translation of the verse
can be but tentative.
297. See Section II.
298. Lios, an enclosure: houses, apartments, or other dwellings within
a fortification.
299. Lear, gen. Lir, a sea divinity; poetically, the sea.
300. i.e. Gaelic.
301. The Black Sea; but possibly the Baltic is meant as O'Mahony
conjectures.
302. The Riffean or Riphean, i.e. the Ural, mountains.
303. The name of this 'narrow sea' does not appear.
304. Perhaps on some great river.
305. Red-sided.
306. Ancient name of Lochgeal or Loughall, barony of O'Neilland, Co.
Armagh.
307. Loch Ramor.
308. Two lakes in Westmeath, now called Derravaragh and Ennell.
309. i.e. Armagh.
310. Near Derrylee, barony O'Nialland, Co. Armagh.
311. Near Island Magee, Co. Antrim.
312. i.e. Rinn Seimhne, old name of Island Magee.
313. i.e. Thick-necked.
314. Derrylee, Co. Armagh.
315. Barony of Carra, Co. Mayo.
316  In barony of Kilmaine, Co. Mayo.
317. In Co. Roscommon.
318. i.e. Tyrone, but the place here mentioned seems to be in Inisowen,
Co. Donegal.
319. or Magh mBrensa: Haliday and other authorities add 'in Leinster.'
320. Near Loch Neach.
321. i.e. 'Teffia,' see above.
322. Near Island Magee.
323. Now part of Co. Louth.
324. 'Bregia,' now part of Meath and Louth: see above.
325. 'Oriel,' now part of Louth, Monaghan, and Armagh counties.
326. i.e. Sliev Bawn, Co. Roscommon.
327. i.e. Rosreaghan, Co. Mayo.
328. i.e. Murlough Bay, Co. Antrim.
329. Said to be Camross, Co. Carlow.
330. Críoch Liatháin i.e. the district round Castlelyons, Co. Cork.
331. i.e. Tory Island, off Donegal.
332. The festival of Samhain at the beginning of November.
333. i.e. the plain lying between the rivers 'Drowse' and 'Erne,'
south of Ballyshannon, Co. Donegal.
334. i.e. Magh gCeudna: this explanation is not tenable.
335. Explanation not admitted.
336. Some northern region is intended (? Bothnia).
337. 'Stony plain,' see above.
338. These speculations are of no value.
339. Or 'Thracia,' as above.
340. See O'Curry's 'MS. Materials,' Lect. I.
341. Ancient record or archæology. 
342. Lit. 'in our wake,' 'after us.'
343. The poet's idea may be that the first start, at any rate, was
made in 'currachs,' or small boats covered with skins, or leather, as
above, until they procured more seaworthy craft.
344. Doimhne.
345. Erris, Co. Mayo.
346. The strand of the bay of Dundrum, Co. Down.
347. Innbhear in the text here, is in MSS. and H., being possibly an
error for Iorrus. Refer to O'Curry's Lect. MS. Mat., pp. 385 and 402,
and App., p. 485.
348. rann, 'verse, stanza.'
349. See section V of the introduction, above.
350. Brugh-na-Boinne, a very ancient monument in Meath.
351. Bóinn, the Boyne.
352. Freamhainn of Meath, a hill on the shore of Loch Uair in
Westmeath.
353. i.e. white-headed.
354. In Co Louth.
355. Two plains of this name, i.e., north, in Co. Sligo: south, near
Cong, in Co. Mayo: scenes of great prehistoric battles, traces of
which have been found.
356. A celebrated place of assembly in Meath, where Aonach Taillteann
used to be held: Tailltin or 'Teltown.'
357. i.e. Silver-handed.
358. near Ballysadare, Co. Sligo.
359. Aran islands in Galway bay.
360. Islay, off the west coast of Scotland.
361 'Rathlin' or 'Raghery' island, off the coast of Antrim.
362. The Hebrides, west of Scotland.
363. The famous king and queen of Connacht.
364. Now known as Loch 'Hacket', Co. Galway.
365. Now 'Tawin' Point, Co. Galway.
366. A peninsula, south of Galway.
367. Now Loch 'Cooter,' near Gort.
368. In Crich Aidhne, barony of Kiltartan, Co. Galway.
369. An ancient stone fort in the great island of Aran in Galway bay.
370. Now 'Moyre,' near Tulla, Co Clare.
371. Old name of Tory hill, near Croom, Co. Limerick.
372. i.e. Maonmhagh, the plain around Loughrea, Co. Galway.
373. Now Loch 'Owel,' near Mullingar. [See Joyce].
374. 'Rath' an earthen rampart.
375. i.e. the river 'Suck.'
376. i.e. the country of
377. 'Offaly' in Leinster.
378 'duan' or 'duain,' poetical composition: 'rann,' verse, stanza.
378. ? Bothnia, (O'Mahony).
379. Mountain ash or rowan: O'Mahony says 'cornel wood.'
380. See Section 1, above, and notes.
381. These terms are stated to be equivalent.
382. Ni fallat fatum, Scoti quocunque locatum
     Invenient lapidem, regnare tenentur ibidem.
383. Sacsa, -san, -sain, England: i Saxaibh, among the English.
384. i.e. the two kings named.
385. i.e. Long-handed.
386. Or critically, for the advancement of learning (?), or
civilization.
387. Béaltaine, the May festival of the Irish.
388. Draoideacht, art magic, sorcery.
389. i.e. Sliev-an-ierin, the Iron mountain, in Co. Leitrim.
390. Near Cong, Co. Mayo.
391. lit. broken.
392. Or 10,000 in other copies.
393. Sect. IX., above.
394. In Co. Sligo, see note 355
395. I.e. the isle of Man.
386. Two mountains called the 'Paps,' near Killarney.
397. I.e. Sliev Luachar, near Castleisland.
398. Tuath, a tribe; a district.
399. A lord.
400 lordship.
401. i.e. the two female chiefs.
402. i.e. Gods.
403. i.e. magi, diviners.
404. i.e. art of any sort; verse as the form in which their secrets
were transmitted.
405. i.e. handicraft
406. i.e. we have here a genealogical enumeration of distinguished
personages.
407. This sentence is very obscure, and the translation is merely
tentative.
408. i.e. the plain of Feimheann, above which rises Sliabh-na-mban
(Feimhin), [Slievenamon] Co. Tipperary.
409. This is obscure, and doubtful whether a personal or a place-
name.
410. Not identified.
411. These names are added in some copies.
412. i.e. Tuatha Dé Danann, as described.
413. Lit. broke.
414. i.e. with the Fomorians at North Magh Tuireadh, 30 years after
the other.
415. i.e. a festival of the ancient Irish on 1st August, marking one
of the divisions of their year.
416. From this to end of sentence added from Haliday.
417. Old name for the hill of Usna in Westmeath.
418. Hazel, Plough, Sun.
419. Now Loch Corrib, in Galway.
420. Loch, lake, improperly written lough.
421. Sraith or Sreath, i.e. 'strath,' a level space by a river.
422. See Introduction, Sec. IX.
424. An ancient record, not now known. See Sect. V. above, and also
O'Curry's Lecture on the lost books, p. 13. Druim Sneachta, "Snow-
capped hill or mountain-ridge," in the present Co. of Monaghan,
according to O'Curry.
425. Lit., where am I with it?
426. Haliday and O'Mahony read, 'Buchanan': the MS. has 'Becanus.'
427. Haliday and O'Mahony read 'Baronius': the MS. has 'Boemus.'
428 "Volumine primo, generatione 16a."
429. Scythae ipsi perpetuo ab alieno imperio aut intacti aut invicti
mansere: Darium regem Persarum turpi a Scythia submovere fuga; Cyrum
cum omni exercitu trucidarunt; Alexandri magni ducem Zophyron a pari
ratione cum copiis universis deleverunt; Romanorum audivere sed non
sensere arma.
430. Míleadh or Míle, Latinized Milesius; Clanna Míleadh, the Milesian
race: Gaedheal, Gaodhal (Gadding), his ancestor; Clans Gaedheal the
Gadelian or Gaelic race; the Gaedhil or Gael; the Scots:
431. ? Two.
432. Or Setim.
433. i.e. 'Land of Thorns.'
434. Gaedheal here signifies the individual, the eponymous ancestor,
whence we have in the next line sliocht Gaedhil for his posterity:
also aicme Ghaedhil, in this section, Gaedhil being genitive singular.
We have also in the same way clann Ghaedhil and clanna Ghaedhil, the
children of Gaedheal: but clanna Gaedheal (gen. plural), the children
of the Gaels, all the clans or families of the Gaelic or Scotic race.
Compare clanna Míleadh; clanna Neimheadh; fine Gaedheal (above): see
notes 113 and 430. The 'Gaedheal' or 'Gael' is used collectively for
the race, as Israel for the children of Israel.
435. Magna diu inter Aegyptios et Scythis contentio fuit in quo
certamine superatis Aegyptis Scythae antiquores visi sunt.
436. Aegyptiis in Mare Rubrio submerses, illi qui superfuerunt
expulkerunt a se quemdam nobilem Scyticum qui degebat apud eos ne
dominem super eos invaderit; expulsus ille cum familia pervenit ad
Hispaniam ubi er habitavit per anos multos et progenies ipsius
familiae multae mutiplicata est nimis et inde venerunt in Hiberniam
437. Tanais fluvius dividens Asiam ab Europa enumeratur inter flumina
quod apud Scitas sunt.
438. Gaelica locuta est in usu in Hibernia ab adventu Nemedii anno 630
a Diluvio in hunc usque diem.
439. Dico ergo a quibuscunque Hibernici originem ducere ab iisdem
scoti exordium capiunt.
440. Procedente autem tempore Britannia post Britones et Pictos
tertiam Scotorum nationem in Pictorum parte receipt qui duce Rheada de
Hibernea egressi vel amicitia vel ferro sibimet inter eos sedes quas
hactenus habentc vindicarunt.
441. Scotos Hibernorum proles et ipsi et omnes optime norunt eodemque
nomine a nostratihus scilicet Gaidhil appellantur.
442. Unde et gens ab his propagata et specificato vocabulo Scotica
vocata usque in hodiernum.
443. Lingua Scotica, seu Hibernica quae eadem est, utuntur.
444. Ab adventu Ibernensium usque ad obitum Sancti patricii sunt anni
mille octingenti.
445. The translation strictly should read 'Was won by Eireamhon over
Eibhear'; but the question intended and actually answered is not
precisely why Eireamhon won the battle, but why he fought it at all;
the sense is this: 'Why did Eireamhon fight this battle which he won
over Eibhear'.
446. Contingit gentem Pictorum de Scythia (ut perhibent) longis
navibus non multis oceanum ingressum, circumagente flatu ventorum.
Extra fines omnes Britanniae Hiberniam pervenisse, eiusque
septmetrionales oras intrasse, atque inventia ibi gente Scotorum sibi
quoque in partibus illius sedes petiisse nec impetrare potuisse.
447. Poem given in Todd's Nennius, Appendix, p. xix., taken from
B.Lec., fol. 286.
448. Poem in Todd's Nennius, p. 274, taken from Mac Firbis's copy,
R.I.A.
449. The quotation marks are of course not in text. In the translation
'a black fleet' is a strictly verbal rendering: the meaning is 'a
fierce company of exiles'.
450. Ceangal na gcúig gcaol, the binding of the five smalls, that is,
of the wrists, the ankles, and the neck: so Haliday; so also Young,
Trans R.I.A. 1. Antiquities P.71, where he gives 'bound neck, hands
and heels' as a translation of sa cuig caol san aon ceangal, taken
from the lay of Conn mac an Deirg. See on this subject Sternem
Zeitschrift für Celtische Philologie, Band Vi, Haft I, p.188. Ceangal
na dtrí gcaol is also sometimes met with. The three caols appear to be
caol an duirn, caol an droma, caol na coise, Ibid.
451. Scoti ex Hispania in Hiberniam quarta aetate venerunt
452. Columbanus qui est Columba vocatur in Hibernia ortus est; eam
Scotorum gens incoluit.
453. Hibernia propria Scotorum patria est.
454. Sanctus Kilianus et duo socii eius ab Hibernia Scotorum insula
venerunt.
455. Hibernia a Scotorum gentibus colitur.
456. Beatus Kilianus Scotorum genere et relqa.
457. Hibernia enim antiquitus Scotia dicta est, de qua gene Scotorum
Albaniam Britanniae maiori proximam quae ab eventu modo Scotia dicitur
inhabitans, originem duxit et progressum habuit.
458. Etiamsi hodie Scotia proprie vocetur ea Britanniae pars quae ipsi
Angliae contingens ad Septentrionem vergit, olim tamen eo nomine
Hiberniam notatam fuisse ostendit D. Beda, cum e Scythia Pictorum
gentem in Hiberniam venisse ait ibique Scotorum gentem invenisse.
459. Qui de Purgatorio dubitat, Scotiam pergat, Purgatorium Sancti
Patricii intret, et de Purgatorii poenis amplius non dubitabit.
460. Hibernia Scotiae sibi nomen etiam vindicabat, quia tamen ex
Hibernia ista Scotorum pars qu edam egressa est in eaque Britanniae
ora quam Picti iam habebant onsederunt; ii quidem principio a duce suo
Rheuda Dalrheudini dicti uerunt, ut ait V. Beda; postea tamen Pictos
inde ipsos exegerunt, et boreale totum illud latus obtinuerunt, eique
vetus gentis suae nomen indiderunt. Ita ut Scotorum gens una fuerit,
sed Scotia duplex facta sit, una vetus et propria in Hibernia,
recentior altera in septentrionali Britannia.
461. Scoti omnes Hiberniae habitatores initio vocabantur ut indicat
Orosius, nec semel Scotorum ex Hibernia transitum in Albiam factum
nostri annales referunt.
462. Principio cum utrique, id est Hiberniae incolae et coloni eorum
in Albiam missi, Scoti appellarentur, ut discrimine aliquo alteri ab
alteris distinguerentur, initio coepere alteri Scoti Ierni, alteri
Scoti Albani, vocari.
463. Repellent barbari ad mare, repellit mare ad barbaros, inter haec
oriuntur duo genera funerum, aut ingulamur aut mergimur.
464. Anno 500 a Caesaris ingressu Britannia Pictorum et Scotorum
immanitati relinquitur.
465. Revertuntur impudentes grassatores Hiberni domum post non longum
tempus reversuri.
466. Multa ignoramus quae non laterent si veterum lectio nobilis esset
familiaris.
467. Britanni facti sumt tributarii Scotis et Pictis anno Christi 446.
468. Hibernia nunquam externae subiacuit ditioni.
469. Patricius Brito natus in oppido Nemptor in Campo Taburno .i.
tabernaculorum, ex parentibus devotis et religiosis ortus.
470. Cum Scoti de Hibernia sub rege suo Naoighiallach diversas
provincias Britanniae contra Romanum imperium multum devastabant,
contendere incipientes aquilonalem Britanniae plagam tandem, ejectis
veteribus colonis, ipsi Hibernenses eam occupaverunt et habitaverunt.
471. Hoc autem tempore quaedam classis Hibernica depredavit patriam in
qua morabatur D. Patricius et, consueto Hibernorum more, multi inde
captivi ducti sunt, inter quos erant D. Patricius aetatis suae anno
decimo sexto et duae eius sorores Lupida et Darerca; et ductus est
Patricius in Hiberniam captivus anno nono Néill regis Hiberniae qui
potenter 27 annis regnavit ac Britanniam et Angliam usque ad mare quod
est inter Angliam et Galliam devastavit.
472. Hiberni initio statim post Religionem acceptam se suaque omnia in
Pontificis Romani ditionem dederant, nec quemquam alium supremum
principem Hiberniae ad illud usque tempus praeter unum Romanum
Pontificem, agnoverant.
473. Írial propheta per decem annos regnavit, et antequam regula
Christi per Patricium seminata esset in Hibernia, de semine eiusdem
Regis quinquaginta septem reges regnaverunt super Hiberniam, et post
Patricium de prole illius quinquaginta reges.
474. Ab adventu Sancti Particii usque ad Feldemidii Regis tempora
triginta tres reges per quadringentos annos in Hibernia regnaverunt;
tempore autem Feldemidii Noruaegienses duce Turgesio terram hanc
occuparunt.
475. A tempore Turgesii usque ad ultimum monarchum Rodericum Conatiae
Regem septemdecem reges in Hibernia fuerunt.
476. Moriardacho glorioso gratia Dei Regi Hiberniae, Anselmus servus
Ecclesiae Cantuariensis.
477. Lanfrancus peccator et indignus Dorobernensis Ecclesiae
archiepiscopus magnifico Regi Hiberbiae Terdeluaco benedictionem cum
servitor et orationibus.
478. Mandavit mihi Rex Hiberniae per breve suum et Burgenses Dublinae
quod elegerunt hunc Gregorium in Episcopum et eum tibi mittunt
consecrendum. Unde tibi mando ut petitioni eorum satisfaciens eius
consecrationem sine dilatione expleas.
479. Anno quadrigentesimo tricesimo Paladius ad Scotos in Christum
credentes a Coelistino Papa primus mittitur episcopus.
480. Benedictus Patricius itinere longo de regione longinqua peracto,
praesentia sui suos exhilarabat et triginta episcopos ex transmarinis
partibus congregatos et a se consecratos in Dominicam messem, eo quod
esset multa et operarii pauci, destinabat.
481. Omnes ergo mares monachos, feminas sanctimoniales, efficiens,
numerosa monasteria aedificavit, decimamque portionem terrarum ac
pecudum eorum sustentationi assignavit.
482. Ecclesias 355 fundavit, episcopos ordinavit eo numero, 355,
presbiteros autem ad tria millia ordinavit.
483. It would appear from the quatrain here that the orders conferred
on the crutharnaigh were episcopal orders, if the Irish seancha is to
be understood as agreeing with Nennius. If fifty-five be added to
three hundred we get Nennius's number. The word crutharnaigh or
crutharnaidh I have not met elsewhere. But it is possible that the
ordination intended by the seancha is that of the priesthood; 55
bishops would not be such a fabulous number, especially if we consider
some of them as succeeding to the sees of others, but 355 seems an
excessive number; see however a list of 276 extinct sees in Mac
Firbis's tract in Rawlinson 400 (Copy in R.I.A. 24 C.7). Nennius MSS.
give 365 and 345. See Stevenson's Ed. p.45.
484. Mutantur et multiplicantur Episcopi pro libitu Metropolitani, ite
ut unus episcopatus uno non esset contentus, sed singulae pene
ecclesiae singulos haberent episcopos.
485. Dum vero in Momoniam proficisceretur, venit obviam ei Rex 
Momoniae, Aonghus mac Natfraoich in campo Feimhean in terra na nDéise,
eumque duxit gaudens in civitatem regalem nomine Caiseal, quae est in
regione Eoghanacht, ibique credidit rex Aonghus et baptisatus est.
486. Cumque Sanctus Patritius regem stando benedixisset cuspis baculi
Sancti fixa est in pede Regis.
487. this quatrain is also in Annals of the Four Masters, Vol. I, p.
144.
488. Habere autem solet (inquit) ipsa Insula rectorem semper Abbatem
presbiterem cuius iuri et omnis provincia et ipsi etiam episcopi
ordine inusitato debeant esse subiecti iuxte exemplum primi doctoris
illius qui non episcopus sed presbiter extitit et monachus.
489. Columba erat primus doctor fidei Catholicae Transmontanis Pictis
ad aquilonem primusque fundator monasterii quod in Hii Insula multis
diu Scotorum Pictorumque populis venerabile mansit.
490. See Ann. F.M. Vol. I. p. 226 for a version of this quatrain.
500. The quatrain is gien in Ann. F.M. p.229, and in the Annals of
Ulster, Vol. I. p.82.
501. Ruanuidh: Keating equates this word with deargthach blushing or
bashful, but the meaning of the word is valiant, champion-like, of
course used here ironically. The translation given therefore is ad
mentem auctorem.
502. Ab adventu Sancti Patricii usque ad Feilimidii regis tempora 33
reges per quadringentos annos in Hibernia regnaverunt. Tempore antem
Feilimidii Noruaegienses duce Turgesio terram hanc occuparunt.
503. Optimus sapiens et anachorita Scotorum quievit.
504. The enumeration of rents, etc., given in text, is abridged from
the Book of Rights. See O'Donovan's edition, p. 32.
505. Post obitum Turgesii de Noruaegiae partibus, quasi sub pacis
intuitu et mercaturae exercendae praetextu, tres fratres Amelanus,
Cyracus et Iuarus cum sua sequela in hanc insulam appulerunt, et de
consensu Ibernorum otio deditorum, maritima loca occupantes, tres
civitates, viz., Waterfordiam, Dubliniam et Limericum construxerunt
qui tamen numero succrescentes contra indigenas frequenter insultabant.
506. The acount of Cormac son of Cuileannain's death given in this
section closely resembles that given in the "Three Fragments of
Annals," p. 200 et seq.
507. The story of the Crosans was published in the Gaelic Journal
(G.J.), Vol. IV. P.106 by K. Meyer from the MS. D IV 2 (fol.51b) of
the Stowe collection R.I.A., date of MS. Being A.D. 1300. The same
story is found in Mac Firbis's Book of Genealogies (Fir.) p. 778
(O'Curry's transcript R.I.A.).
As to the meaning of the word crosán, O'Don. Supp. to O'Reilly's Dict.
gives crossán to mean scurra, that is a jester or buffoon, and Todd
has the following note on the word, Irish nennius p. 182: "They were
the cross-bearers in religious processions, who also combined with
that occupation the profession, if we may so call it, of singinf
satirical poems against those who had incurred Church censure, or were
for any other cause obnoxious." The name crosántacht is given to the
species of metre in which the lay sung by them is written. This kind
of metre is much more common than O'Curry (H. & S. Cat. 555) makes it
out to be. He states that he only knew three specimens of this sort of
metre, one being the present poem, another a poem by Andrew Mac
Criutin, the third a poem by O'Bruadar.
508. Number too high by twenty.
509. Dr. Reeves (Ecc. Ant. Of Down and Connor, p. 139) explains the
absence of the boundaries of the diocese of Dun da Leathglas (Down)
from the list by understanding the see of Dun da Leathglas to be
included in that of Cunnaire (Connor). See also Cambriensis Eversus
Vol II. Addendum C.
510. Baginbun: for some account of this place and name see paper by Mr.
Goddard H. orpen, also papers by Mr,. orpen in Jour. R.S.A.I. 1898, p.
155, and 1904, p. 354.
511. Herimont Morti, that is, Hervey of Mount Maurice; Iarala O'
Stranguell, that is, the Earl of Strigul, also called Strongbow; see
other varieties of these names in the Irish version of Cambrensis'
Expugnatio Hibernica, Ed. Stokes, English Historical review, Vol xx. P.
77 et seq.
512. There are variations in the list of names in several MSS. Thus
O'Mahony (Translation, pp. 651-652) gives a much longer list than that
in the text. Perhaps certain scribes wrote in their favourite family
names. It is on the whole probable that the author did not put his own
name in the list. The names in their modern English forms are:
Fitzgeralds and Burkes, Butlers and Barrys, De Courcys and Roches,
Powers, FitzMaurices and Graces and Prendergasts, Flemings, Purcells
and Prestons, Nugents and Walshes, Toblins and Shortals and Blanches,
Birminghams, Condons, Cantwells, Devereauxes, Darcys and Dillons,
Morrises, Esmonds, De Lacys, Browns and Keatings.


GENEALOGIES
INTRODUCTORY NOTE.

Very few early or reliable MSS. of Keating's History give the
genealogical and synchronistic sections in a complete and satisfactory
manner. In some cases the MSS. are torn or otherwise defective in
these sections. Good MSS, otherwise reliable, have curious scribal
interpolations in the body of the genealogies. Thus MS. M3 (King's
Inns) is an excellent MS. for the body of the history but rather
unsatisfactory in the genealogies and synchronisms as I discovered
after I had copied the entire section. O'Naughton's copy is also
largely interpolated in the genealogies. After a careful examination
of the principal MSS. used in the preparation of the text of the
History I adopted the version of the genealogies and synchronisms
given in M1 (H 5 26 T.C.D.) regarding it as the most complete and
satisfactory copy of these sections that has come down to us. Of
course the archaisms of this MS. are scarcely noticeable in the
genealogical section.

I have supplied variations from M2 (H 5 32 T.C.D.), Fr (A 14,
Franciscan Library, Merchants' Quay), F2 (A 15, same Library).

I have also supplied variants from other sources but chiefly from Mac
Firbis's Book of Genealogies, R.I.A. (McF.) and from O'Clery's
Genealogies, R.I.A. (O'Cl.). Both of these works are practically
contemporaneous with the work of Keating, and are, moreover, the
result of special genealogical study. I have therefore given their
lists as variants.

There are 16 genealogies in all, marked by the letters of the alphabet
A to P inclusive, while Q is added as an important variant of C.
Nearly all the genealogies are traceable to Milidh Easpainne and
thence by an easy ladder to Adam, in whom all the lines meet. I have
marked Adam as number one, and in the line of descent from him, as
given in A, Milidh Easpainne numbers 36, and Oilill Olom (sprung from
Eibhear) 87. In the line of descent from Adam through Milidh Easpainne
and Eireamhon (as expanded in full in O'Clery's Genealogies, p. 7)
Niall Naoighiallach numbers 90, and Cobhthach Caol mBreagh 60 and
Ughaine Mor 59, while in the line of descent from Adam through
Fearghus mac Roigh (Fearghus s. of Rossa Ruadh), Fearghus numbers 36
(O'Clery's Genealogies, pp. 187, 203, etc.)

In each genealogy I have given to the name nearest to Adam to which
the genealogy is brought, the number to which it is entitled in the
main line to which it belongs, and have numbered the lists onwards,
starting from such number. Thus B is brought to Oilill Olom to which
name the number 84 is attached in A.. H is brought to Eochaidh
Muighmheadhoin, to which name the number 89 corresponds in O'Clery's
full genealogy of the descent from Adam through Eireamhon (O'Clery's
Genealogies. p. 7), etc. In N. the number 84a has been introduced for
convenience.

THE BRANCHING OF THE SONS OF MILIDH OF SPAIN AS FOLLOWS.

Some seanchas assert that there are in Ireland twelve tribes of the
Saorchlanna or true nobility of the Gaels, namely six tribes in Leath
Cuinn and six in Leath Mogha. Here are the six tribes of Leath Cuinn,
namely Dal gCuinn Dal gCein Dal nAruidhe Dal bhFiatach Dal Riada and
Dal Niadh Cuirb. The six tribes of Leath Mogha are Dal nEoghain Dal
bhFiachach Dal gCeide Dal Dairine Dal mBairdine and Dal gCais.
Still this is not the order we shall follow in giving the branchings
of the sons of Milidh, but we shall follow up the posterity of those
three sons of Milidh of Spain who have left issue, namely Eibhear, Ir
and Eireamhon, and also that of Lughaidh, son of Ioth, who was son of
a brother of Milidh's father.
Know, O reader, that there are in Ireland six tribes of the
Aitheachthuaith or Daorchlanna whose genealogy it is not right to
trace, though a section of them are Gaels while the others are not 
Gaels.
The first of these tribes is the remnant of the Fir Bolg and of the
Tuatha De Dhanann.
The second tribe consist of those who left their own territory and
being descended from Saorchlanna submitted to a servile tribute from
another race. 
The third tribe consists of that body of Saorchlanna whose territory
had been made into sword-land and who remained therein in slavery
under the sway of their enemy.
The fourth tribe consists of that body of Saorchlanna who fell into
slavery through their own misdeeds and who forfeited their blood and
lands by law.
The fifth tribe are those who sprang from foreign soldiery, namely
from mercenaries from other lands who left issue in Ireland.
The sixth tribe consists of the descendants of the slaves who came to
Ireland with the sons of Milidh.
Now what surprises many is how it could come to pass that no portion
of the descendants of the Saorchlanna who came with the sons of Milidh
to Ireland should survive. To this my reply is that Tuathal Teachtmhar
after he had assumed the sovereignty of Ireland visited them with
great slaughter because of their treachery towards the Saorchlanna of
Ireland as we have stated. For he defeated them in twenty-five battles
in Ulster, in twenty-five battles in Connaught, in twenty-five battles
in Leinster, and in thirty-five battles in Munster; and if after this
some remnant of them has survived no seancha ought, nor would it be
possible for him, to follow up and search out the branching of the
genealogy of these or of any of the five other tribes which we have
enumerated above; and should any untutored seancha attempt to trace
their genealogy whatever statements he might make would have no claim
to be regarded as history.
Understand, O reader, that we shall set down here the leading
genealogical branches of the true Gaelic nobility, and that we shall
begin with the race of Eibhear because of their seniority.
Nevertheless, O reader, you should know that we shall introduce into
the direct line branches that did not spring from its senior founder,
but whose claim arises from the noble exploits in which their
ancestors excelled their seniors in birth. Indeed the sovereignty of
Ireland and of the provinces was more frequently held by members of
junior than by those of senior branches. Here are proof and examples
of this:
It is obvious that there were more monarchs of Ireland of the race of
Eireamhon, the junior, than of the race of Eibhear, the senior; and
that there were more monarchs of Ireland of the posterity of Cobhthach
Caol mBreagh, son of Ughaine, the junior, than of the posterity of
Laoghaire Lorc, the senior; and that there were more monarchs of
Ireland of the posterity of Niall Naoighiallach son of Eochaidh
Muighmheadhoin than of the posterity of the four sons of Eochaidh who
were seniors to him; and that there were more kings of Connaught of
the posterity of Duach Galach, the junior of the sons of Brian son of
Eochaidh, than of the posterity of the twenty-three who were seniors
to him, and that there were more kings of Leinster of the posterity of
Fiachaidh Aiceadha son of Cathaoir Mor, the youngest of the sons of
Cathaoir, than of the posterity of the nine others who left issue. And
thus it appears that it was not by right of seniority that kings
assumed the sovereignty of Ireland or of the provinces, but rather by
the greatness and nobility of their deeds; and hence I mean to unfold
here the family branches and genealogical ramifications of each
division of them in due order and succession and to trace each
offshoot to its own particular place in the branch.
Here follow the branching of the race of Eibhear; and first of the
posterity of Eoghan son of Oilill Olom, senior of the family of
Eibhear.
Now Oilill Olom had three sons who had issue, namely Eoghan Mor,
Corbmac Cas and Cian. All that survive of the race of Eibhear are
descended from these three.

A.
THE GENEALOGY OF MAG CARRTHAIGH MOR (Mac CARTHY MORE) TO WHICH WE
SHALL BRING THE ENTIRE RACE OF EOGHAN MOR.

122 Domhnall the first earl, son of
121 Domhnall an Druimnin, son of
120 Corbmac Ladhrach, son of
119 Tadhg Liath, son of
118 Domhnall an Dana, son of
117 Tadhg na Mainistreach, son of
116 Domhnall. Brother to this Domhnall was Diarmuid Mor of Muscroighe
from whom descended Lord Muscroighe and all who sprang from him.
Another brother of his was Eoghan of Bord Mainge whence the Carrthaigh
of Cois Mainge are descended; son of
115 Corbmac, son of
114 Domhnall Og, from whom are descended Clann Domhnaill Ruaidh. From
the progeny of Diarmaid of Traigh Li, brother to this Domhnall Og, is
sprung Mac Finghin of Ceithearn; son of
113 Domhnall Ruadh na n-oighbhreath, son of
112 Cormac Fionn. From this Cormac Fionn are descended Clann
Charrthaigh of Alla and the princes of Desmond; and from a brother of
this Cormac Fionn is sprung Mag Carrthaigh Riabhach and all who are
descended from him; son of
111 Domhnall Mor na Cuirre, son of
110 Diarmuid of Cill Badhaine from whom are sprung Clann Taidhg Ruaidh
of Scairt; son of
109 Cormac of Magh Teamhnach. From Tadhg brother of this Cormac is
sprung Mac Amhlaoibh; son of
108 Muireadhach, son of
107 Carrthach, whence Clann Charrthaigh, son of
106 Saoirbhreathach. Brother to this Saoirbhreathach was Murchadh
whence spring Siol gCeallachain son of
105 Donnchadh, son of
104 Ceallachan of Caiseal, son of
103 Buadhachan, son of
102 Lachtna, son of
101 Artghal, son of
100 Sneadhghus. Brother to this Sneadhghus was Foghartach and son to
Foghartach was Fionghuine from whom Muinntear Fhionghuine are called;
son of
99 Donnghal, son of
97 Natfraoich, son of
98 Faolghus, son of
96 Colga, son of
95 Failbhe Flann. Brother to this Failbhe Flann was Finghin son of
Aodh Dubh from whom are sprung O Suilleabhain Mor and O Suilleabhain
of Bearra. The Book of Munster says that Finghin was senior to Failbhe
and that for that reason the seancha composed the following stanza on
Finghin's being in the sovereignty of Munster before Failbhe, on
account of his seniority to him:--

To be without Finghin, to be without Mor
To Caiseal is a cause of grief;
It is as if there were no king
If Failbhe Flann is to be king.

However since the descendants of Failbhe excelled those of Finghin in
prowess and nobility of deeds they are made founders in the genealogy
here; son of
94 Aodh Dubh, son of
93 Criomhthann, son of
92 Feidhlimidh. Brother to this Feidhlimidh was Eochaidh Fionn from
whom is sprung O Caoimh, and another brother to him was Eanna whence
spring Muinntear Dhalaigh of Munster; son of
91 Aonghus, son of
90 Natfraoich. Brother to this Natfraoich was Cas son of Corc whence
sprang O Donnchadha Mor, and from him sprang O Donnchadha of the
Gleann, O Mathghamhna Fionn, O Mathghamhna Ruadh, and O Mathghamhna of
Ui Floinn Lua, and O Mathghamhna of Cairbre, and from another brother
of this Natfraoich namely Cairbre Luachra son of Corc are sprung Ui
Muircheartaigh; son of
89 Corc, son of
88 Lughaidh. Brother of this Lughaidh was Daire Cearb from whom are
sprung O Donnabhain and
O Cuilein of Cairbre; son of
87 Oilill Flann Beag. From the progeny of Fiachaidh Fighinnte son of
Daire Cearb son of OiLill Flann Beag are sprung Muinntear Aicheir,
Muinntear Mhiadhachain and Clann Mhic Dabhith in Thomond; son of
86 Fiachaidh Muilleathan, son of
85 Eoghan Mor, son of
84 Oilill Olom, son of
83 Mogh Nuadhat, son of
82 Mogh Neid, son of
81 Dearg, son of
80 Deirgthine, son of
79 Eanna Monchaoin, son of
78 Loch Mor, son of
77 Mo Feibhis, son of
76 Mureadhach Muchna, son of
75 Eochaidh Fear Aine, son of
74 Duach Dallta Deaghaidh, son of
73 Cairbre Lusc, son of
72 Lughaidh Luaidhne, son of
71 Ionnadmhar, son of
70 Niadh Seaghamain, son of
69 Adhamair Foltchaoin, son of
68 Fear Corb, son of
67 Mogh Corb, son of
66 Cobhthach Caomh, son of
65 Reachtaidh Righdhearg, son of
64 Lughaidh Laighdhe, son of
63 Eochaidh, son of
62 Oilill, son of
61 Art, son of
60 Lughaidh Laimhdhearg, son of
59 Eochaidh Uaircheas, son of
58 Lughaidh Iardhonn, son of
57 Eanna Dearg, son of
56 Duach Fionn, son of
55 Séadna Ionnarraidh, son of
54 Breisrigh, son of
51 Rothachtaigh, son of
53 Art Imleach, son of
50 Roan, son of
52 Feidhlimidh, son of
49 Failbhe, son of 
48 Cas Céadchaingneach, son of
47 Faildeargod, son of
44 Airereo Arda, son of
46 Muineamhon, son of
43 Roitheachtaigh, son of
45 Cas Clothach, son of
42 Rossa, son of
41 Glass, son of
40 Nuadha Deaghlaimh, son of
39 Eochaidh Faobharghlas, son of
38 Conmhaol, son of
37 Eibhear Fionn, son of
36 Milidh of Spain, son of 
35 Bile, son of
34 Breoghan, son of
33 Bratha, son of
32 Defhatha, son of
30 Alldod, son of
31 Archaidh, son of
29 Nuadha, son of
28 Neanuall, son of
27 Feibric Glas, son of
26 Adhnon Fionn, son of
25 Eibhear Gluinfhionn, son of
24 Laimhfhionn, son of
23 Aghnomon, son of
22 Tat, son of
21 Oghaman, son of
20 Beoghaman, son of
19 Eibhear Scot, son of
18 Sru, son of
17 Easru, son of
16 Gaedheal Glas, son of
15 Niul, son of
14 Feinius Farsaidh, son of
13 Baath, son of
12 Magog, son of
11 Jafeth, son of
10 Noe, son of
9 Lamhiach, son of
8 Matusalem, son of
7 Enoch, son of
6 Jareth, son of
5 Malalel, son of
4 Caidhionan, son of
3 Enos, son of
2 Seth, son of
1 Adam.

The branching of the progeny of Cormac Cas the second son of Oilill
Olom.
B 
THE GENEALOGY OF O BRIAIN (O BRIEN), NAMELY THE EARL OF THOMOND, HERE,
TO WHICH WE SHALL BRING EVERY TRIBE OF THE DAL gCAS, TRACING IT TO THE
STEM WHENCE IT SPRANG.

126 Henry, son of
125 Brian. A brother senior to this Brian was Henry son of Donnchadh,
who was earl of Thomond and who left no male issue; son of
124 Donnchadh. Brothers to this Donnchadh were Tadhg of Druim Mor and
Sir Domhnall of Carraig an Chobhlaigh; son of
123 Conchubhar. Brother to this Conchubhar was Toirrdhealbhach son of
Donnchadh who was put to death in Gaillimh; son of
122 Donnchadh. Brothers to this Donnchadh were Domhnall Mor, that is O
Briain, Tadhg, Murchadh, Muircheartach and Toirrdhealbhach; son of
121 Connchubhar,. son of
120 Toirrdhealbhach. Son to this Toirrdhealbhach was Murchadh, first
earl of Thomond, from whom
sprang the Baron of Innse Ui Chuinn; son of
119 Tadhg, son of
118 Toirrdhealbhach, son of
117 Brian of Cath an Aonaigh. The posterity of Brian of Cath an
Aonaigh are Siol mBriain na gCumrach; son of
116 Mathghamhain of Maonmhagh. Of the posterity of Mathghamhain of
Maonmhagh are Siol mBriain of Carraig O gCoinneall; son of
115 Muircheartach, son of
114 Toirrdhealbhach, son of
113 Tadhg of Caoluisce. Brother to Tadhg of Caoluisce was Brian Ruadh
from whom spring Siol mBriain of Ara; son of
112 Conchubhar na Suibhdhaine, son of
111 Donnchadh Cairbreach, son of
110 Domhnall Mor, son of
109 Toirrdhealbhach, son of
108 Diarmuid. A senior brother to this Diarmuid was Muircheartach
ancestor of Clann Mathghamhna of Thomond according to an ollamh of the
Dal gCais
themselves. One of their ollamhs speaks as follows:-

The children of Toirrdhealbhach
who shirked not fight
Were great Muircheartach and Diarmaid,
An expert progeny to whom woods bowed,
Noble Muircheartach was their senior.
The children of the younger of them
Were Siol mBrian, sprung from Diarmaid;
While the warlike expert race
Clann Mathghamhna sprang from Muircheartach;

son of
107 Toirrdhealbhach, son of
106 Tadhg. Brother to this Tadhg was Donnchadh son of Brian from whom
is sprung Mac Briain O gCuanach and Clann Bhriain of Eatharlach; son
of
105 Brian Boroimhe. This Brian had six sons, namely, Murchadh, Tadhg,
Donnchadh, Domhnall, Con cubhar and Flann. We find only two of them to
have left issue, i.e., Tadhg and Donnchadh; son of
104 Cinneidigh. This Cinneidigh had twelve sons and only four of them
have descendants now, namely, Mathghamhain, Brian, Donn Cuan and 
Echthigh earn. These are the families that descended from Mathghamhain,
namely, O Beollain, O Cathasaigh, O Spealain O hAmhrachain, O
Siodhachain, Mac Inneirghe, O Conghalaigh and O Tuama. From Brian are
descended Siol mBriain. Now Donn Cuan had six sons namely two
Cinneidighs, Riagan, Longargan, Ceileachar, and Conghalach. From one
of these Cinneidighs sprang Siol gCin neidigh, from the other
Cinneidigh came Muinn tear Chonuing. From Longargan descended
Muinntear Riagain. [From Ceileachar descended Muinntear Cheileachair].
Conghalach went without issue. From Echthighearn descended Muinntear
Echthigheirn and Clann Craith; son of
103 Lorcan. These are the families that sprang from Corcrach s. of
Lorcan: Muinntear Seanchain, Muinntear Chnaimhin, Muinntear Ogain,
Muinntear Allathaigh, Muinntear Mhaolruanuidh, Muinntear Ghloiarn,
Muinntear Ainghiodha and Muinntear Mhaine. Of the posterity of Bran
Fionn, son of Lorcan are Siol mBroin of Dubhthir Laighean; son of
102 Lachtna, son of 
101 Corc, son of
100 Annluan, son of
99 Mathghamhain, son of
98 Toirrdhealbhach. Son to this Toirrdhealbhach was Algeinen from whom
sprang O Meadhra; son of
97 Cathal, son of
96 Aodh Caomh. Another son of this Aodh was Conghalach from whom
sprang O Neill, O nEoghain. Now Niall from whom is the race, was the
son of Ionnrachtach son of Tuathal son of Flann son of Iorchlosach son
of Conghal son of Aodh Caomh; son of
95 Conall, son of
94 Eochaidh Bailldearg, son of
93 Carrthach Fionn. Another son of this Carrthach was Aonghus from
whom are these families: Muinntear Loingsigh, Muinntear Uainidhe,
Muinntear Bhreachtgha, Muinntear Bhréanainn, Muinntear Sheasnain,
Muinntear Riada, Muinntear Thomraigh, Muinntear Chorbmacain; son of
92 Blod. Brother to this Blod was Caisin, whence sprang Siol Aodha,
that is Clann Mic Con Mara and from these sprang Mac Flannchadha. A
son also of this Blod was Breanainn Ban from whom sprang Muinntear
Urthaile, Muinntear Maoldomhnaigh and Muinntear Chearnaigh; son of
91 Cas. This Cas had twelve sons: Blod, Caisin, Lughaidh, Seadna,
Aonghus Ceann Nathrach, Corbmac, Cairrthionn, Cainneach, Aonghus Ceann
Aitin, Aodh, Loiscionn and Dealbhaoth. Of the progeny of Blod is the
head of this branch; of the progeny of Caisin are Siol Aodha,
Muinntear Ghrada and Clann Chaisin. From Aonghus Ceann Nathrach son of
Cas sprang O Deaghaidh, Cineal Fearmhaic, Cineal Baoi and Cineal
Cualochtaigh. From Aonghus Ceann Aitin sprang Muinntear Ifearnain and
Muinntear Neachtain; from Aodh, Muinntear Aodha. From Dealbhaoth son
of Cas sprang Mag Cochlain, and from Lughaidh s. of Cas sprang
Muinntear Dobhorchon and Muinntear Chonraoi. To the Dal gCais also
belong Muinntear Leime, Muinntear Aonghusa and Muinntear Dubhthaigh;
son of
90 Conall Eachluath, son of
89 Lughaid Meann, son of
88 Aonghus Tireach, son of
87 Fear Corb, son of
86 Mogh Corb, son of
85 Corbmac Cas, son of
84 Oilill Olom, et rlqua.
Cian had one son, namely, Tadhg. Tadhg had two sons namely Connla and
Cormac Gaileang. Connla had two sons named Iomchudh from whom O
Cearbhaill, and Fionnachta from whom O Meachair.

The branching of the progeny of Cian son of Oilill Olom here.
C.
THE GENEALOGY OF O CEARBHAILL (O CARROLL), AS FOLLOWS:-

130 Sean, son of
129 Maolruanuidh, son of
128 Tadhg, son of
127 Uilliam Odhar, son of
126 Fear gan ainm, son of
125 Maolruanuidh. Brother to this Maolruanuidh was Donnchadh from whom
sprang the family of Magh Dreimhne; son of
124 Sean, son of
123 Maolruanuidh na feasoige, son of
122 Tadhg, son of
121 Tadhg, son of
120 Ruaidhri, son of
119 Maolruanuidh, son of
118 Tadhg, son of
117 Fionn, son of
116 Gall an Bealaigh,
115 Donnchadh, son of
114 Maolruanaidh, son of
113 Fionn, son of
112 Domhnall, son of
111 Rioghbhradan, son of
110 Cu choirneach, son of
109 Maonach, son of
108 Cearbhall from whom Siol gCearbhaill; son of
107 Dubhluighe, son of
106 Cnaimhin, son of
105 Maonach, son of
104 Seachnasach, son of
103 Aingeadh, son of
102 Maolruanuidh, son of
101 Ulltan, son of
100 Ailtine, son of
99 Lonan, son of
98 Inne, son of
97 Féig, son of
96 Tel, son of 1
95 Meachar, son of
94 Amhruadh, son of 1
93 Druadh, son of
92 Eile Righdhearg from whom Eile is named; son of
91 Earc, son of
90 Sabharn, son of
89 Iomdhamh, son of
88 Iomchadh. Brother to this Iomchadh was Fionnachta from whom sprang
O Meachair; son of
87 Connla, son of
86 Tadhg. Another son of this Tadhg was Corbmac Gaileang from whom
sprang O hEadhra, O Gadhra  and O Cathasaigh and O Conchubhair
Ciannachta;son of
85 Cian, son of
84 Oilill Olom, ut supra.

D
THE GENEALOGY OF O MEACHAIR (O MEAGHAR) AS FOLLOWS:-

125 Tadhg Og, son of
124 Sean, son of
123 Tadhg, son of
122 Giolla na Naomh Og, son of
121 Giolla na Naomh Mor, son of
120 Giolla na Naomh, son of
119 Tadhg, son of
118 Giolla na Naomh, son of
117 Giolla na Naomh, son of
116 Piaras, son of
115 Giolla na Naomh, son of
114 Diarmuid, son of
113 Fionn, son of
112 Maolseachlainn, son of
111 Muircheartach, son of
110 Donnchadh, son of
109 Iarann, son of
108 Fiachaidh, son of
107 Meachar, son of
106 Murchadh Og, son of
105 Domhnall, son of
104 Eigneach, son of
103 Tadhg, son of
102 Dluthach, son of
101 Meachar, son of
100 Caolluidhe, son of
99 Cu choille, son of
98 Meachar from whom Ui Mheachair; son of
97 Aodh Mor, son of
96 Feargna, son of
95 Lughaidh, son of
94 Donn Cuan, son of 
93 Feidhlimidh, son of
92 Fiathaidh, son of
91 Lughaidh, son of
90 Athchu, son of
89 Eochaidh Faobharghlas, son of
88 Fionnachta, son of
87 Connla, son of
86 Tadhg, son of
85 Cian, son of
84 Oilill Olom, ut supra.

The branching of the descendants of Ir son of Milidh as follows

Now there are two sons of Ir who principally have descendants namely
Conall Cearnach and Fearghus son of Rossa Ruadh. From Conall Cearnach
are Mag Aonghusa and Siol Mordha. From Fearghus is sprung O
Conchubhair of Ciarraidhe, O Conchubhair of Corca Moruadh and Siol
bhFearghail with their genealogical branches.

E.
THE GENEALOGY OF MAG AONGHUSA (MAC GUINNESS), AS FOLLOWS:-

125 Aodh, son of
124 Art Ruadh, son of
123 Aodh, son of
122 Domhnall Og, son of
121 Domhnall Mor, son of
120 Aodh, son of
119 Art, son of
118 Aodh, son of
117 Art na madhmann, son of
116 Muircheartach Riaganach, son of
115 Echmhileadh, son of
114 Rughruidhe, son of
113 Giolla Choloim, son of
112 Dubhinnse, son of
111 Aodh Reamhar, son of
110 Flaithbheartach, son of
109 Echmhileadh, son of
108 Aonghus, son of
107 Aodh, son of
106 Echmhileadh, son of
105 Aonghus Og, son of
104 Aonghus Mor, a quo the race, son of
103 Eideadh, son of
102 Laighnen, son of
101 Blathmhac, son of
100 Domhnall, son of
99 Conchubhar, son of
98 Breasal Bealdearg, son of
97 Aodhan, son of
95 Saran, son of
96 Mongan, son of
94 Maine, son of
93 Fothadh, son of
92 Conall. Brother to this Conall was Saran son of Caolbhadh from whom
is sprung Mac Artain; son of
91 Caolbhadh, son of
90 Cronn Bhadhraoi, son of
89 Eochaidh, from whom Ui Eochach of Ulster are called, son of
88 Lughaidh,son of
87 Rossa, son of
86 Iomchadh, son of
85 Feidhlimidh, son of
84 Cas, son of
83 Fiachaidh Aruidhe from whom Dal nAruidhe are named, son of
82 Aonghus Gaibhne, son of
81 Fearghus Gaileang, son of
80 Tiobraide Tireach, son of
79 Breasal Breac, son of
75 Cathbhadh, son of
78 Cearb, son of
74 Giallchadh, son of
77 Mal, son of
73 Dunchadh, son of
76 Rochruidhe, son of
72 Fionnchadh, son of
71 Muireadhach, son of
70 Fiachaidh Fionnamhnas, son of
69 Irial Glunmhar, son of
68 Conall Cearnach. Another son of this Conall Cearnach was Laoiseach
Ceannmhor from whom Siol Mordha spring; son of
67 Aimhirgin Iarghiunach, son of
66 Cas, son of
65 Fachtna, son of
64 Cathbhadh, son of
63 Cionga, son of
62 Rughruighe. Another son to this Rughruidhe was Rossa Ruadh father
of Fearghus Mac Roigh; son of
61 Sitrighe, son of
60 Dubh, son of
59 Faichen, son of
58 Faobhardhil, son of
57 Caithfear, son of
56 Glass, son of
55 Finndearcach, son of
54 Srubh, son of
53 Rossa, son of
52 Dubh, son of
51 Fomhor, son of 
50 Airgeadmhar, son of
49 Siorlamh, son of
48 Fionn, son of
47 Bratha, son of
46 Labhraidh, son of
45 Cairbre, son of
44 Ollamh Fodla, son of
43 Fiachaidh Fionscothach, son of
42 Seadna, son of
41 Art, son of
40 Airtre, son of
39 Eibric, son of
38 Eibhear, son of
37 Ir, son of
36 Milidh of Spain, ut supra.

The branching of the progeny of Fearghus Mac Roigh as follows
F.
FIRST. THE GENEALOGY OF O CONCHUBHAIR OF CIARRAIDHE (O CONNOR KERRY).

109 Sean, son of
108 Conchubhar Bacach, son of
107 Conchubhar Fionn, son of
106 Conchubhar, son of
105 Sean, son of
104 Conchubhar, son of
103 Conchubhar, son of
102 Conchubhar, son of
101 Diarmuid, son of
100 Mathghamhain, son of
99 Diarmuid Sluaghach, son of
98 Mathghamhain,son of
97 Corc, son of
96 Mac Beathaigh, son of
95 Conchubhar, son of
94 Cathal, son of
93 Aodh, son of
92 Tadhg, son of
91 Rughruidhe, son of
90 Cu luachra, son of
89 Diarmaid, son of
88 Conchubhar, son of
87 Fionn, son of
86 Maolseachlainn, son of
85 Flann Feorna, son of
84 Colman, son of
83 Cobhthach, son of
82 Reachtabhrach, son of
81 Maoltuile, son of
80 Aodh, son of
79 Durthacht, son of
78 Seanach, son of
77 Reathaidh, son of
76 Fearba, son of 
75 Iomchadh, son of
74 Eibric, son of
73 Mochdhuine, son of
72 Ulam, son of
71 Meas Con, son of
70 Sabhal, son of
69 Mogh Airt, son of
68 Oirbsionmhar, son of
67 Eochaidh, son of
66 Airtre, son of
65 Aghnaman, son of
64 Fiamhan, son of
63 Dealbhnaoi, son of
62 Enna, son of
61 Lainne, son of
60 Ulpach, son of
59 Astamhan, son of
57 Ciar, son of
58 Mogh Taoi, son of
56 Fearghus. Another son to this Fearghus was Corc from whom are O
Conchubhair of Corca Moruadh. From this Conchubhair sprang O Lochlainn
of Boireann, Muinntear Arga and Muinntear Fhlaithbhearthaigh of
Thomond. Another son to this Fearghus was Cormac from whom sprang Siol
bhFearghail and Mag Raghnaill. Mac Eochadha of Leinster also belongs
to the race of Ir.

The branching of the race of Eireamhon.

Now Ughaine Mor is the ancestor of all that survive of the race of
Eireamhon, and all his sons went without issue except two, namely
Laoghaire Lorc and Cobhthach Caol mBreagh. Of the posterity of 
Laoghaire Lorc are the descendants of Eireamhon in Leinster and of the
posterity of Cobhthach are the descendants of Eireamhon in Leath Cuinn.
We shall first set down the genealogy of O Neill to Eireamhon and
every offshoot from his line to Niall Naoighiallach.

G.
THE GENEALOGY OF O NEILL.

127 Sean, son of
126 Aodh, son of
125 An Fear Dorcha, son of
124 Conn Bacach, son of
123 Conn, son of
122 Einri, son of
121 Eoghan. At this Eoghan the progeny of Feidhlimidh Ruadh part from
O Neill; son of
120 Niall Og, son of
119 Niall Mor, son of
118 Aodh, son of
117 Domhnall, son of
116 Brian of Cath Duin, son of
115 Niall Ruadh, son of
114 Aodh, that is, the Lazy-limbed Youth, son of 
113 Muircheartach of Magh Line, son of 
112 Tadhg of Gleann, son of
111 Conchubhar na Fiodhgha, son of
110 Flaithbhearthach of Loch Adhar, son of
109 Domhnall, that is the Young Ox, son of
108 Aodh Athlamh. Son to this Aodh Athlamh was Donnsleibhe son of
Suibhne of Fanaid. It was. from him sprang Mac Suibhne of the
battleaxes and Mac Suibhne of Badhain; son of
107 Flaithbheartach an trostain, son of
106 Muircheartach Midheach, son of
105 Domhnall of Ard Macha. Brother to this Domhnall was Aodh son of
Muircheartach of the leather-cloaks from whom are Clann Aodha Buidhe;
son of 
104 Muircheartach of the leather-cloaks, son of
103 Niall Glundubh, son of
102 Aodh Fionnliath, son of
101 Niall Caille, son of
100 Aodh Oirndidhe, son of
99 Niall Frasach. Brother to this Niall was Conchubhar from whom
sprang O Cathain; son of 
98 Fearghal, son of
97 Maolduin, son of
96 Maoilfithrigh, son, of
95 Aodh Uairiodhnach, son of
94 Domhnall Ilchealgach, son of
93 Muircheartach. Brother to this Muircheartach was Maine son of
Muireadhach whence sprang O Gairmleadhaigh; son of
92 Muireadhach, son of
91 Eoghan. This Eoghan had five sons who had issue namely Muireadhach,
Oilill, Fearghus, Feilim and Eochaidh Binnigh. Of the progeny of
Muircheartach son of Muireadhach son of Eoghan son of Niall is Mag
Lachluinn. Of the progeny of Mongan son of Muireadhach son of Eoghan
are Muinntear Dhonnghaile. Of the progeny of Fearghal son of
Muireadhach son of Eoghan is Mac Cathmhaoil. Of the progeny of Oilill
son of Eoghan are Muinntear Cheallaigh. Of the progeny of Fearghus son
of Eoghan is O Conchubhair of Magh Iotha. Of the progeny of
Feidhlimidh son of Eoghan son of Niall is O Duibhdhiorma. Of the
progeny of Eochaidh Binnigh son of Eoghan are Cineal mBinnigh.

 Here we treat of the six brothers of Eoghan son of Niall namely
Laoghaire, Eanna, Maine, Cairbre Conall Creamthainn and Conall Gulban.

 Of the descendants of Laoghaire is O Caoindealbhain. Of the
descendants of Maine are the following families, namely, Sionnach
Muinntire Thadhgain, Muinntear Ronain, Muinntear Choinmheadha, Ui
Inneirghe, Muinntear tSlamain, Muinntear Dhuibhgheannain, Clann Ui
Mhaoilchonaire, Muinntear Bhraoin, Muinntear Chibleacain, O Siadhail,
Muinntear Chathalain, Muinntear Mhuireaghdha, O Corrghamhna, and
Muinntear Chuinn. Of the descendants of Conall Creamhthainn is O
Maoilseachlainn. Of the progeny of of Conall Gulban is O Dornhnaill
and all who have sprung from him as we shall presently state. Of Eanna
and Cairbre two other sons which Rioghnach bore to Niall the
descendants are unknown to us. Niall had another son by Inne daughter
of Lughaidh. His name was Fiachaidh. From him are descended Mag
Eoghagain and O Maoilmhuaidh; son of
90 Niall Naoighiallach.

The branching of the progeny of Conall Gulban son of Niall.
H.
THE GENEALOGY OF O'DOMHNALL (O DONNELL) AS FOLLOWS :-

126 Aodh, son of
125 Rughruidhe, son of
124 Aodh, son of
123 Maghnus, son of
122 Aodh Dubh, son of
121 Aodh Ruadh, son of
120 Niall Garb, son of
119 Toirrdhealbhach an fhiona, son of
118 Niall Garbh, son of
117 Aodh, son of
116 Domhnall Og, son of
115 Domhnall Mor, son of 
114 Eighneachan, son of
113 Donnchadh, son of
112 Domhnall, son of
111 Aodh, son of
110 Tadhg, son of 
109 Conn, son of
108 Cathbharr, son of
107 Giolla Criost, son of 
106 Cathbharr, son of
105 Domhnall, a quo the race, son of
104 Eighneachan, son of
103 Dalach, a quo Siol nDalaigh, son of
102 Muircheartach, son of 
101 Ceannfaolaidh, son of
100 Airndealach, son of
99 Maolduin, son of
98 Ceannfaolaidh. This Ceannfaolaidh had two other sons named Maolduin,
from whom is O Baoidhill, and Fionan from whom is O Dochartaigh; son
of
97 Garbh, son of
95 Lughaidh, son of
96 Ronan, son of
94 Fearghus, son of
93 Seadna. A son of this Seadna was Ainmire, father of Aodh, son of
Ainmire. From this Aodh, son of Ainmire, sprang O Maoldoirigh, Mac
Giolla Finnein and O Gallchubhair; son of
92 Fearghus Ceannfhada, son of
91 Conall Gulban, son of
90 Niall Naoighiallach, son of
89 Eochaidh Muighmeadhoin. This Eochaidh had five sons namely Brian,
Fiachra, Fearghus and Oilill, the four sons of Mongfhionn daughter of
Fiodhach. This Mongfhionn was sister to Criomthann, son of Fiodhach,
king of Ireland. The fifth son of Eochaidh was Niall; Cairionn
Chasdubh daughter of the king of Breatain was his mother, and although
Niall was the youngest of the five sons we have placed him first in
the genealogy, since he was the most renowned of them and as it was
from his descendants the greater number of the kings of Ireland were
drawn. Of the four above-named there are two without issue, so far as
I can find, namely Fearghus and Oilill. But of each of the two
brothers who left issue namely Brian and Fiachra we shall give here
the branching.

The branching of the descendants of Brian son of Eochaidh
Muighmheadhoin as follows :-
I.
THE GENEALOGY OF O CONCHUBHAIR RUADH (O CONNOR ROE) TO WHICH WE SHALL.
BRING THE ENTIRE PROGENY OF BRIAN SON OF EOCHAIDH.

130 Aodh, son of
129 Tadhg, son of
128 Cathal Og, son of
127 Aodh, son of
126 Toirrdhealbhach Ruadh, son of
125 Tadhg Buidhe, son of
124 Cathal Ruadh, son of 
123 Tadhg, son of
122 Toirrdhealbhach Ruadh, son of
121 Aodh, son of
120 Feidhlimidh. Brother to this Feidhlimidh was Toirrdhealbhach son
of Aodh from whom O Conchubhair Donn sprang; son of
119 Aodh, son of 
118 Eoghan, son of 
117 Ruaidhri, son of 
116 Aodh, son of 
115 Cathal Croibhdhearg, son of 
114 Toirrdhealbhach Mor. This Toirrdhealbhach had  five sons who left
issue, namely Cathal Croibh dhearg from whom O Conchubhair Ruadh and O
Conchubhair Donn; Brian Luighneach from whom O Conchubhair Sligigh; 
Aodh Dall from whom O Gealbhuidhe; Maghnus from whom Mac Maghnusa of
Tir Tuathal, and Conchubhar  na Midhe from whom Clann Conaifne; son of 
113 Ruaidhri na Soighe Buidhe, son of 
112 Aodh an ghai bhearnaigh, son of 
111 Tadhg an eich ghil. Son to this Tadhg an eich ghil was
Maolruanuidh from whom is Mac Diarmada  of Magh Luirg. From Mac
Diarmada sprang the  three Mac Donnchadhas and Mac Diarmada  Ruadh;
son of
110 Cathal, son of 
108 Tadhg, son of  
109 Conchubhar, son of 
107 Cathal, son of  
106 Conchubhar. Brother to this Conchubhar was Tadhg son of Tadhg Mor
from whom are Muinntear Thaidg; son of  
105 Tadhg Mor, son of  
104 Muirgheas. Another son of this Muirgheas was Cathal from whom Mac
Oireachtaigh; son of 
103 Tomaltach. Another son of this Tomaltach was Diarmuid from whom O
Coincheanainn; son of 
102 Murghal, son of  
101 Ionnrachtach. Of the progeny of this Ionnrachtach are O Birn and O
Fallamhain; son of 
100 Muireadhach Muilleathan. Of the progeny of Cathal  son of
Muireadhach Muilleathan are O Flannagain O Maoilbhreanainn and O
Maoilmhoicheirghe. Of the progeny of Fearghus son of Muireadhach
Muilleathan is Mac Shamhradhain; son of 99 Fearghus, son of 
98 Raghallach, son of 
97 Uadha, son of
96. Aodh. From this Aodh is O Floinn Linne; son of
95 Eochaidh Tiormcharna, son of
94 Fearghus. From Feargna son of Fearghus sprang O Ruairc and Mac
Tighearnãin, and from Fearghus son of Fearghus son of Muireadheach Mal
sprang O Raghallaigh, Mag Bradaigh and Mac Consnamha. Another son of
Fearghus son of Muireadhach Mal was Duach Teanghumha from whom O
Flaithbheartaigh and Mac Aodha na Corcaighe; son of
93 Muireadheach Mal, son of
92 Eoghan Sreabh, son of
91 Duach Galach, son of
90 Brian. Of the progeny of another son of Brian who was called
Oirbsion is O Maille. Another son of Brian was Fare Dearg from whom
sprang O Hainlidhe and Mac Branain; son of
89 Eochaidh Muighmheadhoin.

The branching of the third son of Eochaidh Muighmheadhoin namely
Fiachra
J
THE GENEALOGY OF O SEACHNUSAIGH (0 SHAUGHNESSY).

127 Diarmuid, son of 
126 Ruaidhri, son of 
125 Diarmuid, son of
124 Ruaidhri, son of
123 Diarmuid, son of
122 An Giolla Dubh, son of
121 Diarmuid, son of 
120 Uilliam, son of
119 Sean, son of
118 Eoghan, son of
117 Giolla na Naomh, son of
116 Raghnall, son of 
115 Goll Buidhe, son of
114 Seachnasach a quo the race, son of
113 Donnchadh, son of 
112 Cu mhoighe, son of 
111 Fearghal, son of 
110 Maoilchiarain, son of 
109 Cas, son of 
108 Maoltuile, son of
107 Sioghmuile, son of
106 Nochba, son of
105 Eagna, son of
104 Garbhadh, son of 
103 Branan, son of
102 Bran Leithdhearg, son of
101 Murchadh, son of
100. Aodh. Brother to this Aodh, son of Artghal, was Fearghus from
whom are O hEidhin, Muinntear Thomholtain, Muinntear Chathmhogha and
Clann Mhic Giolla Cheallaigh. Of the progeny of Murchadh son of
Artghal are O Branain, Cineal Aodha and O Cleirigh; son of
99 [Artghal, son of
98 Guaire an einigh, son of
97 Colman, son of]
95 Goibhne, son of
96 Cobhthach, son of 
94 Conall, son of 
93 Eoghan, son of
92 Eochaidh Breac. Of the progeny of this Eochaidh Breac are the
following families, namely Muinntear Mhuirein, Muinntear Mhaoilduin,
Muinntear Chomain, Muinntear Mhaoilfhoghmhair, Muinntear Chreachain,
Muinntear Leannain, Muinntear Fhlaithile, Muinntear Shuanaigh; son of
91 Dathi. Of the progeny of Fiachaidh son of Dathi is O Dubhda; son of
90 Fiachra, son of
89 Eochaidh Muighmheadhoin, son of
88 Muireadhach Tireach, son of
87 Fiachaidh Sraibhthine. Brother to this Fiachaidh Sraibhthine was
Eochaidh Doimhlen. This Eochaidh had three sons who were called the
three Collas, namely, Collas Uais, Colla Meann and Colla da Chrioch.
Of these, Colla Uais was the eldest and the most illustrious, and from
him sprang the following families, namely Clann Domhnaill of Ireland
and of Scotland, Clan nDubhghaill, Clann tSithigh and O Breasail Macha.

Clann Domhnaill as follows :-
K.
THE GENEALOGY OF MAC SAMHAIRLE (MAC SORLEY) THAT IS THE EARL OF
AONDRUIM WHICH IS CALLED ANTRIM, AS FOLLOWS :-

113 Raghnall, son of 
112 Raghnall, son of 
111 Samhairle Buidhe, son of
110 Alasdrann, son of 
109 Eoin Cathanach, son of
108 Domhnall Ballach, son of
107 Eoin Mor, son of 
106 Eoin, son of 
105 Aonghus, son of
104 Aonghus Mor. Brother to this Aonghus Mor was Alusdrann son of
Domhnall from whom are sprung clann tSithigh that is Sitheach son of
Eachdhonn, son of Alasdrann son of Domhnall a quo Clann nDomhnaill;
son of
103 Domhnall a quo Clann nDomhnaill, son of
102 Raghnall, son of 
101 Samhairle, son of 
100 Giolla Brighde, son of
99 Giolla Adhamnain, son of
98 Siolan, son of 
97 Meadhruidhe, son of 
96 Suibhne, son of 
95 Niallghus, son of 
94 Maine, son of
93 Gofraidh, son of
92 Fearghus, son of
91 Earc, son of 
90 Carrthann, son of
89 Eochaidh. Of the progeny of Eochaidh are Clann nDubhghaill; son of 
88 Colla Uais. Brother to this Colla Uais was Colla da Chrioch from
whom sprang the following families with their offshoots, namely Mag
Mathghamhna Mag Uidhir O Hannluain O Ceallaigh O Neachtain O Madagain.


L.
GENEALOGY OF O CEALLAIGH (O KELLY).

120 Tadhg, son of 
119 Tadhg, son of 
118 Domhnall, son of 
117 Conchubhar, son of 
116 Domhnall, son of 
115 Tadhg, son of
114 Conchubhar, son of
113 Diarmuid, son of
112 Tadhg, son of
111 Conchubhar, son of 
110 Conchubhar, son of
109 Tadhg of Cath Bhriain, son of
108 Murchadh, son of 
107 Aodh, son of 
106 Ceallach a quo Siol gCeallaigh, son of
105 Fionachta, son of 
104 Oilill, son of 
103 Innreachtach, son of
102 Fithcheallach. Of the progeny of Coscrach son of Fithcheallach are
Clann Aodhagain; son of 
101 Dluthach, son of 
100 Diocholla, son of
99 Eoghan Fionn. Brother to this Eoghan was Eoghan Buach whence is
sprung O Madagain, son of
98 Corbmac, son of 
97 Cairbre Crom, son of 
96 Fearadhach, son of 
95 Lughaidh, son of
94 Dallan, son of
93 Breasal, son of 
92 Maine Mor, son of
91 Eochaidh Fear da ghiall, son of
90 Domhnall, son of
89 Iomchadh. This Iomchadh had there brothers namely Deaghaidh Duirn,
Rochuidh and Fiachaidh. From Deaghaidh Duirn sprang Mag Mathghamhna;
from Rochaidh sprang Mag Uidhir and Mag Tighearnain of Clann
Fearghaile; from Fiachaidh is sprung O Hanluain. But O hInnreachtaigh
is of the progeny of Iomchadh son of Colla da Chrioch himself; son of
88 Colla da Chrioch, son of
87 Eochaidh Doimhlen, son of
86 Cairbre Lihochair, son of
85 Cormac Ulfhada, son of 
84 Art Aoinfhear, son of 
83 Conn Ceadchathach. Brothers to this Conn were Eochaidh, from whom
are sprung O Nuallain in Leinster, and Fiachaidh Suighdhe from whom
are sprung O Faolain and O Bric in Munster; son of
82 Feidhlimidh Reachtmhar, son of
81 Tuathal Teachtmhar, son of
80 Fiachaidh Fionnolaidh, son of
79 Fearadhach Fionn Feachtnach, son of
78 Criomthann Niadh Nar, son of
77 Lughaidh Sriabh nDearg, son of
76 The three Finneamhnas, sons of
75 Eochaidh Feidhleach, son of
74 Fionn, son of 
73 Fionnlogh, son of 
72 Roighen Ruadh, son of
71 Easoman of Eamhain, son of
70 Blathachtach, son of 
69 Beothachtach, son of
68 Labhraidh Lore, son of
67 Eanna Aighneach. Brother to this Eanna Aighneach was Fiachaidh Fear
Mara whence sprang Conaire son of Mogh Lamha son-in-law to Conn
Ceadchathach. This Conaire was father to the three Cairbres, namely
Cairbre Riada Cairbre Musc and Cairbre Baschaoin. It was these and
their posterity who were called the Earna of Munster. From Cairbre
Riada sprang Dal Riada of Scotland and the Dal Riada of Ulster from
whom the Ruta is named. From Cairbre Musc is named every Muscruighe in
Munster and of his progeny are O Failbhe of Desmond and O Cuirc of
Muscruighe. From Cairbre Baschoin is named Corca Baiscinn and we have
not found out his progeny.

M.
GENEALOGY OF DAL RIADA OF SCOTLAND AS FOLLOWS:-

99 Constantin, son of 
98 Culen, son of 
97 Dubh, son of 
96 Maolcoluim, son of
95 Constaintin, son of 
94 Cinneidigh, son of
93 Ailpin, son of
92 Eochaidh, son of
90 Domhanghort, son of 
91 Aodh Fionn, son of
89 Domhnall Breac, son of
88 Eochaidh Buidhe, son of
87 Aodhan, son of 
86 Gabhran, son of 
85 Domhanghort, son of 
84 Fearghus, son of
83 Neisi Mor, son of
82 Earc, son of 
81 Eochaidh Muinreamhar, son of
80 Aonghus Feart, son of
79 Aonghus Aislingtheach, son of
78 Aonghus Buidhneach, son of
77 Feidhlimidh Roineach, son of
76 Seanchormac, son of 
75 Cruitluath, son of 
74 Fidh feige, son of
73 Eagar Cearr, son of 
72 Eochaidh Andod, son of
71 Fiachaidh Cathmhaol, son of
70 Foirthed, son of 
69 Earc, son of
68 Eochaidh Riada, that is, Cairbre Riada from whom Dal Riada are
named. Of the progeny of Cairbre, also, are the following families in
Scotland namely Cineal nGuaire, Cineal Fionghuine Mac Adhamnain Mag
Eoghain of Eitre, Mac Giolla Eoghain and Mag Giolla Laghmain; son of
67 Fiachaidh Fear Mara, son of
66 Aonghus Tuirbheach Teamhrach, son of
65 Eochaidh Ailtleathair, son of
64 Oilill Caisfhiaclach, son of
63 Connla Cruaidhchealgach, son of
62 Iarraingleo Fathach, son of
61 Meilge Molbhthach, son of
60 Cobhthach Caol mBreagh. Brother to this Cobhthach was Laoghaire
Lorc whence sprang Siol Eireamhoin in Leinster.

The branching of the Lagenians as follows.
I shall begin with the Caomhanaigh
N.
THE GENEALOGY OF MAC MURCHADHA (MAC MORROUGH).

124 Sir Murchadh, son of
123 Domhnall Spainneach, son of
122 Donnchadh, son of
121 Cathaoir Carrach, son of
120 Muircheartach, son of 
119 Art Buidhe, son of
118 Domhnall Riabhach, son of
117 Gearalt, son of 
116 Art Og, son of 
115 Art, son of
114 Muircheartach. Brother to this Muircheartach was Art from whom
sprang the race of Diarmuid Laimdhearg namely Murchadh son of Brian
with his genealogical offshoots; son of
113 Domhnall, son of
112 Domhnall Caomhanach. This Domhnall had two brothers namely Art and
Eanna. Art was put to death by Ruaidhri O Conchubhair and he left no
issue; but, as to Eanna, of his progeny are Ui Cinnsiolaigh.
111 Diarmuid na nGall. Brother to this Diarmuid was Murchadh na
nGaedheal, from whom sprang Mac Daibhith Mor; son of
110 Donnchadh, son of 
109 Murchadh, son of
108 Diarmuid, son of
107 Donnchadh, that is, Maol na mho, son of
106 Diarmuid, son of
105 Domhnall, son of
104 Ceallach, son of
103 Cionaoth, son of
102 Cairbre, son of 
101 Diarmuid, son of 
100 Aodh, son of
99 Ruadhghal, son of
98 Onchu, son of
97 Faolchu, son of
96 Faolan, son of
95 Eoghan Caoch, son of 
94 Naithi. From this Naithi is O Maolriain; son of 
93 Criomhthann, son of
92 Eanna Cinnsiolach. Another son to this Eanna was Feidhlimidh from
whom are sprung Muinntear Mhurchdha and O Dubhloinn; son of
91 Labhraidh, son of
90 Breasal Bealach. Another son to this Breasal was Eanna Niadh from
whom sprang O Broin and O Tuathail; son of
89 Fiachaidh Aiceadha, son of
88 Cathaoir Mor. Rossa Failgheach was the eldest son of Cathoir Mor.
From him sprang O Conchubhair Failghe, O Diomasaigh and O Duinn.
Another son of Cathaoir was Daire Barrach from whom Muinntear Ghormain
sprang, son of
87 Feidhlimidh Fiorurghlas, son of
86 Corbmac Gealta Gaoth, son of
85 Nia Corb, son of
84 Cu Chorb. A son of this Cu Chorb was Cairbre Cluitheachair from
whom Muinntear Dhuibhidhir; son of
84a Mogh Corb, son of 
83 Fionn file, son of 
82 Rossa Ruadh, son of
81 Fearghus Fairrge, son of
80 Nuadha Neacht. Nuadha Neacht had three sons, namely Fearghus
Fairrge, Baoiscne and Gnathaltach. From Fearghus sprang the founder of
this branch. From Baoiscne sprang Cumhall father of Fionn Ua Baoiscne.
Cumhall and Feilim Reachtmhar had the same mother namely Baine
daughter of Scal king of Sacsa. Gnathalach, we do not know who
descended from him; son of
79 Seadna Siothbhac, son of
78 Lughaidh Loithfhionn, son of
77 Breasal Breac. Another son of this Breasal Breac was Connla from
whom sprang the kings of Osruighe; (son of
76 Fiachaidh Foibhreac, son of
75 Oilill Glas, son of
74 Fearadhach Foghlas, son of
73 Nuadha Follon, son of 
72 Allod, son of 
71 Art, son of
70 Mogh Airt, son of 
69 Criomhthann Coscrach, son of
68 Fearadhach Fionn, son of
67 Feidhlimidh Foirthriun, son of
66 Fearghus Fortamhail, son of
65 Breasal Breoghamhain, son of
64 Aonghus Ollamh, son of
63 Oilill Bracain, son of
62 Labhraidh Loingseach, son of
61 Oilill Aine, son of
6o Laoghaire Lorc, son of
59 Ughaine Mor) et rlq.

O.
THE GENEALOGY OF MAC GIOLLA PADRAIG (FITZPATRICK) THAT IS THE LORD OF
OSRUIGHE.

134 Brian Og, son of 
133 Brian Og, son of 
132 Brian, son of 
131 Tadhg, son of
130 Finghin, son of 
129 Brian, son of
128 Brian, son of 
127 Sean, son of
126 Finghin, son of
125 Finghin, son of 
124 Finghin, son of
123 Domhnall Dubh, son of
122 Domhnall, son of
121 Seathfruidh Fionn, son of
120 Seathfruidh Bacach, son of
119 Domhnall Mor of Magh Laoighse, son of
118 Domhnall Clannach, son of
117 Scannlan, son of
116 Giolla Padraig, son of
115 Domhnall, who gave Jerpoint to the monks ; son of
114 Donnchadh, son of
113 Giolla Padraig, son of
112 Domhnall, son of
111 Donnchadh, son of 
110 Ceallach, son of
109 Cearbhall. Another son of this Cearbhall was Braonan from whom
sprang Siol mBraonain ; son of
108 Donnghal, son of 
107 Feartghal, son of 
106 Amhalghuidh, son of 
105 Coinchearca, son of
104 Anmchaidh, son of
103 Faolan, son of 
102 Cronnmhaol, son of
101 Ronan Rioghflaith, son of
100  Scannlan Mor, son of
99 Ceannfaolaidh, son of
98 Colman, son of 
97 Bigne Caoch, son of 
96 Laighneach Faoilidh, son of
95 Ruamann Duach, son of
94 Conall, son of 
92 Niadh Corb, son of
93 Cairbre, son of 
91 Gebhuan, son of 
90 Eochaidh Lamhdhoid, son of
89 Aingeadh, son of
88 Laoghaire Birnbhuadhach, son of
87 Aonghus Osruighe, son of
86 Criomhthann Mor, son of
85 Iar, son of 
84 Seadna, son of 
83 Oilill, son of 
82 Lugaidh, son of
81 Labhraidh, son of
80 Carrthann, son of 
79 Nuadha, son of
78 Connla. Sprung from this Connla are the following families
according to the poem which begins 
Nas of the kings, best of hillocks:
Muinntear Bhaoithin, Muinntear Dhuineamhla, Muinntear Osain, Muinntear
Ionnmhasaigh, Muinntear Fhorannain, Muinntear Thuachair, Muinntear
Chruitin, Muinntear Chreadhmacain, Muinntear Dholbhain, Muinntear
Lionaigh, Muinntear Uarghusa, Muinntear Ioradain, Muinntear
Naoindionain, Muinntear Mhuineachain, Muinntear Bhraoin and many other
families which we shall not name here ; son of
77 Breasal Breac, son of
76 Fiachaidh Foirbhreac, son of
75 Oilill Glas, son of
74 Fearadhach Foghlas, son of
73 Nuadha Follon, son of
72 Allod, son of 
71 Art, son of
70 Mogh Airt, son of
69 Criomhthann Coscrach, son of 
68 Fearadhach Fionn, son of 
67 Feidhlimidh Foirtriun, son of 
66 Fearghus Fortamhail, son of 
65 Breasal Breoghamhain, son of 
64 Aonghus Ollamhdha, son of 
63 Oilill Bracain, son of
62 Labhraidh Loingseach, son of 
61 Oilill Aine, son of
6o Laoghaire Lorc, son of
59 Ughaine Mor, son of
58 Eochaidh Buadhach, son of 
57 Duach Ladhghrach, son of 
56 Fiachaidh Tolgrach, son of 
55 Muireadhach Bolgrach, son of
54 Simeon Breac, son of 
53 Aodhan Glas, son of
52 Nuadha Fionn Fail, son of 
51 Giallchadh, son of
50 Oilill Olchaoin, son of
49 Siorna Saoghlach, son of
48 Dian, son of
47 Rothachtaigh, son of 
46 Maon, son of 
45 Aonghus Olmucaidh, son of
44 Fiachaidh Labhrainne, son of
43 Smiorghall, son of 
42 Eanbhoth, son of 
41 Tighearnmhas, son of 
40 Follach, son of
39 Eitreol, son of
38 Irial Faidh, son of 
37 Eireamhon, son of
36 Milidh of Spain, ut supra.

P.
The branching of the descendants of Lughaidh son of Ioth as follows :-
THE GENEALOGY OF O EIDIRSCEOIL (O DRISCOLL).

86 Sir Finghin, son of 
85 Conchubhar, son of 
84 Conchubhar, son of 
83 Finghin, son of
82 Mac Con, son of
81 Mac Con, son of 
80 Finghin, son of
79 Donnchadh Gud, son of
78 Mac Raith, son of
77 Donnchadh Mor, son of
76 Fothadh, son of 
75 Fionn, son of 
74 Mac Con, son of 
73 Fathadh, son of 
72 Eidirsceol, son of 
71 Fionn, son of 
70 Nuadha, son of 
69 Donnghal, son of 
68 Maoltuile, son of
67 Dunghus, son of
66 Aonghus, son of
65 Folachtach, son of
64 Flannan, son of
63 Brandubh, son of 
62 Eidirsceol, son of
61 Naithi, son of 
60 Aonghus Gaifhuileach, son of
59 Mac Con, son of 
58 Mac Niadh, son of
57 Lughaidh, son of 
56 Daire, son of 
55 Fear Uillne, son of 
54 Siothbholg, son of 
53 Daire, son of
52 Siothbholg, son of
51 Uilleann, son of
50 Eadhamhraidh, son of 
49 Deaghadh Dearg, son of 
48 Deirgthine, son of
47 Nuadha Airgtheach, son of 
46 Lachtaine, son of
45 Logh Feidhleach, son of
44 Eireamhon, son of 
43 Eadhaman, son of 
42 Gos, son of  
41 Sin, son of 
40 Maithsin, son of 
39 Logh, son of
38 Eadhaman, son of
37 Mal, son of
36 Lughaidh, son of
35 Ioth, son of
34 Breoghan, ut supra. Of the posterity of Lughaidh son of Ioth are
the following families : Mag Amhalguidh of Callrach, O Laoghaire of
Ros, Mag Flannchuidh of Dartrach, O Cobhthaigh, O Cuirnin, O Floinn of
Ard, O Baire of Ara, and Mac Ailin in Scotland sprung from Fathadh
Canann son of Mac Con. Also of the progeny of this Lughaidh son of
Ioth are O Treabhair, O Criadhagain and O Cairnein.

Q.
THE GENEALOGY OF O CEARBHAILL (O CARROLL) TO WHICH WE SHALL BRING ALL
THE DESCENDANTS OF TADHG SON OF CIAN.

John (son of Maolruanuidh), son of
Maolruanuidh. Brother to this Maolruanuidh is Tadhg of Baile an
Chnocain; son of
Tadhg. Brother to this Tadhg is John an Bealaigh who was a lord, and
An Calbhach who was a lord, and Sir Maolruanuidh who was a lord, and
many others whom I do not find to have left issue; son of
William Odhar. Brothers to this William Odhar were Tadhg Caoch, that
is, O Cearbhaill, and he was senior to William; and Maolruanuidh and
Uaithne who were his juniors; son of
Fear gan Ainm. Brothers to this Fear gan Ainm were Maolruanuidh Og and
Tadhg who left no issue, and William, that is, An Cuisdiunach, and
Donnchadh, Prior of Saighir, and John. His mother was daughter of Mac
Murchadha; son of
Maolruanuidh. Brothers to this Maolruanuidh were Uaithne who was O
Cearbhaill, and Donnchadh who was O Cearbhaill who was called "the
parson." These three were sons of the daughter of Mac na Mara; and of
the progeny of this Donnchadh are Siol gCearbhaill of Magh Dreimhne,
that is John son of Uaithne son of Maolruanuidh son of An Calbhach son
of Donnchadh. Brother to this Calbhach son of Donnchadh was Tadhg son
of Donnchadh from whom sprang Donnchadh son of Cian son of Tadhg son
of Donnchadh, and his descendants, that is the possessor of Buaile
Bhreac; son of
John. Brothers to this John were William of Corr an Chliabhain who was
O Cearbhaill, Tadhg of Cluain O gCionach and of Culog, and Uaithne of
Bealach Mor, and Maolruanuidh Og of Tulach and Ruaidhri Carrach owner
of Cluain Eachaill; and Beibhionn daughter of O Diomusaigh was their
common mother; son of
Maolruanuidh na Feasoige. Brothers to this Maolruanuidh was Donnchadh
Dall owner of Biorra who was O Cearbhaill, and Connla; son of
Tadhg Aibhle Mhaighe Glaise. Brother to this Tadhg was Ruaidhri Caol
who was O Cearbhaill, whence have sprung the family of Ruaidhri Caol
and Domhnall, that is, owner of Cill Cuimin; son of
Tadhg Caille. Brother to this Tadhg was John whence have sprung Clann
Mhic Seain that is the family of Baile Nua; and this John was O
Cearbhaill till the sons of Mathghamhain O Beacain slew him in Lios
Bualtruighe; son of
Ruaidhri, son of
William. Brothers to this William were John and Uaithne who left no
issue; son of
Maolruanuidh. Brother to this Maolruanuidh was Domhnall who was O
Cearbhaill at the time of the Conquest, and of his descendants are
Clann Mhic Domhnaill; and also the following families : the family of
Coill Meadhoin and the family of Mac Muircheartaigh and the family of
the Giolla Fionn; and it was to the family of this Giolla Fionn that
Leim belonged; son of
Tadhg, son of
Fionn. Brother to this Fionn was Donnsleibhe from whom sprang Sliocht
Breachma and Donnchadh from whom are the Priors of Saighir; son of
Goll an Bhealaigh. And it was this Goll an Bhealaigh who first
acquired Magh an Bealaigh; son of
Donnchadh son of
Maolruanuidh, son of
Fionn, son of
Domhnall. Brother to this Domhnall was Rioghbhradan from whom sprang
the family of Cuil na bhFearnog; son of
Rioghbhradan, son of
Cu Coirneach Maonach, son of 
Ulltan, son of 
Cearbhall, son of 
Lonan, son of
Aodh, son of 
Binne, son of
Dubhluidhe, son of 
Feagh, son of
Cnaimhin, son of 
Tal, son of
Seachnusach, son of 
Meachar, son of
Aineadh Ard, son of
Maolruanuidh, son of 
Drui, son of
Eile Righdhearg, from whom Eile is named, son of 
Iomchadh, son of
Earc. Brother to this Earc was Feigh son of Fionnchadh Uallach, from
whom O Flannagain of Cineal Aga; son of
Fionnchadh Uallach. Brother to this Fionnchadh was Fionnachta from
whom sprang O Meachair and every branch that came from him; son of
Connla. Of the descendants of this Connla is O Conchaibhair Ciannachta
in Ulster; son of
Tadhg. This Tadhg son of Cian had five sons, namely Connla from whom
sprang the head of this family and Cormac Gaileang from whom sprang O
hEadhra and O Gadhra and O Cathasaigh, and Cormac an Chaile from whom
sprang Muinntear Chormaic and Muinntear Cholgan according to the poem
which begins :

Proudly did Tadhg march to battle,

that is, Tadhg son of Cian, and Eochaidh and Muircheartach whom I do
not find to have issue; son of
Cian, son of
Oilill Olom, ut supra.

Thus far the branching of the descendants of Cian son of Oilill Olom
according to their own Ollamh namely Donnghalach O Rioghbhradain.



SYNCHRONISMS
Foreword

The following table, with the exception of the column giving the Irish
kings, was abridged by Keating from Bellarmine's "Chronologia Brevis,"
which is a short tract printed as a supplement to his work "de
Scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis." Bellarmine's Chronological table is
wider than the excerpt given here as it includes Ecclesiastical
writers and Heresiarchs, also the Turkish kings, etc., as well as
various notes and historical events. The first two columns of
Bellarmine, widening to three columns at the separation of the Eastern
and Western Empires were adopted by Keating, and the list of Irish
kings given in a further column, with their dates. The "Chronologia
Brevis" was first published in 1612, and I have collated that edition
with Keating's lists, and made any necessary corrections in the latter.
There were not many corrections to be made, but occasionally the
numbers of the months and days were copied with slight inaccuracies.
In the complete edition of Bellarmine's works, printed in 1838, this
chronology is given not in parallel columns, the various lists being
printed successively. The 1838 edition besides is very inaccurately
printed. Bellarmine divides his table into two parts, the first
extending from the first year of the world to the year 4045 of the
world ; the second from the first year of our Lord to A.D. 1612. In
the first column of the first list the number of years the patriarchs
lived together with the dates of their birth is given up to the death
of Moses; then the Judges begin, and the date of their coming into
office, and the length of their time of office are given. The kings,
potentates, etc., are similarly dealt with. It is scarcely necessary
to say that even at the present day the world's chronology is in a
very unsettled state, some writers who treat of the subject being in
the habit of employing very large figures indeed when there is
question of the age of man on this planet. As regards the ages of the
patriarchs, too, many writers see a difficulty in the figures,
sometimes approaching a thousand years, assigned to some of them. It
is certain that the solution of this difficulty suggested in some
quarters, that the years are to be regarded as months, solves nothing,
and leads to very ludicrous results. The table is here printed, not
for its chronological accuracy or importance, but purely because it
was adopted by Keating as the basis of his synchronisms of the Irish
kings. Bellarmine adds some notes stating his authorities. Thus as to
the age of Cainan which is not found in the Hebrew text of Genesis, he
says "addidimus propter Lucae auctoritatem ex interpretatione LXX." He
gives the years of Bel and the Assyrian kings from Eusebius, though he
puts the dynasty farther back than Eusebius does. He follows
Nicephorus in his list of the Jewish Pontiffs. He takes the reigns of
the Babylonian kings, with a slight change "ex Beroso apud Josephum
lib. I. contra Appionem." He gives many reasons for putting Cyrus
before the destruction of the Babylonian empire. He identifies "Darius
Medus," "Darius the Mede," who reigned one year after Baltassar with
Cyaxares son of Astyax who is mentioned by Xenophon. He takes the
years of the Persian kings from Diodorus, books 11, 13 and 17.
Herodotus and Eusebius differ from Diodorus. For Alexander he follows
Diodorus (lib. 17 and 18), and Josephus "lib. 12 Antiquitatum." He
says it is believed that Orpheus and Linus flourished in the time of
the Judges (of Israel), and that Homer flourished in the time of
Solomon and Thales in the time of Iosias, etc. As regards the early
Roman dates and reigns, Bellarmine gives 244 years to the Roman kings
(following Livy and Dionysius Halicarnasus) and 462 years to the
Consular republic (from the year of the world 3478 to the "Imperium "
of Julius Cæsar).

For remarks on the chronologies of the Irish annals and other Irish
historical writings, the reader is referred to MacCarthy, Todd
Lectures Series, Vol. III, 237 sq ; also to the same writer's
Introduction to the Annals of Ulster, Vol. IV.


Transcriber's Note: The Tables of Synchronisms have not been
transcribed and are only available as page images at the Ex-classics
Web Site http://www.exclassics.com/


Notes On People And Places.

EXPLANATORY NOTE.

In giving the dates in parentheses after kings, popes, etc, the years
that marked the limits of their reigns are given, in other cases the
figures stand for the dates of their birth and death. The figures
indicating the age of the world and those denoting the Christian era
differ so widely in amount that they need not in general be otherwise
distinguished.

The nominative case, singular or plural, is given as far as possible,
and in the spelling of the text, an h being placed after the aspirated
(dotted) letters; the sineadh fada, however, is not given; to discover
where it is used recourse must be had to the text.

The same word, as Ui Neill, Oirghialla, Laighin, etc., frequently
stands for the tribe and the district. Originally it was a name for
the tribe. Keating's geography of Ireland is expressed largely in
terms of the tribal and district names as they existed before the
Norman Invasion and for a considerable period thereafter. As happens
in geography extending over a very long and troubled period, some
names represent districts which partially or wholly overlap. Some
tribe names also that at one period represented flourishing tribes
situated in continuous areas at a later time represent merely a broken
and battered clan of precarious existence and shifting position.

The extent of territory covered by a given name varied with the
centuries; Ulaidh and Oirghialla may be cited as instances of this.
Hence in determining the places represented by Keating's names we must
be broadly guided by the period of which he is speaking. Keating, of
course, took most of his geography from the documents whose substance
he transferred to his pages, and whose very words he modernised and
often adopted without appreciable change.

Terms contracted as indicated below are sometimes written in full, or
nearly so; there are besides some contractions which only apply to the
articles in which they occur and will be readily understood; some
common or obvious contractions have been employed which are not
recorded in the accompanying list.

The use of parentheses ( ) will in general. be plain from the context;
among other uses they sometimes mark a personal or place name for
greater clearness, thus: Rossa Ruadh, f. of Oilill (husband of
Meadhbh), shows that it is Oilill not Rossa Ruadh who was husband of
Meadhbh; with regard to personal names, the information given in the
text is not sufficient to distinguish them in all cases.

In the spelling of proper names there is some slight diversity. Thus
terminal -as and -us are identical, e.g., Ceanannas and Ceannanus are
equivalent, also Diarmuid and Diarmaid, etc. Indeed a and u are often
used as equivalent, thus one finds Cathasuch and Cathusach mutually
interchanged. In Vol I. the diphthong eu is used where ea is employed
in Vols. II. and III.

Transcriber's Note: King's County and Queen's County are now called
Offaly and Laois (Leix) respectively.

PRINCIPAL ABBREVIATIONS.

ab.: abbot
abb.: abbots.
abp.: archbishop
abpp.: archbishops.
Ad.: Adamnan's Life of St. Colomba.
al.: alias, also.
an.: ancestor.
Arch.Hib.: Archivium Hibernicum.
Au.: Annals of Ulster, four volumes, ed. Hennessey and MacCarthy.
bar.: barony
barr: baronies
Bb.: Book of Ballymote, MS. in R.I.A.
B.Hy.: Book of Hy Many, MS. in R.I.A.
B.Lis.: Book of Lismore, MS. copy of, in R.I.A.
bp.: bishop
bpp.: bishops.
br.: brother
brr.: brothers
B.R.: Book of Rights, ed. O'Donovan. L. C. indicates the same work.
c.: circa, 'about.'
C.A.: Coir Anmann, ed. Stokes in 'Irische Texte.'
C.E.: Cambrensis Eversus, 3 volumes, ed. Kelly.
cf.: compare.
C.G.: Cogadh Gaedheal le Gallaibh, War of the Gael and Gall, ed. Todd.
Clon.: Clonmacnoise.
C.S.: Chronicon Scotorum, ed. Hennessy.
d.: died, dies, die, according to context.
da.: daughter
das.: daughters.
dat.: dative case.
def.: defeats, defeated, defeat, according to context.
ds.: descendant
dss.: descendants.
ed.: edited by.
f.: father.
fl.: floruit, 'flourished.'
Fm.: Annals of the Four Masters, 7 volumes, ed. O'Donovan.
g,gen.: genitive case.
gf.: grandfather.
gm.: grandmother.
gpl.: genitive plural.
gs.: grandson.
H.F.: The Genealogies, Tribes and Customs of Hy-Fiachrach, ed.
O'Donovan.
Ire.: Ireland.
ib.: 'ibidem,' in the same page, etc.
jk.: joint king.
k.: king.
K.: Keating.
K.A.: Journal of the Kilkenny Archaeological Society.
k.C.: king of Connaught (Connachta).
k.Ire.: king of Ireland, that is, airdri or high king.
k.L.: king of Leinster.
k.M.: king of Munster.
k.U.: king of Ulster (Ulaidh).
L.: Leinster (Laighin).
Lb.: Leabhar Breac, facsimile copy.
L.C.: Leabhar na gCeart, Book of Rights, ed. O'Donovan B. R. expresses
the same.
Lec.: Book of Lecan, MS. in R.I.A.
Ll.: Leabhar Laighean, Book of Leinster, facsimile copy.
Lu.: Leabhar na nUidhre, facsimile copy.
m.: mother.
M.: Munster (Mumha).
McF.: MacFirbis's Book of Genealogies, MS. copy in the R.I.A. made by
O'Curry.
M.L.: Battle of Magh Leana, ed. O'Curry.
M.M., MS.Mat., Man.Mat.: Manuscript Materials of Irish History, O'
Curry.
M.R.: Battle of Magh Rath, ed. O'Donovan.
n.,nom.: nominative.
npl.: nominative plural.
ns.: nominative singular.
O'D.: O'Donovan.
O'Fl.: Ogygia by O'Flaherty.
ok.: king with opposition.
OLav.: An Historical Account of the Diocese of Down and Connor, by
O'Laverty.
Onom.: Onomasticon Gaedelicum, ed. Hogan.
O'R.S.: O'Donovan's Supplement to O'Reilly's Dictionary. (Note:  the
matter of this Supplement is O'Donovan's but not the editing, it
having appeared in print only after his death, edited, I believe, by
O'Looney).
par.: parish
parr.: parishes.
P.G.: Parliamentary Gazetteer of Ireland, 3 volumes.
Pl.: Plummer's Latin Lives of the Saints, 2 volumes.
pl.: plunder, plunders, plundered, according to context.
plur.: plural.
poet.: poetical.
q.v.: which see.
r.: river
rr.: rivers.
Ra.: Adamnan's Life of St. Colomba, ed. Reeves.
rt.: referred to, reference to, references to.
s.: son
ss.: sons.
S.G.: Silva Gadelica, 2 volumes, ed. O'Grady.
sl.: slay, slays, slain, according to context.
smt.: sometimes.
Sq.: and following (pages, etc).
S.: Saint
Sts.: Saints.
tl.: townland
tll.: townlands
T.D.D: Tuatha de Danann
T.P.: Topographical Poems, ed. O'Donovan.
Trans: the Translation of Keating's History.
U.: Ulster (Ulaidh).
v.: 'vide,' see.
vil.: village
vill.: villages.
w.: wife
ww.: wives.
W.C.: West Connaught, by O'Flaherty.
Ybl.: Yellow Book of Lecan, facsimile copy.
MSS. D. IV. 2, R.I.A. and Rawlinson B. 512, are quoted with reference
to the boundaries of province of Meath. See Index under Midhe.

A.
Abacuc, head falls off, at fair of Taillte, for false swearing.
Abel, born the thirteenth year of Adam's life.
Abha, nom. al. abhainn and abhann, a river.
Abha Lorcaighe, the river Lorcach (name obsolete), at Kells, Co..
Meath.
Abhainn Chara, prob. Little Brosna river, which bounds the barr. of
Eglish and Garrycastle, King's Co., and flows into the Shannon; a
limit of Meath; for name cf. Owencharra r. near Ballymahon; D. IV. 2
has Abhann Chara Coinche.
Abhann Ealla, the r. Allua or Allo, partly in bar. of Upper Connello,
Co. Lim., but chiefly in bar. of Duhallow, Co. Cork, joins r.
Blackwater a mile above Clonmeen; a limit of see of Imleach Iobhair.
Abhann Mhor, r. Blackwater, al. Daball, in the middle of Tir Eoghain;
it rises in the Clogher Mountains and forms for miles a boundary
between Cos. of Armagh and Tyrone; a limit of the sees of Clochar and
Ard Macha.
Abhann Mhor, 'the Great River,' r. Blackwater flowing into Youghal
Harbour; a limit of see of Corcach.
Abhann O mBriuin, see of Cong extends northwards from to Neimhtheann
(Nephin).
Abhann Righe, v. Righe.
Abraham, eighth in descent from Sem, if Sem be reckoned.
Achadh Bo, Aghaboe, a par. in barr. of Clandonagh and Clarmallagh,
Queen's Co.
Achadh Chuinnire, prob. for Achadh Chonaire, Achonry;.
Achadh Fharcha, in bar. of Slane, Co. Meath.
Achadh Liag, on east of r. Suck, in bar. of Athlone, Co. Rosc.
Achaia, a district of Greece; the T. D. D. originally from there.
Achaill, near Tara; v. Aichill.
Achonry, v. Achadh Chuinnire.
Adhamair Foltchaoin, 'A. Fairhead,' s. of Fear Corb.
Adhamh, Adam.
Adhamnan, St., ab. of I and biographer of St. Columcille;.
Adhar, perh. for Magh Adhar, Myra Park, four miles south west of Tulla,
Co. Clare; v. Magh Adhar.
Adhar, a slave who accompanied the sons of Milidh to Ire.
Adhla, s. of Partholon.
Adhna, f. of Neidhe (an author of the Seanchus Mor).
Adrianus, Pope Adrian IV. (1154-1159), an Englishman named Nicholas
Breakespeare.
Aelfred, (Alfred), k. of Britain.
Aere, a name for Egypt.
Aeria, old name of Crete or Candia.
Aetelmhulf, Ethelwulf, f. of Aelfred.
Aetiopia, Aethiopia, in classical times a district in north east of
Africa bounded on north by Egypt and on east by Red Sea.
Afraic, Aifric, Africa.
Agallamh na Seanorach, 'Dialogue of the Ancients,' an Irish Romance,
edited by O'Grady in 'Silva Gadelica' and by Stokes in Irische Texte,
IV. I.; rt., I. 152.
Aghaboe, v. Achadh Bo.
Aghnaman, f. of Tat.
Aghnaman, gf. of Starn.
Aghnoman, f. of Neimheadh.
Aghnon, s. of Tat.
Aherlow, Co. Tipp., v. Eatharlach.
Ai, slave who accompanied the sons of Milidh to Ire.
Aibhle, land (iath) of, in Leitir Craoi, probably for Ailbhe, q.v.
Aicme, 'tribe'.
Aidheit, s. of Laighneach.
Aidhnc, slave who accompanied the sons of Milidh to Ire.
Aifric, v. Afraic.
Aighe, f. of Sean, (an author of the Seanchus Mor).
Ailbhe, of Imleach, St., protector of all Munster.
Aileach, da. of Udhaire (k. of Alba), and m. of the three Collas.
Aileach Neid, Greenan Ely, on Isthmus between Innishowen and mainland,
Co. Donegal; a limit of Er's portion of Ire.; a royal seat of Ulster.
Ailghionan, f. of Feargraidh (k. M).
Ailghionan, s. of Eochaidh, an. of Cormac, s; of Cuileannan,.
Aillbhe, da. of Cormac, s. of Art, and second w. of Fionn, s. of
Cumhall.
Ailldeargoid, s. of Muineamhon.
Aillinn, Allen, five miles east of Kildare.
Ailp, v. Sliabh Alpa.
Ailpin, da. of Comhghall, of the Dealbhna Mor, and m. of Domhnall, s.
of Murchadh, k. Ire.
Ailpin, f. of Cinneide (k. of Alba).
Ailpin, k. of the Picts,.
Aimhirgin, al. A. Gluingheal, 'A. Whiteknee,' s. of Milidh.
Airioch Feabhruadh, a. of Milidh.
Airmeadhach Caoch, 'A. the Blind,' a. of Conall Guithbhinn.
Airndil, s. of Maine, of the race of Eireamhon.
Airteach Uchtleathan, s. of Fear Conga, and f. of Ruadh (3rd wife of
Dathi, k. Ire).
Airtre, s. of Cathal, k. M.
Airtre, s. of Conchubhar.
Airtre, s. of Eibric.
Aitheachthuaith, the serfs or rustic tribes of Ire.;.
Aithiochta, da. of Cian O Conchubhair, and m. of Niall Frasach (k.
Ire).
Aithirne, an author of the Seanchus Mor.
Aithne, occurs only in g. 'Cathair na hAithne,' Athens in Achaia.
Alasdar, s. of Domhnall, of the line of Colla Uais, an. of Clann
tSithigh (the Mac Sheehys).
Alba, History of, by Buchanan v. Buchananus.
Alba, History of, by Hector Boetius v. Boetius, Hector.
Alba, 'Scotland' v. Crutheantuaith.
Albanach, a., Scottish; a S. author, Johannes Major; Buchanan, a S.
author.
Albanactus, third son of Brutus; Alba called Albania from.
Albanaigh, npl., ns. Albanach, the Albanians or Scots.
Albania, name of Alba, supposed to be derived from Albanactus.
Albion, a Welsh author, says Welsh princes were well received in Ire.
Ale-drinking, first introduced into Ire. by Samaliliath in time of
Partholon.
Alexander Mor, 'A. the Great,'.
Alladh, f. of St. Baoithin.
Allaoi, s. of Tat, of the T. D. D.
Allen, Hill of, Co. Kild.; v. Almha and Almha Laighean.
Allgor, earl of Chester.
Allod, v. Ealloid.
Allua, r., v. Abhann Ealla.
Almha, al. A. Laighean, al. Almhain (dat. form for nom.), Hill of
Allen, Co. Kild.
Almha Laighean, v. Almha.
Alphonsus (a Sancta Maria), Alphonso de Cartagena (1396-1456), Spanish
historian, author of "Rerum Hispanarum Romanorum imperatorum necnon
regum Francorum anacephaleosis"; computed 5984 years from Adam to
Christ.
Alps, the, v. Sliabh Alpa.
Altisiodorensis, Auxerre, in France.
Amazones, Amazons, sprung from Iobath, s. of Magog; the Amazones were
a legendary nation of female warriors who were supposed to live in
Pontus near the shore of the Black Sea; they are not purely legendary,
as in all probability the accounts of them that have reached us have a
historical foundation, and in later times in Bohemia and elsewhere
historical parallels are not wanting.
Amazons, v. Ciochloiscigh, and Amazones.
Ambrosius, k. of Britain, at war with the Picts and Scots
Amhalghaidh, f. of Aimhirgin (filé of Diarmaid s. of Cearbhall)
Amhalghuidh, f. of Cuan (k. M.)
Amhalghuidh, s. of Fiachraidh, k. C. for twenty years, d., in reign of
Oilill Molt.
Amhalghuidh, s. of Muireadhach, an. of St. Maodhog.
Amhlaoibh, s. of Aralt and f. of Maghnus (k. of Norway).
Amhlaoibh, or Olanus, s. of Gothfruidh, heir to the throne of the
Isles.
Amhlaoibh (s. of Iomhar of Luimneach), a chief of the Lochlonnaigh
captured with Iomhar and Duibhgheann, two other chiefs, at Inis
Cathaigh by Brian Boraimhe(anno 975, recte 977, Fm,); according to Fm.
Iomhar was father of Amhlaoibh and Duibhgheann; in C. G. 102 (v. also
CXXX V ) it is stated that the three chiefs were sl., and the name
Cuallaid is given for Amhlaoibh; C. G. also attributes the slaving of
some, at least, of these leaders to the Ui Domhnaill of Corca Baiscinn.
Amhlaoibh, s. of k. of Lochloinn, (called Huita or 'the White' ) came
to Ire. as leader of the Lochlonnaigh(anno 853, C. G. LXIX.)
Amhlaoibh, s. of Sitric.
Amhlaoibh, s. of Sitric, k. of the Lochlonnaigh, sl. in retribution
for the burning of Cork; f. of Dubhghall, (perh. not identical).
Amhlaoibh Cuaran, 'A. of the Sandals,' s. of Sitric
Amhulchach, 'beardless'.
Anamchara, 'soul's friend'; v. chaplain.
Annagassan, Co. Louth, v. Casan.
Anroth, a graduate in filidheacht (poetry) next in rank to an ollamh
Anselmus, Anselm, St., abp. of Canterbury (1093-1109)
Anthony, St., v. Antonius.
Antonius, the monk, or hermit, Anthony, St. (d. 356-357, having lived
105 years); he is the founder of Christian Monasticism and his grave
was kept secret at his own request; his body was miraculously
discovered(anno 531 Au).
Antrim, v. Aondrom and Antruim.
Antruim, Earl of, v. Aondrom.
Anust, w. of Seanghan.
Aodh, foster-son of Cormac, s. of Cuileannan
Aodh, al. Colla Meann, one of the three Collas v. Colla Meann.
Aodh, f. of Caus
Aodh, f. of Ceallach (vicar general of primate).
Aodh, f. of St. Brighid.
Aodh, k. M., and an. of Donnchadh, s. of Caomh.
Aodh, k. of Ui Liathain.
Aodh, s. of Ainmire, k. Ire. twenty-seven years.
Aodh, s. of Ainneann, filé to Conchubhar, s. of Neasa.
Aodh, s. of Breanainn, k. of Teathbha.
Aodh, s. of Colga, k. L., sl in bt. of Uchbhadh, III. 148.
Aodh, s. of Colum, an. of St. Adhamnan.
Aodh, s. of Cumascach (k. U).
Aodh, s. of the Daghdha (Daghadh in Trans.)
Aodh, s. of Dluitheach (Duitheach in Trans. ), sl. Fionnachta
Fleadhach (k. Ire. ), (anno 695 Au).
Aodh, s. of Duach Galach, k. of South Oirghialla, present at
Convention of Drom Ceat.
Aodh, s. of Dualghus.
Aodh, s. of Eochaidh, k. of Inis Fionnghall.
Aodh, s. of Eochaidh Tiormcharna, k. C. and f. of Cuarnan; sl. in bt.
of Bagha (anno 577 Au).
Aodh, s. of Eochagan, k. U., sl. by the Lochlonnaigh at Ath Cliath,
(anno 919 Au).
Aodh Athlamh, s. of Flaithbheartach an trostain ('of the pilgrim's
staff '), an. of Mac Suibhne (MacSweeny)
Aodh Balbh, 'A. the Dumb or the Stutterer,' s. of Innreachtach, k. C.,
d. anno 737 Fm.
Aodh Beannain, k. M. (i.e., West Munster), f. of Sts. Fursa, Faolan
and Ultan, I. 52; d. anno 614 Fm., 619 Au.
Aodh Buidhe, 'A. the Tawny,' k. of Ui Maine; def. by Conall, s. of
Suibhne anno 600 Fm.
Aodh Caomh, 'A. the Gentle,' s. of Garadh Glundubh
Aodh Caomh, 'A the Gentle,' s. of Conall, an. of Brian Boraimhe
Aodh Dubh, 'A. the Swarthy,' s. of Criomhthann, k. M., at Drom Ceat
Aodh Dubh, s. of Suibhne Aruidhe, sl. Diarmaid, s. of Fearghus, k.
Ire., anno 565 or 572 Au.
Aodh Eigeas, a filé, ollamh over Breagha, Meath, etc.
Aodh Finnliath, s. of Niall Caille, k. Ire. sixteen years, anno 864,
Fm., 867, O'Fl.)
Aodh Fortamhail, 'A. the Strong,' br. of Oilill Anbhann (k. C.),.sl.
in bt. of Cuil Chonaire anno 544 Fm.
Aodh Muindearg, 'A. Redback,' f. of Domhnall.
Aodh Oirndighe (al. Oirdnidhe), k. Ire. 24 years, sl. anno 817 Fm.
Aodh Ollan, k. Ire. nine years.
Aodh O Neill, chief of Cineal Eoghain.
Aodh Roin, k. of Ui bhFailghe.
Aodh Roin, k. U. thirty-three years, sl. in bt. of Fothart (Fotharta,
which is g., Trans.) anno 732 Fm.
Aodh Ruadh, 'A. the Red,' s. of Badharn, k. Ire. twenty-one years.
Aodh Slaine, s. of Diarmaid, k. Ire. six years
Aodh Uairiodhnach, k. Ire. twenty-seven years
Aodhan, 32 saints of the name.
Aodhan, s. of Dealbhaoth.
Aodhan, s. of Gabhran, k. of Alba, a contemporary of Aodh, s. of
Ainmire.
Aodhan Glas, f. of Simeon Breac
Aoife, da. of Diarmaid Mac Murchadha.
Aoife, m. of Conlaoch
Aoife, w. of Fiachaidh Sraibhthine, II. 356.
Aolgnat, bp. of Ard Breacain.
Aolmhagh, a plain, Donaghmore in bar. of Dromahaire, Co. Leitrim.
Aonach Macha, Fair-Green of Macha, around Navan Fort near Armagh.
Aonach Taillteann, Fair of Taillte; v. Taillte.
Aondrom, Antrim, Earl of; v. Raghnall, s. of Samhairle.
Aonghus, first name of Oihll Olom.
Aonghus, one of the Cruithnigh.
Aonghus, one of the Earna.
Aonghus, f. of Clothna (chief filé of Ire.)
Aonghus, k. of the Cruithnigh, or Picti, called k. of Alba.
Aonghus, s. of Colman
Aonghus, s. of the Daghdha.
Aonghus, s. of Domhnall.
Aonghus, s. of Eochaidh Fionn, leader of the Deise when they came to M.
Aonghus, s. of Fearghus, k. of Picti
Aonghus, s. of Feidhlimidh, of Leinster
Aonghus, s. of Nadfraoch, k. M.
Aonghus Celle De, 'A. the Culdee,' author of Saltair (Psaltair) na
Rann
Aonghus Cinn Nathrach, 'A. of the Serpent's Head,'.
Aonghus Feart, f. of Eochaidh Muinreamhar.
Aonghus Fionn, 'A. the Fair,' s. of Fearghus Duibhdheadach, d. anno
248 Fm.
Aonghus Gaibhnionn, a of Fearghus Foghlas
Aonghus Gaileann, s. of Oilill Bracan.
Aonghus Gaoibuaibhtheach, s. of Fiachaidh Suighdhe,
Aonghus Molbhthach, s. of Natfraoch, v. Aonghus, s. of. Natfraoch.
Aonghus Mor, 'A. the Great,' s. of Eochaidh Fionn Fuath nAirt, an. of
St. Brighid, of Cill Dara.
Aonghus Ollamh, s. of Oilill, k. Ire. eighteen years.
Aonghus Olmucaidh, s. of Fiachaidh Labhruinne, k. Ire. eighteen or
twenty-one years.
Aonghus Osruighe, expelled with his followers from Magh Feimhean.
Aonghus Tireach, s. of Fear Corb.
Aonghus, Tuirbheach Teamhrach, s. of Eochaidh Foiltleathan, k. Ire.
thirty or sixty years
Apulia, al. Daunia, country of the Dauni.
Aquileia, ancient town in Italy.
Ara, Co. Tipp., v. Duthaigh Aradh.
Ara, in Rinn Muinntire Baire, in Cairbreacha, Ara in Muntervary
peninsula in West Carbery.
Arainn, al. Ara, Aranmore Island in Galway Bay.
Aralt, f. of Gothfraidh
Aralt, gf. of Maghnus (k. of Norway).
Aralt, s. of Iomhar, chief of the Lochlonnaigh of Luimneach
Aran, v. Arainn and Ara.
Arannan, St, d. anno 847 Fin.; ab. of Beannchair, Fm.
Arannan, youngest son of Milidh
Archaidh, k. of W. Connaught, f. of Beibhionn (m. of Brian Boraimhe)
Ard Achaidh, in Sliabh Fuaid, near Newtown Hamilton, Co. Armagh.
Ard Breacain, Ardbraccan, two miles west of Navan, Co. Meath; Aolgnat,
bp. of, d. anno 781, Au. where name is Ailngnad.
Ard Cein, near Prom Ineasclainn (Dromiskin in Co. Louth), II. 292. Ard
Charna (al. Ardachadh), Ardagh, see of.
Ard Ciannachta, district extending north of r. Liffey to near
Druirniskin in Co. Louth.
Ard Fionain, Ardfinnan, par. and village in bar. of Iffa and Offa, Co.
Tipp.
Ard Ladhrann, Ardamine, Co. Wex.
Ard Leamhnachta, 'New Milk Height' in Ui Cinnsealaigh, perh. the hill
of Forth in Co. Wex.
Ard Macha, Armagh.
Ard Macha, i.e. prob. Ard Macha Brege rt. in Annals of Loch Ce, seems
to be in Fingall, and is identical with Tigh Gighrain of Fm.
Ard Macha (Armagh), Book of, one of the chief books of Ire.; this book
is now unknown; the Book of Armagh preserved in the Library of T.C.D.
is a different work.
Ard na nGeibhleach, 'Captives' Height,' al. An Chnocach, Knockagh,
three miles north-east of Cahir, Co. Tip.
Ard Neimheadh, Island of, in Ui Liathain, al. Oilean Mor an Bharraigh,
Great Island (Barrymore) in Cork Harbour.
Ard Padraig, mentioned with Ceanannus (K ells), Domhnach Padraig and
Cill Scire, hence prob. in Meath.
Ard Padraig, Ardpatrick, 5 miles south of Kilmallock, Co. Lim., a
limit of the see of Luimneach.
Ard Sratha, al. Ard Srath, Ardstraw, Co. Tyrone.
Ardachadh, al. Ard Charna, Ardagh.
Ardagh, v. Ardachadh and Ard Charna.
Ardamine, v. Ard Ladhrann.
Ardan, brother of Naoise, goes to Alba, returns, and is sl. at Eamhain.
Ardbhanbha, 'High Banbha' (prefix is poetical) a name for Ire.
Ardbraccan, Co. Meath, v. Ard Breacain.
Ardfinnan, Co. Tipp., v. Ard Fionain.
Ardghal, s. of Madagan, k. U. 17 years, sl. at bt. of Cill Mona, anno
970, Au.
Ardpatrick, v. Ard Padraig.
Ardri, high king, overking.
Ardstraw, Co. Tyrone, v. Ard Sratha.
Arfaxat, al. Arphaxad, s. of Sem.
Argivi, the Argives, a Grecian tribe.
Arglan, al. Earglan, s. of Beoan, s. of Starn
Argus or Cecrops, ruled over the Argives; Gaedheal said to be sprung
from.
Arias, a sage of the T. D. D.
Arklow, Co. Wick., v. Innbhear Deaghaidh.
Armagh, v. Ard Macha.
Arnulfus, Earl of Pembroke, married da. of Muircheartach O Briain anno
1101.
Arog, da. of Cathal, k. of Feara Cul, and m. of Maoilseachlainn (k.
Ire).
Arphaxad, al. Arfaxat, s. of Sem.
Art, f. of Cormac, v. Art Aoinfhear, and Cormac, s. of Art.
Art, s. of Airtre.
Art, s. of Cairbre Nia, an. of St. Brighid of Cill Dara,
Art, s. of Conn, v. Art Aoinfhear.
Art, s. of Diarmaid Mac Murchadha, given by his f. as hostage to
Ruaidhri O Conchubhair.
Art, s. of Lughaidh Laimhdhearg, k. Ire. six years.
Art, s. of Mogh Airt, an. of Cathaoir Mor.
Art Aoinfhear, s. of Conn Ceadchathach, f. of Cormac Ulfhadha (usually
called Cormac, s. of Art, or Cormac mac Airt), k. Ire. 30 years.
Art Coileach O Ruairc, k. of Breithfne.
Art Imleach, s. of Eilim, k. Ire. twenty-two years; sl. by Nuadha
Fionn Fail anno 4198 Fin.
Artghaile, al. Artghal, s. of Cathal, d. in I, anno 791 Au.; he was k.
of Connaught).
Artur, Arthur, supposed to have been k. of Britain about the fifth
century, the hero of the Arthurian Legends; king, contemporary of
Muircheartach, s. of Earc; sl. by Scots and Picts.
Artur, s. of Neimheadh
Arviragus, f. of Marius (k. of Britain).
Asal, slave who came to Ire. with the sons of Milidh.
Asal, a district in Meath; Ath Maighne, a ford on r. Inny in par. of
Mayne, bar. of Fore, Co. West., is in it.
Ascenez, s. of Gomer.
Assaroe, Co. Don., v. Eas Ruaidh.
Assembly, general; three in Ire., viz. Feis of Tara, Feis of Eamhain,
Feis of Cruachain; one at beginning of each reign, for legislation.
Asur, Asshur, s. of Sem.
Ateniensis, Crioch A., the Country of Athens, in Greece, I. 202; v.
Crioch Ateniensis.
Ath Aiseal, Athassel, par. and hamlet, 31/2 miles west of Cashel, on r.
Suir, Co. Tipp.
Ath an Tearmainn, 'Ford of the Sanctuary,' in Roscommon; see of Tuaim
extends from A. an T. to the r. Shannon, and the see of Conga (Cong)
from A. an T. westward to the sea.
Ath ar choinne Lodan, 'Ford opposite to Ludden', a boundary of the see
of Luimneach; lies between r. Maoilchearn (Mulkern) and Loch Guir.
Lodain is now Ludden; there are the townlands of Ludden Beg and Ludden
More and the par. of Ludden in the bar. of Clanwilliam, Co. Tipp.
Ath Ceit, 'Ceat's Ford,' seems in the region of Brefny; Ceat sl. by
Conall Cearnach at, II. 206.
Ath Cliath, Dublin, County of, v. Magh Lithfe.
Ath Cliath, Dublin
Ath Cliath (a kingdom distinct from Laighin); Meath extends from r.
Sionainn east to A. C. (where prob. the kingdom and not the city or
the modern Co. is meant).
Ath Cliath, the Ford, the eastern extremity of the boundary line
between Leath Cuinn (Northern half of Ire.) and Leath Mogha (Southern
half), Gaillimh, or rather Ath Cliath Meadhraidhe, being the western
extremity, and Eiscir Riada the boundary line itself; this ford seems
identical with Ath Cliath Laighean, cf. the limits of Partholon's
division of Ire., and on it is built Ath Cliath, Dublin town; v. Ath
Cliath Laighean, and Ath Cliath, Dublin.
Ath Cliath Laighean,.A. C. of Leinster, a limit in Partholon's
division of Ire., from Aileach Neid to A. C. L. being given to Er, and
from A. C. L. to Oilean Arda Neimheadh to Orbs; A. C. L. formed the
northern limit of k. of Cashel's jurisdiction when not k. Ire.: from
Teach Duinn to A. C. L. (L.C. 50), and this affords some argument for
placing A. C. L. farther south than Dublin; the only other Ath Cliath
mentioned in the Seanchus with which it could be identified is. Ath
Cliath Soir, in Ormond, a limit of Thomond; still it seems certain
that A. C. L. is identical with Ath Cliath or Dublin.
Ath Cliath Meadhruidhe, Maaree, 6 miles south-east of Galway (O'Fl.
West Connaught, ed. Hardiman), it is probably at Kilcolgan Bridge or
at Clarinbridge; the boundary in Partholon's division between western
north and south of Ire.
Ath Crionna, near Stackallan Bridge on the Boyne.
Ath Crochdha, ford on r. Shannon, near Shannon Harbour; bridge built
there by Toirrdhealbhach O Conchubhair,
Ath Dara, on r. Barrow in Magh nAilbhe, Co. Kild.
Ath I, Athy, on r. Barrow, Co. Kild.; called al. Ath Troistean (but
the two are distinct).
Ath Luain, corrupt for Ath da on, Adoon some four miles north of
Mohill, Co Letrim; D. IV. 2 reads Ath da on which of course is
phonetically very close to Adoon; a limit of Meath.
Ath Luain, 'the ford of Luan,' Athlone, on the Shannon
Ath Luchad, Lochid Bridge bar. of Inchiquin, Co. Clare.
Ath na Boraimhe, the ford at Killaloe on the Shannon, now Ballina; a
limit of Lughaidh Meann's sword-land won from Connaught.
Ath na gCarbad, 'Ford of the Chariots,' called Anegarbid in "Taxation
of Irish Dioceses and Parishes," anno 1302-6; in Magh Feimhean, in the
Cahir district, Co. Tipp.; Power (The Place Names of Decies, p. 409)
thinks that A. na gCarbad is identical with Templemichael between
Grangemockler and Newtown Lennon.
Ath Seannaigh, Ballyshannon, bar. of W. Offaly, Co. Kild.
Ath Troistean, a ford on the river Greece near the hill of Mullaghmast
in the south of Co. Kild., Fm. 635; K. wrongly equates it with Ath I
or Athy.
Ath Truim, Trim, Co. Meath.
Ath Uiseal, same as Ath Aiseal, q.v..
Athassal, Co. Tipp., v. Ath Aiseal and Ath Uiseal.
Athens, v. Aithne.
Athlone, v. Ath Luain.
Athy, Co. Kild., v. Ath I.
Atra, an. of Aelfred.
Attila, the Great, A. was k. and general of the Huns and d. anno 453.
Augustin, monk, St., first archbishop of Canterbury (d. anno 604);
sent to Britain by Pope Gregory the Great, anno 596
Augustinus, Augustine, St. (354-430), Latin Father of the Church
Aurelianus, Aurelian, Roman Emperor (270-275), "the first emperor who
wore the imperial crown,".
Aurelius Ambrosius, k. of Britain, ordered the erection of a monument
(Stone Henge) to British nobles sl. by the Saxons
Avoca, r., estuary of, v. Innbhear Mor.
Axal, name of Columcille's guardian angel.

B.
Baath, s. of Magog
Babilon, Babioloin, v. Baibiolon.
Babylon, v. Baibiolon.
Bacrach, a Leinster druid, announced the Crucifixion of Christ to
Conchubhar
Badharn, f. of Aodh Ruadh (k. Ire).
Badhbh, goddess of the T. D. D.
Badhbhchaidh, s. of Eochaidh Buadhach.
Badhraoi, f. of Neimheadh.
Baibiolon (al. Babioloin, Babilon) Babylon, Babel.
Baile, a division of land; thirty --s in the triocha cead; twelve
seisreachs in the baile.
Baile biadhthaigh, a division of land.
Baile na mBreathnach, 'Welshestown 'North and South, bar. Of Moyashel
and Magheradernon, Co. West.; called Ballybranach in the 16th century
and Ballenebrannagh in the Inquisition of James I. (No. 4); so called
from Welsh settlers
Baile na Laitheach, v. Laitheach Mhor.
Baile Orluidhe, in Magh Feimhion, and somewhere near Clonmel;
townlands called Ballygorley North and South are in par. of Kilcormick,
Co. Wexford.
Ballot, Scottish family name.
Baine, da. of Scal Balbh, and w. of Tuathal Teachtmhar.
Bairrfhionn, seven saints of the name.
Bairrfhionn, St., al. Fionnbharr, of Corcach (Cork).
Baiscionn, sl. in bt. of Sliabh Cailge, anno 3790 Fm.
Baiscnigh, tribe from Leim Chon gCulainn, dss. of Conaire, s. of Mogh
Lamha
Balbha, a maiden who came to Ire. with Ceasair before the Deluge
Ballaghawry, in Co. Cork, v. Bealach Feabhradh.
Baltinglas, al. Bealach, abbey of, built by Diarmaid Mac Murchadha,
anno 1151; v. Bealach.
Banbha, wife of Mac Cuill, chief of the T. D. D., from whom Ire. was
called Banbha.
Banbha, according to the Book of Drom Sneachta, the first maiden who
occupied Ire. before the Deluge and from whom it is called Banbha
Banbha, (now often Banba), name of Ireland, supposed to be derived
from Banbha, w. of Mac Cuill (q.v.); said by the Book of Drom Sneachta
to be derived from the name of the first maiden who occupied Ire.
before the Deluge who was called Banbha.
Banchainteach, 'censorious woman '; Leabharcham a b. to Conchubhar, s.
of Neasa; Bolgbhain Breathnach, m. of Corc, a b..
Banchomhorba, successor to an abbess and foundress of a convent.
Bangor, an abbey in Flintshire, some fifteen miles from Chester,.
on its site now stands village of Bangor on Dee
Bangor, Co. Down, v. Beannchair.
Banna, r. Bann, flowing into the sea below Coleraine between Li and
Eille; v. Li and Eille.
Bannow Harbour, Co. Wex., v. Cuan an Bhainbh.
Baodan, f. of Fiachaidh, identical with B., f. of Fiachna (q.v).
Baodan, s. of Muircheartach Mac Earca, jk. Ire. three years
Baodan, s. of Ninnidh, k. Ire. one year, d. anno 586 Au.
Baoiscne (genitive case), Fionn Ua B.; v. Clanna Baoiscne, and Fionn,
s. of Cumhall.
Baoithin, four saints of the name, III. 108.
Baoithin, ab. of Beannchair, d. anno 665 Fm.
Baoithin, s. of Alladh, St.
Baoithin, s. of Breanainn, St., of the Cineal Conaill, disciple and
cousin of Columcille.
Baoithin, s. of Cuanaidh, St.
Baoithin, s. of Fionnach, St..
Baoth, one of the five ss. of Diothorba, outwitted by Macha Mhongruadh
Barclai, Seon, John Barclay, (1582-1621), Scottish satirist and Latin
poet.
Barclay, Scottish family name.
Barclay, John, v. Barclai, Seon.
Bards, (eigse) equated to poetae (filidhe) by Camden; v. filé.
Baronius, Cardinal (1538-1607), author of "Annales Ecclesiastici
Barragh, v. Oilean Mor An Bharraigh.
Barraigh, the Barrys, come with the Normans to Ire.
Barrann, a maiden who came to Ire. with Ceasair.
Barrow, r., v. Bearbha.
Barrow Peninsula, in Tralee Bay, v. Ceann Beara.
Bartolinus, Bartholinus, Hanmer refers to Partholon as.
Bathach, s. of Iobath, ds. of Neimheadh.
Bathadh, identical with Bathach (q.v).
Beabhal, merchant of Partholon.
Beabhua, s. of Sceldwa, an. of Aelfred.
Beacan, bp. of Finne.
Beacan, St., contemporary of Diarmaid (s. of Fearghus Ceirrbheoil),
lived at Cill Bheacain (Kilpeacon) on north side of Sliabh gCrot in
Muscruidhe Chuirc
Beada; v. Beda.
Beag, s. of Aodhan, of the race of Eibhear.
Beag, s. of De, saint and seer, d. anno 557 Fm., 553 or 558 Au., 550
Annals of Clonmacnoise).
Beag An Bun, now Baginbun, a headland at the lower extremity of the
entrance to Bannow Bay, Co. Wexford; at Cuan an Bhainbh on the south
coast of the county of Loch Garman, the place where Robert FitzStephen
landed.
Beal Dathi, v. Bealach Dathi.
Bealach, abbey of, al. Baltinglas, q.v.
Bealach Carcrach, a limit of the see of Leithghlinn; this Bealach has
not been identified.
Bealach Chonglais, one of the three bealachs of Ire. from the Boyne to
B. C. was counted the third part of Ire, McF. 39; a limit of various
divisions of Ire.; it was near Cork city.
Bealach Dathi, Ballaghanea in par. of Lurgan, Co. Cav. (so generally,
but v. Onom. which suggests bar. of Farbil, Co. West.); incorrectly
Beal Dathi in text.
Bealach Duin Bolg, at Rathbran chapel in par. of Baltinglas (Onom.); v.
Lec. 612.
Bealach Feabhradh, Ballaghawry (or Ballagharea) in par. of Kilbolane,
in bar. of Orhhraidhe and Coillmhor, Co. Cork. (C. E. II. 788); a
limit of see of Luimneach
Bealach Gabhrain, Gowran Pass, a road leading from Leinster into
Osruighe, over the r. Barrow, passing into Gowran, Co. Kilk.
Bealach Leachta, between Loch Longa north-west of Glenworth, Co. Cork,
and Ardpatrick in bar. of Coshlea, Co. Lim. (C. G.); bt. at, in which
Brian Boraimhe def. Maolmuaidh, k. of Ui nEachach, anno 976 Fm.
Bealach Mor Osruighe, al. Slighe Dhala, road from Urmhumha to Tara
passing by the castle of Bealach Mor in Queen's Co. v. Slighe Dhala.
Bealach Mughna, Battle of, an historic tract; this appears to be the
tract on the bt. published in "Three Fragments of Annals," ed.
O'Donovan.
Bealach Mughna, now Beallaghmoon, 21/2 m. north of Carlow town, Co.
Kild.; so generally, but as Onom. points out, Bb. Ll. Lec. and even K.
place it in Magh Ailbhi in Ui Drona, Moyalvy in Idrone, which is some
nine miles farther south; a boundary of the see of Leithghlinn
Bealach na Luchaide, v. Luchad.
Bealchu, of Breithfne, a Connaught champion, sl. by his sons in
mistake for Conall Cearnach.
Beallaghmoon, Co. Kild., v. Bealach Mughna.
Bealltaine, ancient Irish festival used as a date, generally equated
with the first of May.
Beann Eadair, Howth Hill, Co. Dublin.
Beann Foibhne, Benyevenagh, a mountain 1260 feet high on East of Lough
Foyle (Reeves); a limit of the sees of Ard Sratha.
and Cuinnire
Beanna, s. of Conchubhar (s. of Neasa)
Beanna Boirche, 'Peaks of Boirche', Mourne Mts. in Co. Down; name
still applied to that part of the Mourne chain in which the river Bann
has its source (Fm. IV. 1204).
Beannchair, now Bangor on the South of Belfast Lough.
Beanntraighe, place so named from Beanna, s. of Conchubhar, s. of
Neasa, prob. Beantraighe tire Eachach in Crich hUa nAongusa, (Lec. 255,
453).
Beara, da. of Eibhear Mor (k. of Castile), w. of Eoghan Mor.
Bearbha, the r. Barrow, which rises in Slieve Bloom in Queen's Co. and
uniting with the Suir and Nore flows into Waterford Harbour.
Bearchan of the Prophecy, foretold an invasion of Ire. by Gentiles; v.
also Mobhi.
Bearla, 'dialect' or 'language', Feinius bids Gaedheal to regulate the
Irish Language into its five divisions, Bearla na Feine, Bearla na
bhFileadh, Bearla an Eadarscartha, Bearla Teibhidhe, Gnaithbhearla.
Bearla (al. Beurla), the English language
Bearla an Eadarscartha, the separative language or dialect, a division
of Irish v. Bearla.
Bearla na bhFileadh, the poetic dialect or language, a division of
Irish; v. Bearla.
Bearla na Feine, the language or dialect of law, a division of Irish,
v. Bearla.
Bearla Teibhidhe, the abstractive language or dialect, a division of
Irish, v. Bearla.
Bearnan Eile, Devil's Bit mountain, near Templemore, Co. Tip.; a
boundary in the sub-division of Munster.
Bearnard, Bernard, St., (1090-1153)
Bearnard Muiris, of Luimneach, sl. in bt. of Sulchoid
Bearnghal, s. of Geidhe Ollghothach, k. Ire. 12 years
Bearn tri gCarbad, south of Limerick, between Cam Fearadhaigh and
Sliabh Cain (Sliabh Riabhach, or Sliabh Reagh near Kilfin church on
the borders of Co. Limerick); at Cam Fearadhaigh (q.v).
Bearta, da. of Goirtniad (k. of Britain), and w. of Feig (k. M.)
Becanus, probably Joannes Goropius Becanus whose "opera hactenus in
lucem non edita nempe Hermathena, Hieroglyphica, Vertumnus, Gallica,
Francica, Hispanica," etc., were published at Antwerp in 1580; cf.
Gallicorum Liber II. p. 42 where he treats of the derivation of Gallia,
from. Gal. 'altam vehementemque vocem'; he is also the author of
Origines Antwerpianae in nine books, but I have not been able to find
in either the passage referred to by K.; (Buchanan in Trans.); v.
Epiphanius.
Bectif, al. de Beatitudine, Bective, Co. Meath; abbey of, built by dss.
of Maoilseachlainn (k. of Meath), anno 1151.
Bective, Co. Meath, v. Bectif.
Beda, Bede. (672 or 673--735), author of "Historia Ecclesiastica
Gentis Anglorum," referred to by K. as 'Stair Eaglaise na Sacsan,'
'Stair na Sasan,'
Bedach, one of the five ss. of Diothorba, outwitted by Macha
Mhongruadh, II, 152, 154.
Bede, v. Beda.
Beggery Island, in Wexford Harbour; v. Beigeire.
Bedug, s. of Japhet, an. of Aelfred.
Beibhionn, da. of Archaidh, k. of West Connaught, and m. of Brian
Boraimhe.
Beibhionn, da. of Turgesius, and sister of Sitric, proposed as a w.
for Ceallachan of Cashel.
Beigeire (al. Beigeirinn), 'little Ireland,' Beggery Island in Wexford
Harbour; a limit of sees of Gleann da Loch and Fearna
Beigreo, s. of Cairbre Caitcheann, of the T. D. D.
Bell (properly Bel in nom.), a god worshipped in Ire.; honoured at
Uisneach, at Bealltaine.
Beil (properly Bel in nom.), s. of Nemroth (Nimrod), and f. of Nion
(monarch of the world).
Beilin, f. of Gorguntius (k. of Britain).
Beinen, Latinised Benignus. s. of Seiscnen, St., primate of Ire.,
author of the Book of Rights; one of the nine chosen to purify the
Seanchus Mor; d. anno 467 Fm., 468 Au.; the Book of Rights that now
exists cannot have been written by Beinen; v. L. C. Introduction, II.
-- XI.
Beinia, da. of Criomhthann, and m. of Eochaidh Feidhlioch (k. Ire.)
Beinne Briot, s. of k. of Britain
Bel, a god; v. Beil.
Bel, s. of Nemroth; v. Beil.
Beld, s. of Uoden, an. of Aelfred.
Belfast Lough, v. Loch Laogh.
Bellarminus, Robert Bellarmine, Cardinal, (1542-4621); the work of
Bellarmine that K. has chiefly in view is entitled "De Scriptoribus
Ecclesiasticis... cum Chronologia"; from it he has taken his
Synchronisms
Beltra Strand, Co. Sligo, v. Traigh Eothuile.
Benignus, al. Beinen, comhorba of Patrick, d. in reign of Oilill.
Molt; v. Beinen.
Benyevenagh, v. Beann Foibhne.
Beoaidh, f. of Ciaran mac an tSaoir.
Beoan, s. of Starn.
Beodhaman, s. of Eibhear Scot.
Beothach, s. of Iarbhoineol, warrior of the race of Neimheadh
Beotia, a district in ancient Greece.
Berthus, leader of a British host who pl. Ire., anno 684
Beuchuill, female chief of the T. D. D., I. 214, 218.
Beurla, Bearla, the English Language; v. Bearla.
Bevis of Hamton, name of an English metrical romance, the oldest
extant version being about early 13th century; Bevis is s. of Guy,
Count of Hamton (Southampton).
Bile, s. of Breoghan, and f. of Milidh of Spain (al. called Galamh.
or Golamh)
Bile, s. of Brighe, s. of Breoghan, came to Ire. with the sons of
Milidh.
Bile Teineadh, 'Fire Tree,' in Cuil Breagh; Coill a' Bhile (Irish),
Billywood (English), in par. of Moynalty, bar. of Lower Kells, Co.
Meath.
Biobhal, one of Partholon's two merchants.
Bior, an ancient name of r. Foyle, near Lifford, Co. Don., C. E. II.
785; the river of this name (Bir) which St. Colman Elo and St.
Columcille passed is generally identified with Moyola Water which
flows into Lough Neagh on the north west; a limit of the see of Ard
Macha: from B. to Abhann Mhor (Northern Blackwater)
Biorar (al. Biorra), g., Biorair, now Birr, King's Co.; v. Biorra.
Biorra, Birr or Parsonstown, King's Co.; a limit of Meath,
Bioscain, Biscay, a maritime province of Northern Spain whose northern
boundary is the Bay of Biscay; it is one of the Basque provinces, and
is often used loosely for Basque
Bioth, s. of Noe, f. of Ceasair, comes to Ire. with Ceasair
Bioth, f. of Adhna, of the race of Nion (s. of Bel)
Biothlann, Belan, about four miles to east of Athy, Fm. II. 705;.
Biradus, s. of Guineth, a prince of Wales, in time of Henry II., whose
mother was an Irishwoman; what Hanmer whom K. purports to follow here
says is "In the time of Henry the second Biryd the sonne of Owen
Gwyneth Prince of Wales being Lord of Cloghran in Ireland begat his
sonne Howel upon an Irishwoman." This is not the same as K.'s
statement.
Birr, King's Co., v. Biorar and Biorra.
Biscay, v. Bioscain.
Bisey, Scottish family name.
Black Lough, Co. Meath, v. Dubhloch Arda Ciannachta.
Black River, v. Duff.
Black Sea, v. Mare Euxinum, and Muir Phontic.
Blackwater, r., tributary of Shannon, v. Dubhabhainn.
Blackwater, r., in North of Ire., v. Abhann Mhor.
Blackwater, r., in South of Ire., v. Abhann Mhor.
Bladh, s. of Breoghan comes to Ire. with ss. of Milidh
Bladhma, Slieve Bloom, Co. Tipp., on borders of King's Co. and Queen's
Co.; 'from B. to the sea,' a description of the kingdom of Osruighe; v.
Sliabh Bladhma.
Blanaid, da. of the lord of Manainn
Blathacht, s. of Labhraidh Lorc.
Blathchuire, s. of Iomhar, k. of Normandy, d., III. 238; [Blacaire (al.
Blacar, and Blacair), s. of Goithfriadh, s. of Iomhar, chief of the
Norsemen, d. anno 948; v. Fm., Au.; also C. G., the two seem
identical].
Blathmhac, s. of Aodh Slaine, jk. Ire. seven years.
Bleithin ap Conan, a Welsh prince who took refuge in Ire., anno 1087
Bloinnsinigh, the Blanches, who came to Ire. at the beginning of the
Norman Invasion.
Boemus, Joannes; v. Bohemus.
Boetia, in the north of Europe, once inhabited by the T. D. D.
according to some.
Boetius, Roman Consul; the Britons solicit aid from against the Scots
and Picts.
Boetius, Boece, Hector, (1465-1536), one of the founders of the
University of Aberdeen, published in 1527 "Scottorum Historiae" which
is the work K. refers to
Boghaine, bar. of Banagh in the south west of Co. Don. (M. R.156)
Bohemus, al. Boemus, Joannes, John Boehme, an author who wrote a book
on the customs and manners of all nations; the book is entitled
"Omnium gentium mores leges et ritus 3 libb."; it was first published
anno 1520; there is a Friburg edition, dated 1536.
Boinn, r. Boyne, flows into the Irish Sea about 4 miles below Drogheda.
Bolgbhain Breathnach, a "censorious woman," m. of Corc.
Bollsaire, or mareschal of the house, had duties at the banquet halls
of Tara.
Bolum, Humfrie, Humphrey Bolum, left at Port Lairge, with a garrison,
by Henry II.
Booeotia, Boeotia, a district of Central Greece between the Strait of
Euboea and the Corinthian Gulf; in the district called Achaia
Boraimhe (used by K. in genitive case, nom. Borumha, smt. Boraimhe,
masculine), now Beal Borumha, earthen fort on bank of r. Shannon one
mile North of Killaloe; from this fort Brian Boraimhe (Brian Boru) is
named; v. a paper by Westropp, Proceedings R.I.A., Volume XXIX.,
Section C., p. 186, entitled, "Types of the ring-forts remaining in
eastern Clare (Killaloe its Royal Forts and their history). ".
Boraimhe, a tribute imposed on Leinster; v. Boraimhe Laighean.
Boraimhe Laighean, al. Boraimhe, a tribute imposed on Leinster by
Tuathal Teachtmhar (k. Ire.) to avenge the death of his two daughters,
Fithir and Dairine, and usually referred to as the Boromean Tribute.
Boraimhe Laighean, an Irish tract in the Book of Leinster, giving the
history of the Boraimhe tribute; edited by Stokes in Rev. Celtique
XIII., and by O'Grady in Silva Gadelica.
Borbchas, one of the five ss. of Diothorba, outwitted by Macha
Mhongruadh.
Bothar na Mias, 'the Road of the Dishes,' Bohernameece, in tl. of
Keelhilly, par. of Carran, 5 miles south west of Kinvara; the name 
given to the five miles' path that lies between Durlus Guaire, (q. v.)
and the well a little to south west of Buireann.
Boyne, r., v. Boinn.
Boyne, r., Estuary of; v. Innbhear Colpa.
Boys, now Boyce, Scottish family name.
Bran, f. of Maolmuaidh (k. of Ui nEachach).
Bran, f. of Muireadhach (half k. of L).
Bran, f. of Murchadh (k. L).
Bran, s. of Faolan, made k. L. by Niall Caille (k. Ire.) anno 834 Fm.;
d anno 837, Fm.
Bran Beag, s. of Murchadh, half k. of L., sl. in bt. of Ath Seannaigh
anno 733 Fm.
Bran Muit, a warrior from whom the Branaigh (the O Byrnes) derive
their name.
Branaigh, the O Byrnes, mentioned by Spenser as of foreign origin; the
tribe have St. Caoimhghin of Gleann da Loch as patron; family sprung
from Labhraidh Loingseach.
Brandubh, s. of Eochaidh, story of his becoming k. of L. the Brandubh
who was k. of L. was not. a son of Eochaidh, k. of L. one year; death
of, anno 601 Fm.
Bras, one of the five sons of Diothorba, outwitted by Macha Mhongruadh.
Brath, Doom, Last Day.
Bratha, s. of Deaghatha (Deaghaidh in Trans.), eighth in descent from
Eibhear Gluinfhionn.
Bratha, s. of Deaghfhatha, and f. of Midhe (rom whom Midhe, Meath, is
named; nom. Brath in Trans.
Bratha, s. of Labhraidh, ds. of Ollamh Fodla.
Breagh v. Breagha (Bregia) Breaghmhagh and Magh Breagh.
Breagha, nom. pl., gpl. Breagh, it has no sing. form, cf., Connachta,
Ulaidh, etc. (sometimes rendered Breagh in Trans.); a plain (and its
people) in.East Meath, Latinised Bregia, and extending, according to
Mageoghegan (Annals of Clon. anno 778), from Dublin to Bealach Breck,
west of Kells, and from the Hill of Howth to Sliabh Fuaid; the ancient
limits of the plain are not exactly defined; it contained Ath Truim
(Trim) and Eadar (Howth); Ath Cliath (Dublin) was outside of but close.
to it. It seems to have reached as far as the Boyne and Cassan, i.e.,
Annagassan to the south-east of Castlebellingham. It is often called
Breaghmhagh and Magh Breagh; Breagha also means the people of Breagha
or Bregia.
Breagha, s. of Breoghan, (Breogha); comes to Ire. with sons of Milidh.
Breagha, s. of Seanbhoth, first established single combat in Ire.
Breaghmhagh, plain of Breagha, identical with Breagha (Bregia) v.
Breagha (Bregia).
Breakespeare, Nicholas, an Englishman, becomes Pope Adrian IV.
Breanainn, Brendan, St., of Biorra, d. aged 180, anno 571 Fm.
Breanainn, Brendan, St., of Cluain Fearta, of the race of Ciar (s. of
Fearghus)
Breanainn, f. of St. Baoithin.
Breanainn Dall, "B. the Blind", f. of Eithne (w. of Aodh Slaine)
Breantracht Mhaighe Iotha, a plain in Magh Iotha (q.v.) through which
r. Finn flows (Irish Nennius, 240).
Breas, one of the three sons of Tighearnbhard (s. of Brigh), came to
Ire. with the sons of Milidh.
Breasal, s. of Aonghus, an. of Cormac, s. of Cuileannan.
Breasal, s. of Diarmaid (k. Ire.), put to death by his father and
restored to life by St. Beacan.
Breasal, s. of Fearb, k. U., sl. at Magh Cru, by the Athachthuaith.
Breasal, s. of Siorchaidh, an. of Eochaidh Gunnat, k. Ire.
Breasal Bealach, s. of Fiachaidh Aiceadha, s. of Cathaoir Mor
Breasal Boidhiobhadh, s. of Rudhruighe, k. Ire. eleven years; sl. by
Lughaidh Luaighne, anno 5001 Fm.
Breasal Borr, Breasal, s. of Dian, an. of St. Brighid of Cill Dara,
Breasal Breac, 'B. the Speckled,' s. of Aonghus Gaileann
Breasal Breac, s. of Fiachaidh Foibhric, an. (in the fourteenth
generation) of Cathaoir Mor, k. L.
Breasal Breoghaman, s. of Aonghus Ollamh, ds. of Ughaine Mor
Breasal Einiochghlas, s., having issue, of Cathaoir Mor
Breasal Ua Treasaigh, v. Ua Treasaigh.
Breatain, npl., Britons; dpl. Breatanaibh,
Breatain (n. an Bhreatain; g. na Breatan or na Breataine; also npl.
Breatain dpl. Breatanaibh), Britain, used in K. as 1° equivalent to
Wales, 2° Roman Britain or Britain excluding Alba or the land of the
Scots and Picts, 3° the island of Great Britain, 4° with Mhor added,
Breatain Mhor being the island of Great Britain, but smt. vaguely
equivalent to the southern part

1° Breatain means Wales. The portion of Great Britain now called
Breatain (Wales) was formerly called Cambria;

2° Breatain excludes Alba or the land of the Scots and Picts, but in
some instances is vaguely used.

3° Breatain means the entire island of Great Britain though the word
Mhor is not expressed.

4° Breatain Mhor (Great Britain) is expressly named, though in some
instances the term is vaguely used for the southern part of the Island.
Breatain Bheag, 'Little Britain,' name for Armorica (q.v.), identical
with Breatain na Fraingce (q.v).
Breatain Mhor, v. under Breatain.
Breatain na Fraingce, 'French Britain,' Brittany al. Armorica, the
peninsula of France between the English Channel and the Atlantic Ocean
Breathnach, an, the Welshman; a Briton
Breathnach, a., 1° Welsh: 2° British.
Breathnaigh, the Walshes, a family who came to Ire. at the time of the
Norman Invasion.
Breathnaigh, npl.; gpl. Breathnach, dpl. Breathnachaibh, 1° Welsh: 2°
Britons generally
Breathnais, the Welsh language.
Brefny, v. Breithfne.
Brefny O Reilly, v. Breithfne Ui Raghallaigh.
Brefny O Rourke, v. Breithfne Ui Ruairc.
Bregia, v. Breagha, Mag Breagh and Breaghmhagh.
Brehon Laws, legal system of Ire.
Breisrigh, s. of Art Imleach, k. Ire. 9 years.
Breitheamhnas Tuaithe, books of, full of the customs, etc., enacted at
Feis of Tara; laws, etc. made by Cormac, s. of Art.
Breithfne, Brefny, the counties of Leitrim and Cavan, or the see of
Kilmore
Breithfne Ui Raghallaigh, Brefny O'Reilly, or East Brefny, comprises
all Co. Cavan except bar. of Tullyhunco and bar. of Tullyhaw, H. F.,
73.
Breithfne Ui Ruairc, Brefny O Ruairc or West Brefny, now roughly Co.
Leitrim.
Brendan, St., v. Breanainn.
Breogan; v. Breoghan.
Breogha, v. Breagha, s. of Breoghan.
Breoghan, s. of Bratha, an. of Milidh of Spain.
Breoghan, bt. of in Freamhainn, where Fulman and Manntan, Picts, were
sl. by Eireamhon (for Freamhainn Fm. and older MSS. generally gives
Feimhin in this connection).
Brian, one of the two guardians of k. of Ire., sl. by Greaghoir (k. of
Alba).
Brian, s. of Dealbhaoth, a god of the T. D. D.
Brian, s. of Eochaidh Mogh.
Brian, s. of Eochaidh Muighmheadhoin
Brian, s. of Faolan, k. of Laoighis.
Brian, s. of Maolmordha, k. L., treacherously blinded by Sitric in
reign of Maoilseachlainn, s. of Domhnall.
Brian Boraimhe (Brian Boru), s. of Cinneide, k. Ire. 12 years
Brian Boru, v. Brian Boraimhe.
Bridhe, female author.
Brigansia, near Corunna, built by Breoghan.
Brigantes, a people of Northern Britain, whose territory included most
of Yorkshire, the whole of Lancashire, Durham, Westmorland, Cumberland,
and part of Northumberland; said to be named from Breoghan (called
Brigus)
Brigh, da. of Orca Mac Eire, and m. of Aodh Uairiodhnach (k. Ire.)
Brighe, da. of Orca (s. of Carthann), and m. of Aodh Ollan
Brighe, s. of Breoghan, II. 82, 86.
Brighid, da. of Cobhthach (a Lagenian), w. of Ainmire and m. of Aodh,
s. of Ainmire.
Brighid, St. of Inis Brighde.
Brighid, St., da. of Aodh.
Brighid, St., da. of Colla.
Brighid, St., da. of Damhar.
Brighid, St., da. of Dioma.
Brighid, da. of Dubhthach Donn (s. of Dreimhne), St., of Cill Dara.
Brighid, St., da. of Eachtar Ard.
Brighid, St., da. of Eanna.
Brighid, St., da. of Fiadhnat.
Brighid, St., da. of Luinge.
Brighid, St., da. of Moman.
Brighid, St., da. of Mianach.
Brighid, St., of Seanbhoth.
Brighit, poetess of the T. D. D..
Brigia, name given formerly to Castile in Spain, from Breoghan or
Brigus.
Brigus, a name by which Breoghan was called.
Briotan, s. of Fearghus Leithdhearg, of the race of Neimheadh, al.
Briotan Maol, Great Britain called Britannia from; an. of the Britons;
Gaelic or Scoitbhearla the language of, and of the descendants of.
Briotan Maol, v. Briotan.
Briottainis, British (or Welsh) language; v. Breathnais.
Brisleach Mhuighe Muirtheimhne, 'the Rout of Magh Muirtheimhne', an
Irish tract; published in the Gaelic Journal,.
XI. and XVII.
Bristoe, Bristol (older names Brigstow, Briston, Bristow, Bristole) in
England.
Bristol, v. Bristoe.
Britain, v. Breatain.
Britannia Camdeni, a Latin historical work on the British Islands by
William Camden, first published in the year 1586.
British (or Welsh) language, v. Briottainis and Breathnais.
Britons, v. Breathnaigh.
Brittany, v. Breatain na Fraingce and Breatain Bheag.
Broin Bhearg, name of a dwelling in Eamhain.
Brond, s. of Beld, an. of Aelfred.
Brosna, or Brosnach (g. Brosnaighe), the nine r. Brosnas of Eile burst
forth in time of Eireamhnon,; There are only two rivers of this name
at present, the other seven were probably only small tributary streams
to these, Fm. I. 31.
Brosnach, near r. Brosna, in Meath, which flows into Shannon Harbour
Browns, the, v. Brunaigh.
Bruadar, leader of the Lochlonnaigh; sl. at Cluain Tarbh.
Bru Bhriodain, a pass between two plains in Ui Failghe, in the
district of Gesill (Geashill).
Bruce, v. Brus.
Brugh (an Brugh) al. Brugh na Boinne, an Brugh os Boinn, Brugh Mic-an-
Oig, a place on the river Boyne near Stackallen Bridge, Co. Meath, Fm.
22; name seems to have lingered till recently in Bro Park, Bro Mill,
Bro Cottage, near Newgrange (O Laverty in K. A. XX. 430); it is
identical with Brugh-Mic-an-Oig, as appears from B. Hy. 145 a.l. and
other ancient documents; one of the two chief burying places of kings
of Pagan Ire.
Brughaidh, 'farmer'
Brugh-Mic-an-Oig, at Crionna Chinn Chomair, same as Brugh na Boinne, v.
Brugh.
Brugh na Boinne, v. Brugh.
Brugh os Boinn, v. Brugh and Brugh-Mic-an-Oig.
Bruid na Babioloin, the Babylonian Captivity.
Bruighean Chaorthainn, Irish romance; ed. Pearse
Bruighean da Bhearg, near Bothernabreeney, Co. Dublin; the Dodder
flowed through it, Lu. 97 b, etc; Brwyn al. Bohyrnybrynee near
Glashymoky (Morrin's Patent Rolls, anno 1542, p. 90)
Bruighean da Choga, now, in Irish, Bruighean Mhor and Anglicised
Breenmore or Brinemore, in tl. of Breenmore, in bar. of Kilkenny West,
Co. Westm., Fm. IV. 822.
Bruinne, a satirist of the T. D. D., I. 218.
Brunaigh, the Browns; came to Ire. at the Norman Invasion.
Bruree, Co. Limer., v. Fochair Maigh and Dun Eochair Mhaighe.
Brus, Pilib de, left to guard Loch Garman by Henry I.
Brus, Bruce, Scottish family name.
Brutania, what Britain would be called if it got its name from Brutus.
Brutia, name of Britain if derived from Brutus, according to Daniel
Brutus, s. of Silvias (supposed to have invaded Britain in early
times).
Buadhachan, f. of Ceallachan Caisil.
Buaidhne, one of the three ss. of Tighearnbhard (s. of Brighe), came 
in the army of the sons of Milidh to Ire.
Buan, a chief of the Athachthuaith.
Buan, w. of Bile, drowned at Teach Duinn.
Buas, a r. which K. places between Dal nAruidhe and Dal Riada, or the
Ruta, which some identify as the r. Bush, Co. Antrim, Onom. however
quotes; is i cric hhUa Fidgeinte O Bhruig Righ Co Buais, which would
go to show that there were two rivers of the name; one of the nine rr.
Partholon found in Ire.
Buas, s. of Tighearnbhard, one of the leaders of the sons of Milidh
when coming to Ire.
Buchananus, George Buchanan (1506-1582), a Scottish historian, etc.,
author of "Rerum Scoticarum Historia," published the year of his death,
1582.
Buicead, a Leinster farmer.
Buidhe Conaill, a plague, Diarmaid Ruanuidh and Blathmhac, jkk. Ire.,
d. of, anno 664, Fm. and Bede. This plague, which is named 'flava
icteritia' is mentioned by Bede in his Ecclesiastical History, who
states that it depopulated the southern coasts of Britain and
afterwards ravaged the district of Northumbria; he adds that its
devastations were no less severe in Ire., where many of the Anglo
Saxons of the higher as well as of the lower ranks were at the time
engaged in study or leading monastic lives (Hist. Eccl. Lib. II., cap.
27).
Buill (a dat. form, the older nom. is Buall; the word stands both for
the town and river of Boyle), Boyle, Co. Roscom., abbey of built anno.
1151, II. 354.
Builtcaraigh, the Butlers, came to Ire. at the Norman Invasion.
Buireann, Burren, prob. in U.
Buireann (means a large rock, also a stony wild desert, smt. applied
to a hill as in Fanad, Co. Donegal), Burren in Co. Clare; a limit of
the see of Cluain Fearta; a well to the south-west of, five miles from
Durlas Guaire (q.v).
Bulgaden, Co. Limer., v. Sliabh Bealgadain.
Bun Innbheir Cholpa, al. Droichead Atha, Drogheda; a name for Cumar na
dTri nUisce (q.v).
Burcaigh, the Burkes, came to Ire. at the Norman Invasion.
Burgage Moat on the Barrow, v. Dionn Riogh.
Burkes, the, v. Burcaigh.
Burren, in Co. Clare, v. Buireann.
Butlers, the, v. Builtearaigh.

C.
Cacht, da. of k. of Fionnghall, and w. of Baodan, k. Ire.
Cadualin (Ceadwallan), a Welsh king, banished to Ire. by Edwin, s. of
Athelfred, anno 625 (according to Hanmer)
Caesarius, of Heisterbach (c. 1170 -- c. 1240) a Cistercian monk,
author of "Dialogus magnus visionum atque miraculorum, Libri XII.,"
which is the work to which K. refers, but he is mistaken as to the
date (v. I. 378) of Caesarius apparently confounding him with
Caesarius of Arles (c. 470-543).
Caetua, Caetwa, s. of Beabhua, an. of Aelfred.
Cahir, Co. Tipp., v. Dun Iascaigh and Dun Iasc.
Caicher, a druid, s. of Eibhear, s. of Tat.
Caicher, s. of Manntan, a leader in the expedition of the sons of
Milidh to Ire.
Caicher, s. of Namha, of the T. D. D.
Cailchin, f. of Cuanna (k. of Fearmaighe).
Cailitin, sons of, sl. Cuchulainn.
Cailleach Dhe, m. of Muircheartach O Briain (ok. Ire.)
Cáimín, St. of Inis Cealltrach; of the race of Fiachaidh Aiceadha (s.
of Cathaoir Mor)
Cainan, s. of Enos.
Cainneach, Cannice, St., of Achadh Bo, d. anno 598, Fm., 599 or 600,
Au)
Cainneach, f. of Eimhin
Cainneall, k. of Sacsa, f. of Aine (w. of Breasal, k. U).
Caintearbuiridh, Canterbuiridh, v. Canterburie.
Cairbre, the three C's., ss. of Conaire, s. of Mogh Lamha, i.e.
Cairbre Rioghfhada, Cairbre Baschaoin, and Cairbre Muse.
Cairbre, ns.; npl. Cairbreacha, the barr. of Carbery in Munster.
Cairbre, f. of Colman Mor (k. L).
Cairbre, k. M., an. of Donnchadh, s. of Caomh, k. of the two
Fearmaighes.
Cairbre, s. of Niall Naoighiallach, def. Leinstermen in bt. of
Sleamhain Mhidhe (anno 492 Fm.
Cairbre, s. of Ollamh Fodla.
Cairbre Ard, 'C. the Tall' s. of Brian, s. of Eochaidh Muighmheadhoin,
an. of St. Fionnbharr.
Cairbre Baschaoin, one of the three Cairbres, ss. of Conaire, s. of.
Mogh Lamha; C. A. gives C. Báschain,. 'C. of the gentle death,' as he
died on his pillow, that is, a natural death.
Cairbre Caitcheann, 'C. Cathead,' a. of Tabharn, of the T. D. D.
Cairbre Chinn Chuit, al. Cairbre Caitcheann, 'Carbery Cat-head,'  s.
of Dubh thacht, k. Ire., five years, d. of the plague, anno 14, Fm.;
This king who was of course an usurper should be made to succeed
Criomhthann Nia Nar; v. Lynch's remarks on this subject, quoted in Fm.
I. 96, 97.
Cairbre Cluithiochair, s. of Cuchorb, an. of O Duibhidhir;
'Cluithiochair that is from Cluithre Cliach,' C.A.
Cairbre Crom, s. of Griomhthann Seirb, k. M. three years.
Cairbre Crom, s. of Ealcmhar, of the T.D.D.
Cairbre Cromcheann, 'C. Benthead,' s. of Daire Dornmhar.
Cairbre Cruithneach, 'C. the Pict,' s. of Corc, an. of the Eoghanacht
of Magh Geirrghinn in Alba (C. Cruithneachan).
Cairbre Cruithneachan, v. Cairbre Cruithneach.
Cairbre Fionnmhor, s. of Conaire Mor.
Cairbre Gailin, one of the five great champions of Ire. in his time.
Cairbre Lithfeachair, 'C. of the Liffey,' s. of Cormac, s. of Art, k.
Ire. 27 years.
Cairbre Lusc, ('C. the Lame,' C.A.), f. of Duach Dallta Deaghaidh (k.
Ire.)
Cairbre Musc, one of the three Cairbres, ss. of Conaire, s. of Mogh
Lamha.
Cairbre Nia, 'C. the Champion,' s. of Cormac, an. of St. Brighid of
Cill Dara
Cairbre Nia Fear, k. L.
Cairbre Riada, al. C. Rioghfhada ('C. Longarm '), one of the three
Cairbres, ss. of Conaire, s. of Mogh Lamha; from his son, Earc, are
sprung the Dal Riada of Alba, and from his son, Olchu, the Dal Riada
of Ulster.
Cairbre Rioghfhada, v. Cairbre Riada.
Cairbre Tochar, v. Tochar Cairbre.
Cairbreacha (v. Cairbre), the barr. of Carbery in Munster.
Cairche, da. of Laoghaire (s. of Niall), and w. of Cronan
Cairche, Plain of, v. Machaire Chuircne.
Caireall, abbot, with a community of seven hundred monks, obtained by
prayer, offspring for Cianog,(da. of Ciocharan) and Criachan (a
Leinster chief )
Caireall, f. of Tuan.
Caireall, s. of Muireadhach Muindearg, and f. of Deaman and Baodan (kk.
U.); d. anno 526, Fm.
Cairioll, Colla Uais, one of the three Collas; v. Colla Uais.
Cairionn Chasdubh, da. of king of Britain, and m. of Niall
Naoighiallach
Cairneach, bp., one of the purifiers of the Seanchus Mor.
Caisc, Easter
Caiseal, Cashel, Saltair (Psaltair) of, an Irish historical work, now
lost, though portions of its contents are still extant in other
compilations; v. Cormac, s. of Cuileannan.
Caiseal, Cashel, co. Tipp.; Rock of, first called Siothdhruim, al.
called Leac na gCead and Druim Fiodhbhuidhe; now (K.'s time) called
Carraig Phadraig (Patrick's Rock).
Caiseal, Cashel, Eoghanacht of, Royal residence
Caiseal, Cashel, plain of, v. Machaire Caisil.
Caiseal, Cashel, co. Tipp., the kk. of Munster were al. called Kings
of Caiseal.
Caiscal Coincheann, Cashel of Quin, 'the stone fortification of Quin,'
(bar. of Bunratty, co. Clare), belonged to Conall Eachluaith (k. Ire).
Caisin, s. of Cas, Clann Mhic Conmara (the Macnamaras) spring from him.
Caithcasach, s. of Oilill, k, of the Cruithnigh, sl. by the
Leinstermen at Raith Beitheach,anno 749 Fm., where he is called k. of
Ulster.
Callann (name seems ident. with Callonn infra) a river. There were
three rivers of the name: 1° in Co. Armagh; 2° in Co. Kilk., now
King's river; 3° in Gleann Ua Ruachtain in Co. Ker.
Callonn, r. Callan, in Armagh, tributary of the Blackwater; one of the
three black rivers of Ire.
Callruidhe, in Co. Leitrim, around Drumlease and Dromahaire, v. Onom.
under Ailmag.
Calmana, sister of Cain, born in Adam's fifteenth year
Camber, second s. of Brutus; Cambria (Wales) allotted to and named
from.
Cambrens, al. Cambrensis, Giraldus Cambrensis, Gerald de Barry, a
Welshman (c. 1146-1220), author of "Topographia Hibernica," and
"Expugnatio Hibernica"; it is the former work on which K. chiefly
animadverts.
Cambrensis, v. Cambrens.
Cambria, Wales, given to and named from Camber, s. of Brutus.
Camchluain, bt. of, in which Bran Dubh was sl.; prob. near
Templeshambo, at the foot of Mount Leinster, bar. of Scarawalsh, Co.
Wex. (Fm. I. 229).
Camden, al. Camdenus, William Camden. English antiquary and historian
(1551-4623); author of 'Britannia' (smt. rt. as Britannia Camdeni ')
published in 1586, which is the work K. animadverts on; it will be
noted that he quotes Camden generally with respect and approval.
Camdenus, v. Camden.
Campbell, v. Mac Ailin, Mac Cailin, Mac Callum.
Campianus, v. Campion.
Campion, al. Campianus, Bl. Edmund Campion (1540-1581), author of "A
Historie of Ireland written in the year 1571," which is the work on
which K. animadverts
Campus Circit, al. Capacyront, (q.v).
Canaan, s. of Cham.
Candia, al. Creta, or Crete, a large island in the Mediterranean Sea.
Cannice, St., v. Cainneach.
Canterburie, al. Canterbuiridh, Caintearbuiridh, Canterbury.
Canterbury, v. Caintearbuiridh and Canterburie.
Cantualaigh, the Cantwells, came to Ireland at the Norman Invasion.
Cantwells, the, v. Cantualaigh.
Caoi Caoinbhreathach, 'C. of Fair Judgments, 'a sage from Judea, who
presided over a school established by Feinius Farsaidh.
Caoilte, a. of Ronan, called al. Ronanus, an ancient who lived 300
years and had a colloquy with Patrick.
Caoimhfhiodh, s. of Corb, an. of St. Caoimhghin, II. 118.
Caoimhghin, Kevin, St., of Gleann da Loch (Glendalough), d. aged.
120, in reign of Suibhne Meann, k. Ire., anno 617.Fm.; patron of the
Tuathalaigh.(O'Tooles) and Branaigh (O'Byrnes)
Caoin-inis O bhFathaidh, 'the Fair Island of Ui Fathaidh,' 'Ui
Fathaidh agus O Fathaidh,' are the barr. of Iffa and Offa in Co. Tipp.,
but there were tribes of the name in Corca Laidhe, that is in the
south-western part of Co. Cork, v. Celtic Miscellany, 43, 50-59, and
Caoin-inis O bhF. is perhaps off that coast; the reading in C. G. is
Camas O Fothaidh Tire, that is 'the Bay or River bend of Ui Fothaidh
Tire'; Todd (C. G. XXXVI.) mentions a reading in K. 'Caoin-inis Uibh
Rathaigh' which would place the island on the coast of Iveragh and
this would suit context.
Caolbhach, s. of Cronn Badhraoi, k. Ire. one year.
Caomh, f. of Donnchadh (k. of the two Fearmaighes)
Caomhan, St., disciple of Patrick, first called Mac Neise
Caomhanach, Domhnall, son of Diarmaid na nGall; the Caomhanaigh,
Cavanaghs, named from.
Caomhanaigh, Cavanaghs.
Caomhlogha, f. of St. Caoimhghin.
Caondruim, al. Uisneach; Usna in Co. Westm.
Capa, s. of Gionga.
Capacyront, al. Campus Circit, name of land beside the Red Sea
Capgrave, v. Capgravius.
Capgravius, Capgrave, John (1393-1464), an Augustinian monk, author of
"Nova Legenda Angliae," or "Catalogus" of the English saints, and "The
Chronicle of England".
Cara, river, falls into the Little Brosna near Birr, Fm. II. 189; a
limit of Meath.
Caradocus, Caradog of Llancarvan (d., c. 1150), Welsh author. He wrote
a chronicle which is not extant in its original form, though some
extant chronicles are based on it; his chronicle was a continuation of
Geoffrey of Monmouth's well-known work; K.'s. reference to Caradocus.
is evidently taken from Hanmer's Chronicle, p. 18 (1809 edition).
Carcair na nGiall, 'hostage prison,' a building at Tara.
Carlow, v. Ceatharlach and Ceithearlach.
Carlus, a leader of the Lochlonnaigh.
Carn, v. Crioch Chairn.
Carn Achuidh Leithdheirg, in Fearnmhagh (bar. of Farney), Co. Mon.
Carn Ceasrach, 'the carn or mound of Ceasair '(q.v.), in Connaught
near the r. Boyle, Ll. 3; the carn on Cnoc Meadha Siuil, now Knockmaa
near Tuam in bar. of Clare, Co. Gal., O'Fl., 162.
Carn Conaill, in Aidhne (which is co-extensive with the bar. of
Kiltartan or see of Kilmacduagh, Co. Gal.), prob. the present
Ballyconnell, par. of Kilbecanty, near Gort, Fm. I. 260; bt. of anno
645 Fm.
Carn Connluain, "from Corcu Connluain I guess it to be north of Slieve
Baune, Co. Ros.," Onom.
Carn Duin Cuair, a limit of the see of Daimhliag (q.v).
Carn Fearadhaigh, on Knockainey in bar. of Small County, Co. Lim., or
in its neighbourhood; Correenfeeradda, a tl. between Knockainey and
Killballyowen, and Cahirnarry, 31/2  miles S.E. of Limerick seem to
reflect the name;
Carn Fraoich, Carnfree, Carns tl. in Ogulla par. in bar. and Co. Rosc.,
Fm. II. 221.
Carnfree, Co. Rosc., v. Cam Fraoich.
Carn Glas, Carn Glais, the mountain now called The Tops between Raphoe
and Donaghmore, Fm. IV. 832; a limit of the sees of Ard Sratha and of
Doire or Raith Both.
Carn Ui Neid, near Mizen Head, south-west of Co. Cork; a limit of the
see of Corcach.
Carolus Cnutus, s. of k. of Lochloinn, at Cluain Tarbh.
Caronia, island in the Pontic sea, visited by the dss. of Gaedheal.
Carraig, 'Rock,' a place now (K.'s time) so called, two miles outside
Wexford town (Loch Garman), Ferrycarrig.
Carraig Bladhruidhe, Cumhdach Cairrge Bladhruidhe, the stronghold of
Carraig Bladhruidhe, built by Manntan; it is in Eibhear's half; it is
placed in Murbolg by Bb. 20 a, 23 a, and Lec. 574 (Murloch Bay 15
miles E. of Dunseverick); it would seem then that it was in the part
of Ire. assigned to Eibhear, s. of Ir. and not in that of Eibhear who
was brother to Eireamhon.
Carraig Chaisil, Rock of Cashel, v. Caiseal.
Carraig Feadha, the Raith or Fort of Carraig Feadha built by Fulman in
Eibhear's half of Ire.; in Fm. Fulman builds Raith Rioghbhaird i
Muirisc, Fm. I. 28.
Carraig Fhearghusa, Carrigfergus, Co. Antrim.
Carraig Leime an Eich, 'Horse Leap Rock,' there are several places
named Leim an Eich, Horse Leap, in Ire.; O'D. suggests that the place
mentioned by K. may be Leim an Eich Ruaidh, Lemnaroy near Maghera in
Co. Derry (Fm. I. 205)
Carrick, v. Carraig.
Carraig Phadraic, 'Patrick's Rock,' a name given to Cashel (Rock of).
Carrigfergus, Co. Antrim; v. Carraig Fhearghusa.
Carrowmore Lake, Co. Mayo; v. Fionnloch Ceara.
Carrthach, Carthage, St., al. Mochuda; v. Mochuda.
Carrthach, s. of Saoirbhreathach, k. of Eoghanacht Chaisil, burned
anno 1045 Fm.
Carrthann, f. of Orca.
Carrthann, s. of Earc, an. of St. Maodhog.
Carrthann Fionn, 'C. the Fair,' s. of Blod, an. of Brian Boraimhe.
Carthage, St., v. Carrthach.
Cas, f. of Fachtna Fathach, (k. Ire.)
Cas, s. of Conall Eachluaith, an. of Clann Mhic Conmara (the
Macnamaras); an an. of Brian Boraimhe.
Cas, s. of Fachtna.
Cas, s. of Fiachaidh Aruidhe.
Cas Ceadchaingneach, s. of Ailldeargoid.
Cas Clothach, ('C. the hospitable,' C.A.; but more probably 'C. the
renowned'), f. of Muineamhon (k. Ire.)
Cas Trillseach, s. of Cas., I. 258.
Casan, r. Annagassan, Co. Louth, where the rr. Ardee, Dunleer, and
Mile Stone meet; a limit of Breagha or Bregia
Casan Brige, in Meath
Cashel, v. Caiseal and Saltair Chaisil.
Casibellanus, Cassivellanus (fl. 54 B.C.), k. of Great Britain; ruled
over a territory lying to the north and north-east of the Thames,
corresponding roughly to Hertfordshire, Buckinghamshire, and Berkshire.
He submitted to Julius Caesar after a struggle.
Casmhaoll, satirist, of the T. D. D.
Casp, sea of, the Caspian Sea, v. Muir Caisp.
Caspian Sea, v. Muir Caisp.
Castile (g. na Castile), Castile in Spain; Beara, da. of k. of, and w.
of Eoghan Mor.
Castilia, Castile in Spain, formerly called Brigia.
Castledermot, Co. Kild.; v. Disirt Diarmada and Reilig Dhiarmada.
Castleknock, Co. Dublin, v. Cnucha.
Cath Bhealaigh Mughna, 'Battle of Ballaghmoon', Irish tract, prob.
identical with the tract published in "Three Fragments of Annals,"
200-216, ed. by O'Donovan for Arch. and Celt. Soc.; K.'s account of
the battle agrees with the "Three Fragments" account very closely
Cath Crionna, 'the Battle of Crionna,' Irish tract; the Book of
Lismore and Ll. versions of this tract are published with translations
in Silva Gadelica, ed. O'Grady; there is a modern version in MS. 23 K.
27, R.I.A.
Cathair Leon, Caerleon, an ancient village of Monmouthshire, England,
3 miles north east of Newport, a fortress of Roman Britain, and named
Isca Silurum; (Cambrensis does not mention the place, but Campion
does.)
Cathal, called Ceann Geagain, k. M.
Cathal, f. of Airtre (k. M).
Cathal, f. of Artghaile.
Cathal, f. of Scannlan (k. of the Eoghanacht of Loch Lein).
Cathal, f. of Tadhg (k. C).
Cathal, s. of Aodh Caomh, an. of Brian Boraimhe.
Cathal, s. of Conchubhar, k. C. twenty years, d. at Iorrus Domhnann,
anno 1009, recte 1010, Fm.
Cathal, s. of Domhnall, s. of Dubh da Bhuireann, sl. Amhlaoibh, s. of
Sitric, and Mathghamhain, s. of Dubhghall, anno 1012 Fm.
Cathal, s. of Fiachraidh, k. of Feara Cul.
Cathal, s. of Fionghaine, k. M.; d. anno 737, Fm.
Cathal, s. of Muireadhach Muilleathan.
Cathal, s. of Ruaidhri, k. of West C., d. in penance at Ard Macha,
anno 1043, Fm.
Cathal Carrach, 'C. the Mangy ', a claimant of the kingdom of
Connaught, supported by William Aldelmel.
Cathal Croibhdhearg, 'C. Redfist,' k. C.
Cathal O Conchubhair, k. C.
Cathaoir Mor, 'C. the Great,' k. Ire. 3 years; an. of Siol mBrain
(Byrnes), Tuathalaigh (Tooles), Caomhanaigh (Cavanaghs), St. Caimin,
St. Mochua, Diarmaid Mac Murchadha; Muinntear Riain of the race of.
Cathbhadh, druid, foretold evil to Ulster on account of Deirdre.
Cathbhadh, f. of Geanann.
Cathbhadh, s. of Giallchaidh Fionn.
Cathluan, s. of Gud, leader of the Cruithnigh or Picts.
Cath Maighe Muchruimhe, 'Battle of Magh Muchruimhe,' Irish tract; the
tract has been edited by Whitley Stokes, Revue Celtique, Vol. XII.
Cath Mhuighe Leana, Battle of Magh Leana, Irish tract; this
tract has been edited by O'Curry for the Celtic Society.
Cath Mhuighe Rath, Battle of Magh Rath, Irish tract; this tract has
been edited by O'Donovan for the Irish Archaeological Society.
Caus, s. of Aodh.
Cavanaghs, the, v. Caomhanaigh.
Ceacht, da. of Ceallach, and m. of Fearghal (k. Ire).
Ceadnathach, filé to Eochaidh Muighmheadhoin,; also called druid.
Ceall Fine, 'Church of Fine,' at Innbhear Deaghaidh, in Lower
Leinster; it is also in Uibh Garchon, McF. 693; hence it must be in
the neighbourhood of Arklow.
Ceall Molaise, Kilmolash, tl. and par. in bar. of Decies without Drum,
Co. Wat.
Ceall Osnadh, in Magh Fea, 4 miles east of Leighghlin, now Kellistown,
in bar. of Forth, Co. Carlow
Cealla Saile, 'churches of Saile,' prob. Kinsaley in Fingal, Co.
Dublin; cf. the passage in which the churches are enumerated together
with Sord Cholum Chille, etc., with the following passage "Gabhran i.
hitaeb suird choluim cille no o chind saile ifine gall ", Feilire of
Oengus, CX VII.
Ceallach, a noble, sl. in bt. of Bealach Mughna; prob. Ceallach s. of
Cearbhall, q.v.
Ceallach, eldest s. of Eoghan Beal (k. C).
Ceallach, f. of Donnchadh (k. of Osruighe)., II. 152.
Ceallach, f. of Lorcan (k. L).
Ceallach, f. of Muireann (m. of Flaithbheartach, k. Ire).
Ceallach, one of the two kk. of the Cineals.
Ceallach, s. of Aodh, comhorba of Patrick, that is, vicar-general of
the primate at the general assembly of clerics and laymen at Fiadh Mic
Aonghusa; it would appear from Au. and Fm. that Ceallach was actually
primate, and not merely vicar general to him, at Fiadh Mic Aonghusa.
He was elected successor to Patrick, anno 1105 (Fm., Au.), though he
was then only 25 years of age (Au).
Ceallach, s. of Cearbhall, k. of Osruighe
Ceallach, s. of Cearnach, k. of Breithfne Ui Raghallaigh, present at
Convention of Drom Ceat, II. 82.
Ceallach, s. of Conaing, II. 238.
Ceallach, s. of Cormac, s. of Art, sl. by Aonghus Gaoibuaibhtheach,
anno 265 Fm.
Ceallach, s. of Duibhgheann, chief of the Clann Eachach, at Cluain
Tarbh.
Ceallach, s. of Faolchur, k. of Osruighe
Ceallach, s. of Maolcobha, k. of Cineal Conaill; identical with
Ceallach, s. of Maolcobha, jk. Ire.
Ceallach, s. of Maolcobha, s. of Aodh, jk. Ire. 13 years, II. 130; sl.
at Brugh os Boinn, 136 (anno 658 or 664 Au).
Ceallach, s. of Raghallach, k. C.
Ceallachan Caisil, Ceallachan of Cashel, k. of the two Munsters 10
years, d. anno 952 Fm., 954 Au.
Cealltair, g. Cealltrach (g. Aircealtra Fm.), in Ui Maine;
Ceannfaolaidh (k. Ire.) sl. by Fionnachta Fleadhach in bt. of, anno
673 Fm., 674 Au.; Fm. gives the name of battle as Aircealtair (at
least g. is Aircealtra) at Tigh Ui Maine.
Ceanannas, al. Ceanannus, v. Ceanannas na Midhe.
Ceanannas na Midhe, al. Ceanannas, Kells (par., town and bar.), Co.
Meath; v. Sheiridmheadh.
Ceann Abhrad, in Sliabh Caoin; Sliabh Caoin is now Sliabh Reagh near
Kilfin church on borders of Cork and Limerick, Fm. VI. 2150; and Ceann
Abhrad is a part of it; some identify it as Suidhe Finn in bar. of
Coshlea, Co. Lim.;.
Ceann Beara, a boundary of the See of Raith Mhaighe Deisceirt, 'from
Baoi Bheirre to C.B.'; Barrow peninsula, which juts into Tralee Bay,
opposite Fenit, sheltering Barrow Harbour, and on which there is a
military round castle of about the twelfth century.
Ceann Beara, point of, in Ulster,.
Ceann Bearroide, a servant of Conchubhar, s. of Neasa, who vainly
endeavoured to carry his master's corpse to Eamhain without resting.
Ceann Choradh, 'Weir Head,' Kincora, a residential fort built by Brian
Boraimhe near Killaloe, which was his most important residence. It
means 'the Head of the Weir,' the weir in all probability being the
great one above the bridge where the old castle stood; the present
Catholic church stands on ground which was probably near the site of
the fort. No trace or reliable tradition of the site remains. It must
not be confounded with An Bhoraimhe, now Beal Boraimhe or Ballyboro.
Ceann Criadain, Credan Head in bar. of Gaultier, Co. Water., Fm.; S.
Deise extends from Lios Mor to it.
Ceann Eich, 'Horse Head,' Kineigh in Co. Kild. adjoining Co. Wick., Fm.
I. 174.
Ceann Eitigh, Kinnity, tl. and. par. in bar. of Ballybrit, King's Co.,
10 miles east of Birr.
Ceann Feabhrad, in Sliabh Caoin; v. Ceann Abhrad.
Ceann Fuaid, Confoy or Confey, near Leixlip, in bar. of Salt, Co. Kild.
(Fm. I. 588), but from the poem quoted Fm. I. 590, it must be in the
glen above Teach Moling, and therefore Onom., not improbably, places
it in Glynn, one mile north of St, Mullin's and one mile east of the
Barrow; however the Lochlonnaigh plundered Cill Dara, 50 miles distant
afterwards, which raises a difficulty as to this latter
identification; bt. of, in which the Leinstermen were def. by Iomhar,
a chief of Lochloinn, anno 915 Fm.
Ceann Geagain, al. Cathal, k. M.
Ceann Maghair, still (O'D.'s time), so called in Irish, and Anglicised
Kinnaweer; it is situated at head of Mulroy Lough, in bar. of
Kilmacrenan, Co. Don., Fm. I. 303.
Ceannfaolaidh, bp. of Ath Truim, d. anno 819 Fm.
Ceannfaolaidh, f. of Scannlan Mor (k. of Osruighe).
Ceannfaolaidh, k. of Ciannachta Ghlinne Geimhean, burned by.
Maolduin, s. of Maoilfithrigh in Dun Ceitheirn.
Ceannfaolaidh, k. of Ui Conaill, sl. in bt. of Bealach Mughna
Ceannfaolaidh na foghluma, 'C. the learned,' author of the.
Uraicheapt.
Ceannfaolaidh, s. of Blathmhac, k. Ire. four years; sl. by Fionnachta
Fleadhach, anno 673 Fm.
Ceannfaolaidh, s. of Moichtighearn, d. at age of 13 years
Ceara, a slave who came to Ire. with the ss. of Milidh.
Ceara, v. Fionnloch Ceara.
Cearb, f. of Simeon (one of the Fortuatha of Leinster).
Cearbhall, f. of Ceallach, k. of Osruighe.
Cearbhall, f. of Diarmaid, k. of Osruighe (identical with Cearbhall, f.
of Ceallach, above).
Cearbhall, k. of Osruighe, identical with Cearbhall, f. of Diarmaid
and with Cearbhall, f. of Ceallach.
Cearbhall, s. of Lorcan, three sons of, pl. Gleann da Loch, and are sl.
in one night by the power of St. Caoimhghin.
Cearbhall, s. of Muireigen, k. L
Cearmad Milbheoil, 'C. Honeymouth,' at. Cearmad, of the T. D. D; v.
Dun Cearmna.
Cearnach Sotal, ('C. the Proud ', C.A.), s. of Diarmaid, s. of Aodh
Slaine.
Ceasair, da. of Bioth, comes to Ire. before the Deluge.
Ceasair Chruthach, 'C. the Comely,' da. of a k. of the French, w. of
Ughaine Mor and m. of Cobhthach Caol mBreagh (k. Ire).
Ceasarb, s. of Neimheadh.
Ceat, s. of Magha, a Connaughtman, obtained the brain of Meisceadhra
from two jesters; infixed it in Conchubar's head.
Ceatharlach, Carlow town; v. Ceithearlach.
Ceathur, proper name of Mac Greine, s. of Cearmad.
Ceaulin, Ceawlin, an. of Aelfred.
Cecht, god of Mac Cecht.
Cecrops, first k. of Attica, (named Cecropia from him)
Celleachair, kinsman of Ceann Geagain (k. M).
Ceileachair, s. of Donn Cuan, at bt. of Cluain Tarbh.
Ceinnfhionnan, v. Fiachaidh Ceinnfhionnan.
Ceis Chorainn, Keshcorran, in bar. of Corran, Co. Slig., Fm. V. 1768;
a boundary of the see of Ard Charna or Ardachadh.
Ceithearlach, al. Ceatharlach, q.v., Carlow; Ceall Osnadh, in Magh Fea,
in County of.
Ceithlionn, sl. the Daghdha Mor.
Ceolbhald, Ceolwald, an. of Aelfred.
Cerdic, s. of Elesa, an. of Aelfred.
Cham, s. of Noe, has thirty sons.
Chaplain, 'anamchara, soul's friend' officer of the Christian kk. of
Ire.; corresponded to the druid of Pagan times.
Charles, v. Searlus.
Chorea Gigantum, a former name of Stone Henge (q.v).
Christ, v. Criost.
Cian, f. of Lugh Lamhfhada, of the T. D. D.
Cian, f. of Tadhg; identical with Cian, s. of Oilill Olom.
Cian, s. of Oilill Olom.
Cian O Conchubhair, k. of Ciannachta.
Ciannachta, v. O Conchubhair Ciannachta.
Ciannachta, v. Ciannachta Ghlinne Geimhean.
Ciannachta, Magh Luighne in; it is not clear which Ciannachta is
referred to; Magh Lughna is the form used by Fm., I. 36, Bb. 23 b.;
Lec. 459 gives Ciannachta Luighne as in Connaught.
Ciannachta, the tribe, sl. 200 Lochlonnaigh,; from the parallel
passage in C. G., 23, 230, this slaughter took place at Inis Finmic,
now Inch, near Balrothery, Co. Dublin; hence the Ciannachta mentioned
must be Ciannachta Breagh which extended from r. Liffey to near
Dromiskin, Co. Louth, Fm. I. 110.
Ciannachta Ghlinne Geimhean, bar. of Keenaght, Co. Londonderry
Cianog, da. of Ciocharan, female an. of Brian Boraimhe.
Ciar, s. of Fearghus and Meadhbh; Ciarraidhe named from; St. Breanainn
of the race of,; St. Mochuda of the race of.
Ciaragan, f. of Colam.
Ciaran, 25 saints of the name.
Ciaran, bp. of Tuilen, d. anno 919 Fm.
Ciaran, of Cluain Mic Nois, al. Ciaran mac an tSaoir, 'C. the
Artificer's Son,' St.; d. at age of 31 years, anno 549 Au.
Ciaran, of Saighir, St. v. Saighir Chiarain.
Ciaran, s. of Ronan.
Ciaran, St., of Tiobraid Naoi.
Ciarnait, da. of the k. of the Cruithnigh or Picti;
Ciarraidhe, Kerry, the kingdom formerly so named.
Ciarraidhe (etymologically Ciarraighe), v. Ciarraidhe Luachra.
Ciarraidhe Luachra, al. Ciarraidhe, Ciarraidhe Mumhan, now Kerry, the
name was applied to the district extending from the strand of the
harbour of Tralee to the Shannon and comprised about the northern
third part of the present Co. of Kerry, T. P. (LXXI.); named after
Ciar.
Ciarraidhe Mumhan, 'Ciarraidhe of Munster', v. Ciarraidhe Luachra.
Cill Airdbhile, a limit of the see of Cill Aladh.
Cill Aladh, Killala, Co. Mayo.
Chill Beacain, 'church of St. Beacan, Killpeacon an old church in par.
of Killaidrif, in bar. of Clanwilliam, Co. Tipp. at the foot of Sliabh
gCrot, (O'R. S.); on the north side of Sliabh gCrot.
Cill Brighde, 'church of Brighid '; a pillar stone is to be seen (K.'s
time) to the west of r. Slaney between Cill Brighde and Tulach O
bhFeidhlimidh.
Cill Caomhain, Kilkevan, 21/2 miles north west by north of Gorey, Co.
Wexford, in Lower Leinster; Domhnall Caomhanach, s. of Diarmaid na
nGall, so called from having been nurtured there.
Cill Chainnigh, Kilkenny.
Cill Chleite, Kilcliet, near Strangford Lough, in bar. of Lecale, Co.
Down, Fm. I. 632, 744.
Cill Chuillinn, Old Kilcullen, in par. and bar. of Kilcullen, Co. Kild.
Cill Dalua, Killaloe, Co. Clare.
Cill Dara, Kildare.
Cill Ealchruidhe, near Kells, Co. Meath, no doubt equivalent to Cill
Elgraige in Termon Cenansa, mentioned in Ll. 308, and in B. Lis. 93 b.
Cill Maighnionn, Kilmainham, near Dublin.
Cill Mic Creannain, Kilmacrenan, village (also par. and bar.) in
DoneGal.
Clll Moicheallog, Kilmallock (townland, town and bar.), Co. Limerick.
Cill Mona, Kilmona, par. of Rahugh, bar. of Moycashel, Co. Westmeath
(O'D. Martyrology of Donegal, 134).
Cill Scire, several places of this name, the best known is now
Kilskeer par. and tl. in bar. of Upper Kells, Co. Meath, which is prob.
the place referred to in text.
Cill Sleibhe, Killeevy, Co. Armagh, province of Meath extends to Magh
an Chosnamhaigh at.
Cillin, a church, pl. by the followers of Fearghal, s. of Maolduin, k.
Ire., as he was on the point of setting out to fight the bt. of
Almhain (Allen, Co. Kildare); further data for identification are not
given, perh. Killeen, a par. 21/2 miles north by west of Dunshaughlin,
Co. Meath.
Cime Ceithircheann, a Fear Bolg, whence Loch Cime is named.
Cin Droma Sneachta, a Book of Invasions, now lost; for an account of
this book v. O'Curry MS. Materials, Lecture I.
Cineadh Scuit, al. in one passage, Cine Scot; the Scots or Scotic race,
a name applied to the Gaels of Ire. and to their dss. settled in the
north of Scotland; Ire. called Scotia because inhabited by the Scotic
race from Scythia, according to some.
Cineal, the  -- s; Ceallach and Lorcan, two kk. of the Cineals (da
righ na gCineal) among the victors at the bt. of Bealach Mughna, sl.
Seachnasach (k. Ire.) anno 669 Fm.
Cineal Comhghaill, of Islay in Scotland, sprung from race of Eochaidh
Muinreamhar; this tribe gave their name to the district now known as
Cowall north part of Cantire, north of Crinan Canal.
Cineal Conaill, district and people, so called from Conall Gulban, s.
of Niall Naoighiallach; it comprised the Co. of Donegal except the
barr. of Inis Eoghain and Raphoe (Magh Iotha), which belonged to
Cineal Eoghain, H.F. 73.
Cineal Cuallachtaigh, the tribe of a district which comprised the
south-eastern part of bar. of Inchiquin, Co. Clare, where they built
the castles of Ballygriffy and Mogowna al. C. Cuallachta.
Cineal Eoghain, district and tribe comprising the counties of Tyrone
and Derry and the barr. of Inis Eoghain and Raphoe (Magh. Iotha), Co.
Donegal; so called from Eoghan, s. of Niall Naoighiallach.
Cineal Failbhe, the O Falveys; the O Falveys were formerly lords of
Ibh Rathach in Kerry (O'Brien, Ir. Diet).
Cineal Fearmhaic, the original tribe name of the O'Deas, but later the
district was co-extensive with the bar. of Inchiquin, Co. Clare, Fm. V.
2042.
Cineal Fiachaidh (C. Fiachach), Kenalighe (sic in Anglo-Irish
documents), Mageoghegan's country, which extended originally from Birr,
King's Co. to hill of Uisneach in Co. West. and at a later period
corresponded to bar. of Moycashel, Co. West.; the tribe sprung from
Fiachaidh, s. of Niall Naoighiallach.
Cineal Gabhrain, in Alba, the posterity of Earc, s. of Eochaidh
Muinreamhar.
Cineal Lodhairn, in Alba, sprung from Earc, s. of Eochaidh
Muinreamhar; the territory of C.L. was in Argyleshire, north of Lough
Awe, extending to Lough Leven on the north and the Crinan Canal in the
south-west.
Cineal Luighdheach, from Lughaidh, great gs. of Conall Gulban;
district co-extensive with bar. of Kilmacrenan.
Cing, s. of Eibhear, s. of Tat.
Cinneide, f. of Mughron and Odhran.
Cinneide, s. of Ailpin, k. of Alba, Picti extinguished by the Scots in
reign of, 839 years after Christ.
Cinneide, s. of Donn Cuan.
Cinneide, s. of Lorcan, and f. of Brian Boraimhe; k. Ire. anno 948 Fm.
Cinric, s. of Creoda, an. of Aelfred.
Ciocal, s. of Nel, said to have occupied Ire. before Partholon.
Ciocharan, f. of Cianog (q. v).
Ciochloiscigh, npl., 'the Breast-Seared' also called Amazons; v.
Amazones.
Ciolarn, swineherd of the k. of Eile.
Ciombaoth, s. of Fionntan, k. Ire. 20 or 28 years.
Cionaoth, f. of Olchobhar, k. M.
Cionaoth, filé; this Cionaoth is prob. Cionaoth O Hartagain, (q.v.)
chief filé of Ire., who died anno 975 (Au).
Cionaoth O Hartagain, 'primate' of Ard Macha; no.
primate of this name is mentioned in the annals either of Ulster.
or of the Four Masters; priomhaidh of text is prob. equal priomhfaidh,
'chief seer,' 'primate among seers'; v. Cionaoth,.
filé.
Cionaoth, s. of Ailpin, k. of Alba.
Cionaoth, s. of Conchubhar, k. of Ui Failghe, sl. at bt. of Duibhthir
Atha Luain, anno 920 Fm.
Cionaoth, s. of Iorghalach, k. Ire. four years; sl. in.
bt. of Drom Corrain, (name of bt. is Druim Corcain Au., and Druim
Corcrain, Fm.; Au. gives date 728, Fm. 722).
Ciosail, 'rock of tribute' supposed derivation of Caiseal.
Cir, son of Cis, a filé, who came to Ire., with the sons of Milidh.
Cirus, Cyrus, sl. by the Scythians.
Cis, f. of Cir.
Cithneallach, a druid of T. D. D.
Civitate Dei, a work by St. Augustine.
Claire, a hill near Duntryleague in bar. of Small County, Co.
Limerick; poet. for Munster (cf. Fm. I. 902).
Clancys, the, v. Muinntear Flannchuidhe and Siol Flannchuidhe.
Clann an Duinn Deasa, of Leinster, a remnant of the free races of.
Ire.
Clann Aodhagain, the Mac Egans, brehons to Mac Carrthaigh (Mac Carthy).
Clann Bhiorthagra, brehons to O'Neill.
Clann Bhriain Eatharlach, the O'Briens of Aherlow, Co. Tipp., St.
Seanna the patron of.
Clann Bhruaideadha, the MacBrodys, ollamhs in seanchus to O Briain.
Clann Charrthaigh, the MacCarthys, sprung from Fiachaidh Muilleathan.
Clann Choilein, the Macnamaras of East Clare; their territory up to
1318 contained the parr. of Quin, Tulla, Cloney, Dowry, Kilraghtis,
Kiltalagh, Templemaley, Inchacronan, and Kilmurry na nGall; after 1318
nearly all the land between the r. Fergus and the Shannon was given
them, Fm. II. 206.
Clann Cholgan, the tribe who inhabited the district so named which was
co-extensive with the present bar. of Philipstown, King's Co.; the
families of O'Hennessey and O'Huallahan were by turns chiefs of it, Fm.
IV. 819; sprung from Rossa Failgheach, s. of Cathaoir Mor.
Clann Cholmain, tribe name of the O Melaghlins, of bar. of Clonlonan,
Co. Westm.
Clann Chraith, the Magraths, ollamhs in poetry to O Briain of Thomond.
Clann Chruitin, the Mac Curtins, ollamhs in seanchus to O Briain.
Clann Chuinn, poet. name for the people of Leath Cuinn or Conn's half
of Ire., that is, of the Northern Half; the Ulstermen and Connaughtmen.
Clann Domhnaill, na hAlban agus na hEireann, the Mac Donnells of
Scotland and of Ireland, that is, of the Isles and of Antrim; named
from Domhnall, f. of Alasdair.
Clann Eachach, a tribe of Ely O'Carroll (Eile), McF., 199
Clann Eirc, the dss. of Earc, s. of Eochaidh Muinreamhar, settled in
Scotland.
Clann Fiachrach, i.e. Tir Fhiachrach, North and South.
Clann Iomhair, the descendants of Iomhar (Ivar), a body of
Lochlonnaigh who came with Sitric in a great fleet in the reign of
Niall Glundubh; the Lochlonnaigh or Norsemen in general.
Clann Mhic Conmara, (identical with Clann Mic na Mara), the
Macnamaras; Siol Aodha their proper designation; sprung from Caisin, s.
of Cas, ib.
Clann Mic na Mara, al. Siol Aodha, the Macnamaras of Clare, sprung
from Cormac Cas.
Clann Mileadh, Clanna Mileadh, al. Meic Mileadh, the children of
Milidh, al. the sons of Milidh, smt. the Milesians, come to Ire. 1080
years after the Deluge.
Clann Mogha, tribe of Mogh Nuadhat; Cashel, city of
Clann Neill, the dss. of Niall Naoighiallach, divided into Clann Neill
an tuaisceirt, (q.v.) or Northern Ui Neill and Clann Neill an
deisceirt or Southern Ui Neill, whose territory corresponded roughly
with the cos. of Meath, Westm. and Longford.
Clann Neimheadh, al. Clanna N., the children of Neimheadh, the name
given to the colony who invaded Ire. under the leadership of Neimheadh,
s. of Agnoman, s. of Pamp; v. Neimheadh.
Clann Riocaird, Clanrickarde, Co. Gal., comprising the barr. of
Loughrea, Kiltartan, Clare, Dunkellin, Athenry and Leitrim;.
Clann Rudhruidhe, v. Clanna Rudhruighe.
Clann Scanlain, This tribe is mentioned twice in the Fm. text, I. 774
(corresponding to K.'s reference) and 824, under the year 1032, when
Diarmaid. s. of Eochaidh, died.
Clann tSithigh, Mac Sheehys, sprung from Sitheach, s. of Eachdunn, and
of the race of Colla Uais; said by Spenser to be foreign.
Clann tSuibhne, Mac Sweenys, said by Spenser to be foreign; of the
race of Aodh Athlamh.
Clann Tall, the people of the barr. of Corcomroe and Burren, Co.
Clare; they are so named from Tal, s. of Broc, who was eleventh in
descent from Moruadh; loosely represents Dal gCais, cf. Teaghlach Tail,
poet. of or the dynasty of Dal gCais, O'Curry MS. Mat., p. 479; a copy
of Mac Bruaideadha's poem beginning Cuirfead commaoin ar Ghlainn Tail
made by Michael O'Clery is given in MS. B. 4 2 Stowe, R.I.A. fol. 85.
Clanna Baoiscne, the tribe from which Fionn, s. of Cumhaill, sprang.
Clanna Cein, 'a body of Munstermen, to wit, the Gaileanga and the
Luighne of the race of Tadhg, s. of Cian.'
Clanna Connacht, the tribes of Connaught, protected by St. Ciaran.
Clanna Deaghaidh, al. Clann D., one of the three orders of champions
of Ire.
Clanna Dealbhaoith, the Dealbhua, so named (poet.) from. Dealbhaoth, s.
of Cas, s. of Conall Eachluaith, v. Dealbhaoth.
Clanna Mileadh, v. Clann Mileadh.
Clanna Morna, al. C. Moirne, a tribe whose territory was in Maonmhagh
in Ui Maine in Connaught.
Clanna Neill an tuaisceirt, 'the Northern O Neills,' identified with
Cineal Eoghain and Cineal Conaill, Fm. I. 976 (text).
Clanna Rudhruighe, the Ultonians, their territory corresponded roughly
to the present counties of Down and Antrim; Lough Neagh and the Lower
Bann separated them from Cineal Eoghain, and the trench called the
Danes' Cast from the Oirghialla, M.R. 44; named from Rudhruighe Mor.
Clanrickarde, v. Clann Riocaird.
Clar Chontae Luimnigh, 'the Plain of Limerick County,' al. Ui
Fidhghinnte, (q.v.); Guaire, s. of Colman, def. by the Munster-men at
Cam Fearadhaigh in.
Clar Cille Dalua, the plank bridge over the Shannon at Killaloe.
Claudian, v. Claudianus.
Claudianus, Claudian, a Latin epic poet who flourished during the
reigns of Arcadius and Honorius; calls Ire. Ierna.
Cleircen, k. of Ui Bairrche, among the victors at bt. of Bealach
Mughna.
Cleiteach, House of, on north of the Boyne near the bridge of Slane
and Brugh na Boinne, on a height called Ucht Cleitig, M.L. 66; O'D.,
Fm. I. 115, places it south of the Boyne near Stackallen Bridge.
Cliabhan Modhairn, in Brefny Ui Ruairc.
Cliu, a slave who came to Ire. with the sons of Milidh.
Cliu (g. Cliach), a plain comprising the eastern half of Co. Limerick
and extending to Killaloe and probably to the r. Suir, 'from Luachair
to Cashel'; plundered by Muircheartach, s. of Earc; this plunder is
thus described by Flann Mainistreach (v. Arch. Hib. I. 70), 'Organ na
Cliach o Luachair co Cassel Muman,' 'the plundering of Cliu from
Luachair to Cashel of Munster;' this passage gives us rough limits of
the plain, which seems to have touched Lough Derg and to have
contained Teamhair Luachra and even Glynn; al. Cliu an Mhaighe, Cliu
Mail mic Ughaine, Cliu Mumhan.
Cloch an Stocain, Cloghastookan, a well-known pillar of limestone
about 10 feet high by the roadside at Garron Point, on west coast of
Antrim; length of Ire. measured from Carn Ui Neid to.
Cloch Mhionnuirc, now prob. par. of Manner, formerly Maineure, in
Peebles, Reeves, Ad., 381.
Cloch na Cinneamhna, 'Saxum Fatale,' 'the stone of Destiny,'.
the Lia Fail so called by Hector Boece.
Clochan, a limit of the see of Cluain Ioraird, 'from C. westward to.
the Shannon,'
Clochar, Clogher, name of vil. par. bar. and diocese in Co. Tyrone.
Clochar Deasa, a limit of Oirghialla (q.v).
Cloghastookan, Co. Antrim, v. Cloch an Stocain.
Clogher, Co. Tyrone, v. Clochar.
Cloithfhionn, da. of Eochaidh Uichtleathan, and m. of the three
Finneamhnas.
Clonard, v. Cluain Ioraird.
Cloncoose, Co. Long., v. Cluain Cuasa.
Cloncurry, Co. Kild., v. Cluain Conaire.
Clondalkin, Co. Dublin, v. Cluain Dolcain.
Clonenagh, Queen's Co., v. Cluain Eidhneach.
Clones, Co. Mon., v. Cluain Eoais, Cluain Uais and Cumar Cluana Eoais.
Clonfert, Co. Galw., v. Cluain Fearta.
Clonkeen, Co. Limer., v. Cluain Caoin.
Clonmacnoise, King's Co., v. Cluain Mic Nois.
Clonmel Third, Co. Tipp., v. Trian Chluana Meala.
Clontarf, near Dublin, v. Cluain Tarbh.
Clooncraff, Co. Rosc., v. Cluain Chreamaidh.
Clothna, s. of Aonghus, chief poet of Ire., d. anno 1008 Fm.
Clothra, da. of Eochaidh Feidhlioch, sister of the three Fionns, and m.
of Lughaidh Riabh nDearg; 'grandmother to her son.'.
Cloyne, Co. Cork, v. Cluain Uama.
Cluain, v. Cluain Mic Nois.
Cluain Airde, v. Cumar Cluana hAirde.
Cluain Ard Mobheadhog, Kilpeacon, at foot of Sliabh gCrot, in bar.
Clanwilliam, Co. Tipp.
Cluain Caoin, Clonkeen, near Abington, bar. of Owenybeg, Co. Lim. (C.E.
790); a limit of the see of Imleach Iobhair, 'from C. C. to Abhann
Mhor.'
Cluain Chreamaidh, 'meadow of the wild garlic,' Clooncraff, par. to
the east of Elphin, Co. Rosc., Fm. IV. 975.
Cluain Conaire, Cloncurry, 41/2 miles north-west of Kilcock on the
northern border of Co. Kildare; a limit of the see of Cluain Ioraird,
'from Iubhar Coillte to C.C.'
Cluain Connrach, a limit of Meath; prob. identical with Cluain Conaire.
Cluain Cuasa, Cloncoose, in bar. of Granard, Co. Longf., Fm. I. 40
(where text has Cluain Cuas).
Cluain Dolcain, Clondalkin, 5 miles south west of Dublin; the dun of
Amhlaoibh, k. of Lochloinn, at.
Cluain Eidhneach, Clonenagh, 11 miles east of Mountrath, Queen's Co.;
al. called Cluain Eidhneach of Fionntan.
Cluain Eidhneach, Clonenagh, Book of Annals of the church of (now
lost), one of the chief books of the Seanchus of Ire.
Cluain Eoais, Clones, Co. Mon.
Cluain Eoais, v. Cumar Chluana Eoais.
Cluain Fearta, al. Cluain Fearta Breanainn, Clonfert in bar. of
Longford, Co. Galw.; church of, built by St. Breanainn (Brendan).
Cluain Ioraird, v. Cumar Cluana Ioraird.
Cluain Ioraird, Clonard, village and par. in bar. of Upper Moyfenagh,
Co. Meath.
Cluain Mhic Nois, al. Cluain Mhac Nois, Clonmacnoise, on the west
border of bar. of Garrycastle and of King's Co., 8 miles south by west
of Athlone.
Cluain Mhic Nois, Clonmacnoise, Book of, a part of the Seanchus of
Ire.; perh. identical with the book called Uidhir of Ciaran; v. Cluain
Mic Nois.
Cluain Muirisc, (C. Muirisce, Fm.), in the north of Brefny; Lec. 33,
557, places C. M. in South Breithfne.
Cluain Tarbh, Clontarf, near Dublin.
Cluain Uais (al. Cluain Eoais in K., Cluain Auiss, C. Auis, C. Euis in
earlier authorities), Clones, Co. Mon.; v. Cluain Eoais.
Cluain Uama, al. Cluain Uama Mic Leinin (from St. Colman, s. of Leinin,
its founder), Cloyne tl. in bar. of Imokilly, Co. Cork.
Cnamhchoill, at Tiobrad Arann (Tipperary town), prob. Cleghile 11/2
miles east of town of Tipperary, a limit of Urmhumha (Ormond); a limit
of the see of Imleach Iobhair.
Cnamhros, in Leinster, prob. Camross, near Barry's Cross, Co. Carlow,
Fm. I. 11; Camross hill, 3 miles north-west of Taghmon, Co. Wex., Onom.
Cnocach, an Ch., al. Ard na nGeimhleach, Knockagh, 3 miles north-east
of Cahir, Co. Tipp.
Cnoc Aine Cliach, Knockainey hill, and par., in bar. of Small County,
Co. Limerick.
Cnoc an Bhogha, at Ferns, Co. Wexford.
Cnoc Rathfonn, al. Raith Naoi, Knockgraffon, tl. and par. in bar. of
Middlethird, Co. Tip.
Cnucha, 'a hill over the Liffey,' Castleknock, tl. par. and bar., four
miles west of Dublin.
Cnucha, w. of Geanann.
Coba, w. of Noe.
Cobha, the Ui Eachach Cobha occupied barr. of Upper and Lower Iveagh,
Co. Down, B.R. 165--6.
Cobhthach, s. of Dathi.
Cobhthach, s. of Oilill, a Lagenian.
Cobhthach Caol mBreagh, s. of Ughaine Mor, k. Ire. 30 years.
Cobhthach Caomh, 'C. the Beautiful,' f. of Mogh Corb.
Cochlan, s. of Lorcan, of the race of Eibhear.
Coelestinus, Celestine I., Pope (422-432), sent Paladius and Patrick
to Ire., anno 430/431.
Coenred, s. of Ceolbhald, an. of Aelfred.
Cogadh Gall re Gaedhealaibh, 'War of the Gail with the Gaels' an Irish
historical tract, edited by Todd.
Cogaran, a page sent by Brian Boroimhe after the k. of Leinster.
Coibhdhean, bp. of Ard Sratha, anno 745 Fm., which gives his name
as.Coibhdheanach.
Coill Lamhruidhc, in Feara Rois, in Ulster; O Curry says it was
opposite the door of Conchubhar's palace in Eamhain, M.M. 277, but
there seems to be no other authority for this.
Coill na Manach, Kilnamanach, bar. in Co. Tipp.
Coimhgheallach, f. of Colman.
Coinneal, da. of Eoghan Mor.
Coir Anmann, 'Fitness of Names,' an Irish tract edited by Stokes,.
Irische Texte, Dritte Serie, 2 Heft.
Coirbre, filé of the T. D. D., I. 218; Cairbre in Trans.
Coirbre Caitcheann, v. Cairbre Caitcheann.
Coirtheine, in Magh Riada (q.v).
Coisir Chonnachtach, an establishment of the k. of Connaught at Tara.
Colam, s. of Ciaragan, comhorba of Bairre, that is, bp. of Corcach
(Cork).
Colbha Gearmainn, a boundary of the see of Cuinnire.
Coleraine, Co. Derry, v. Cuil Rathan.
Colga (Colgan), f. of Aodh (k. L).
Colga (Colgan), f. of Seachnasach, of the Ui Cinnsealaigh.
Coll, god of Eathur (called Mac Cuill), of the T. D. D.
v. Mac Cuill.
Colla, the three C.'s, v. Colla da Chrioch, Colla Meann, Colla Uais.
Colla, f. of a St. Brighid.
Colla da Chrioch, one of the three Collas, v. Colla; Muireadhach the
true name of; Colla fo Chri poet. form of name.
Colla Meann, one of the three Collas, v. Colla; Aodh true name of.
Colla Uais, one of the three Collas, (v. Colla); Cairioll, true name
of; called Uais 'noble, exalted' from having been a king, while his
brothers were not kk.
Collomille, Scottish family name.
Colman, Columbanus, St.; the word Cilla after Colum in text, is a slip
of scribe or author. The Latin which K. quotes and translates is
adapted from the 2nd chapter of the first book of Jonas's 'Vita
Columbani.' The exact words in the original are; Columbanus etenim qui
et Columba, Ortus Hibernia insula, etc., for twenty lines of verse;
Hanc Scottorum gens incoluit, etc., v. Bruno Krusch's edition of the
Vita Columbani.
Colman, ab. of Ceann Eitigh.
Colman, bp. of Inis Bo Finne, d. in reign of Fionnachta Fleadhach,
anno 674 Fm., 676 Au.
Colman, bp. of Laosan, sl. by the Ui Turtaire anno 744 Au.
Colman, f. of Guaire, (i.e., Guaire Aidhne).
Colman, St., of Eala, d. anno 611 Au.
Colman, s. of Coimhgheallach.
Colman Beag, 'C. the Little' ('Colmanus Modicus,' in Lat. Life of St.
Cainneach), s. of Diarmaid, a. of Fearghus Ceirrbheoil; sl. in bt. of
Beal(ach) Dathi, anno 572 Fm.
Colman Mor, 'C. the Great,' s. of Cairbre, k. L., d. anno 576 Fm.
Colman Mor, s. of Diarmaid, s. of Fearghus Ceirrbheoil.
Colman Rimhidh, jk. Ire. six years.
Colpa an Chloidhimh, 'Colpa of the Sword,' al. Colpa, s. of Milidh and
Scota, born in the island of Gothia; a leader in the Milesian
Invasion; drowned at Innbhear Colpa.
Colum, 22 Saints of the name.
Colum, s. of Seadna, an. of St. Adhamnan.
Columbanus, St., v. Colman.
Columba, St., v. Colm Cille.
Columcille, the Amhra of, an Irish tract; v. Amhra.
Colum Cille, Columcille, St. al. Columba, sprung from the O'Domhnaill
family of Cineal Conaill; goes to Alba, anno 565 according to Beda.
Comain, da. of Dall Bronach, and m. of Tuathal Maol Garbh.
Coman, s. of Colman, sl. Boadan, in violation of St. Colum's
protection anno 567 Fm.
Coman Eigeas, f. of Feircheas.
Comann, the three C.'s, 3 septs settled in south of Queen's Co., and
north of Co. Kilk..
Comar, near Clones, Co. Mon., v. Cumar Cluana Eoais.
Comhdhan, a jester.
Comhdhan, s. of Da Cearda, St..
Comhghall, of the Dealbhna Mor, f. of Ailpin.
Comhghall, f. of Conall.
Comhghall, k. of Alba.
Comhghall, St., Abbot of Beannchair; buildt monastery at Beannchair,
anno 552 Fm.
Comhghall, s. of Aodh Slaine.
Comhorba, 'coarb '; a successor, as to a saint and founder of a
church; also heir or successor to property.
Conaing, f. of Flann.
Conaing, poet.
Conaing, s. of Conghal, s. of Aodh Slaine.
Conaing, s. of Donn Cuan; sl. at Cluain Tarbh.
Conaing, s. of Faobhar, a Fomorian.
Conaing, s. of Niall (Glundubh), def. Lochlonnaigh of Loch nEachach,;
under the year 931 Fm. has "a bt. was gained by Conning, s. of Niall,
and the foreigners of Loch Eathach over the province of Ulidia wherein
twelve hundred were slain," and under 933 Au. has "a victory of
Conning, s. of Niall over the Ulidians at Rubha Conchongalt in which
three hundred persons or more were slain.".
Conaire, s. of Mogh Lamha, k. Ire. seven years.
Conaire Mor, s. of Eidirsceol, k. Ire. thirty or seventy years.
Conall, two Conalls (Conall Gulban and Conall Creamhthainne) sons of
Niall Naoighiallach by Rioghnach.
Conall, first name of Corc, s. of Lughaidh.
Conall, leader under Failbhe Fionn.
Conall, bp. of Cill Scire, d. anno 865 Fm.
Conall, a jester, II. 130.
Conall, noble, sl. in bt. of Bealach Mughna.
Conall, of the race of Eireamhon, baptised by Patrick; v. Tripartite
Life.
Conall, s. of Aodh, s. of Ainmire; called Conall Clogach, 'C. of the
bells,' ib.
Conall, s. of Comhghall, k. of Dal Riada, gave I to Columcille; d.
anno 572 Fm.
Conall, s. of Eochaidh Bailldearg, II. 256.
Conall, s. of Suibhne, (al. Conall Guithbhinn), def. the three Aodhs,
Aodh Slaine, Aodh Buidhe, Aodh Roin, in one day anno 600 Fm.; v.
Conall Guithbhinn.
Conall Caol, 'C. the Slender,' s. of Maolcobha, jk. Ire. thirteen
years; sl. by Diarmaid, s. of Aodh Slaine, anno 656 Fm.
Conall Cearnach, 'C. the Victorious,' s. of Aimhirgin Iairghiunach.
Conall Cearnach, Deargruathar, 'Red Rout,' of, an Irish tract, a
modern version of, ed. Lloyd.
Conall Clogach, 'C. of the Bells,' v. Conall, s. of Aodh, s. of
Ainmire.
Conall Collamhrach, s. of Eidirsceol Teamhrach, k. Ire. five years; sl.
by Nia Seaghamain, ib. (anno 4880 Fm.
Conall Creamhthainne, s. of Niall Naoighiallach; called Creamhthainne,
according to the C.A. from having been reared in Creamhthainne in
Oirghialla or from his second name being Crimthann; d. in reign of
Oilill Molt anno 475 Fm
Conall Eachluaith, 'C. of the Swift Steeds,' s. of Lughaidh Meann, and
fosterson of Criomhthann (k. Ire).
Conall Guithbhinn, 'C. of the Melodious Voice,' v. Conall, s. of
Suibhne.
Conall Gulban, s. of Niall Naoighiallach, an. of Sts. Mochuda and
Molaise of Leithghlinn
Conall Laoghbhreagh, s. of Aodh Slaine, sl. in ht. of Odhbha anno 607
Fm.
Conan, prince from Britain, comes to Ire., anno 1050
Conan of Cuala, f. of Meadhbh Leithdhearg (w. of Art Aoinfhear).
Conchadh, s. of Cuana, k. of Cobha, sl. in bt. of Fothart in
Muirtheimhne anno 732 Fm.
Conchubhar, a guardian of the k. of Ire., sl. by Greaghoir (k. of
Alba), according to Buchanan.
Conchubhar, br. of Murchadh (s. of Brian).
Conchubhar, f. of Airtre.
Conchubhar, f. of Cathal.
Conchubhar, f. of Cionaoth.
Conchubhar, s. of Donnchadh, half-k. of Meath.
Conchubhar, s. of Donnchadh, k. Ire. fourteen years; d., 164 anno 831
Fm.
Conchubhar, s. of Maoilseachlainn, k. of Meath.
Conchubhar, s. of Maoilseachlainn, heir to the throne of Ire., sl. at
Ath Cliath anno 917 Fm.; from Fm. we learn that the exact site of the
battle was Cill Mosamhog (near Island Bridge on the river Liffey), Co.
Dublin; Todd, C. G., XCI., says the exact date is Sept. 15th, 919.
Conchubhar, s. of Neasa, k. of Ulster (usually called Connor Mac
Nessa).
Conchubhar Abhradhruadh, 'C. of the red eyelashes,' k. Ire. one year,;
an. of Diarmaid Mac Murchadha,; Lia Fail silenced since time of.
Conchubhar of Maonmhagh, k. C., invited by a body of Irish chiefs to
rule over them.
Condon Country, the, v. Crioch Chondunach.
Condons, the, v. Conndunaigh.
Confoy or Confey, Co. Kild., v. Ceann Fuaid.
Cong, Co. Gal., v. Conga.
Conga, Cong. a par. partly in bar. of Ross, Co. Galway, and partly in
bar. of Kilmain, Co. Mayo; also a town in the Mayo section of the par.
about mile north of the nearest part of head of Lough Corrib, P.G.
Congain, w. of Criomhthann (s. of Eanna Cinnsealach).
Conghal, s. of Aodh Slaine.
Conghal, s. of Eadhaman.
Conghal, s. of Maolduin.
Conghal Ceannmhaghair, s. of Fearghus Fanad, k. Ire. nine years;
sudden death of anno 708 Fm; v. Ceann Maghair.
Conghal Clairingneach, 'C. of the Broad Finger-nails,' s. of
Rudhruighe, k. Ire. fifteen years; sl. by Duach Dallta Deaghaid anno
5031 Fm.
Conghal Claon, s. of Scannlan Sciathleathan, k. U. sl. at Magh Rath,
ib. anno 634 Fm.
Conghalach, a leader of Dal gCais; 'C. from the lake,' poet.
Conghalach, s. of Eochaidh, sl. by the Lochlonnaigh;. Loch Bricrinne
pl. against, ib. (both events anno 832 Fm.
Conghalach, s. of Conning, sl. Fionnachta, k. Ire., at Greallach
Doluidh.
Conghalach, s. of Maoilmithidh, al. Conghal, s. of M., k. Ire. ten
years; sl. at Ard Macha, by the Lochlonnaigh of Ath Cliath and the
Lagenians, anno 954 Fm.; Fm. says he was sl. at Tigh Gighrainn,
supposed to be on Liffey, but name now obsolete; Au. says Taig Giurann
in Leinster and LI. 16 b a says Ailen Tighi Giurand 'island of Tech
Giurand '; it would thus appear that Ard Macha of K. is Ard Macha
Brege of Annals of Logh Ce (II. 386) and identical with Tigh Gighrainn.
Conghalach Chinn Maghair, k. of Tir Conaill; v. Ceann Maghair.
Conlaoch, s. of Cuchulainn and Aoife.
Conmhac, s. of Fearghus and Meadhbh; the Conmhaicnes of Connaught
named from, ib.
Conmhaicne, the name of a Sept, from Conmhae, s. of Fearghus and
Meadhbh, al. of the district they inhabited; the see of Conmhaicne was
co-extensive with see of Ard Achadh (Ardagh).
Conmhaicne Chonnacht, 'C. of Connaught,' v. Conmhaicne.
Conmhaol, Mound of, v. Feart Conmhaoil.
Conmhaol, s. of Eibhear, k. Ire. (first k. Ire. of the race of
Eibhear) thirty years.
Conn, druid of the T. D. D., from whom Connachta (Connaught) is said
to be named.
Conn, of Adhar, noble sl. in bt. of Bealach Mughna; v. Adhar.
Conn, v. Leath Cuinn, and Siol gCuinn.
Conn Ceadchathach, 'C. of the hundred battles 'or rather 'of the
hundreds of battles,' s. of Feidhlimidh Reachtmhar, k. Ire.
twenty years; called 'Ceadchathach 'from the hundreds of btt. he
fought against the provincial kk., 260 btt. in all.
Connachta, npl.; gpl. Connacht; dpl. Connachtaibh, Connaughtmen,
Connaught; al. Cuigeadh Connacht, province of Connaught; extent of
corresponds to the ecclesiastical prov. of Tuam (sees of Tuam, Achonry,
Clonfert, Elphin, Galway, Kilmacduagh, and Killala) and Co. Leitrim;
the ancient province contained in addition Thomond and North Breithfne
or Co. Cavan, W.C. 125..
Connaught, v. Connachta.
Connaught, West, v. Iarthar Connacht.
Connaughtmen, v. Connachta and Connachtaigh.
Conndunaigh, the Condons, came to Ire. at time of Norman Invasion.
Connello, Upper and Lower, Co. Limer., v. Ui Conaill Gabhra.
Connla, s. of Art, an. of St. Brighid of Cill Dara.
Connla; s. of Breasal Breac; an. of the Ossorians.
Connla, s. of Conn Ceadchathach.
Connla, s. of Cormac Cas.
Connla Caoinbhriathrach, 'C. the Fair-spoken,' a Connaught sage, a
pagan author of the Seanchus of Ire.
Connla Clamh, 'C. the Mangy,' s. of Tadhg, s. of Cian, an. of Siol
gCearbhaill, etc..
Connla Cruaidhchealgach, 'C. the Hard-deceitful,' s. of Iarainnghleo
Fathach, k. Ire. four years; d. at Tara, anno 4757 Fm.; he is called
Connla Caomh by Fm.
Connlaoch, St., bp. of Cill Dara, al. Roincheann
Connlo, s. of Caolbhach.
Connor, Co. Antrim, v. Cuinnire.
Connra, al. Connraidh, (g. Connrach), f. of Tinne.
Connra, al. Connraidh (g. Connrach), s. of Rossa Ruadh.
Constaintin, last of the seventy Pictish kk. on the throne of Alba.
Constantin, a lord of the Picts, and a lay brother.
Constantine Mor, 'C. the Great' Roman Emperor (307-337).
Conuing, s. of Cuchoingiolt, k. of the Forthuatha, sl. at Drom Connla,
anno 825 Fm.
Conuing Beigeaglach, 'C. the Fearless,' k. Ire. ten years,; sl. by Art,
s. of Lughaidh Laimhdhearg, anno 4388 Fm.
Conuing Currach, s. of Conghal.
Convention of Raith Aodha mic Bric, anno 872, Fm.; anno 859 Au.
Cooley, Co. Louth, v. Crioch Chuailgne and Cuailgne.
Cooley, Cattle Spoil of, v. Tain Bo Cuailgne.
Cooley Mountains, the, v. Sliabh Cuailgne.
Coolfowerbeg, Co. Gal., v. Cuil Fabhair.
Coolkeenaght, Co. Derry, v. Cuaille Ciannachta.
Corann, Corran, a bar. in Co. Sli.; formerly the district included
also Gailenga in Go. Mayo, Luighne in Co. Sli., etc.
Corb, s. of Fearghus Laoibdhearg.
Corb, s. of Mogh Corb.
Corb Olom, s. of Breasal, born in Alba.
Corbach, da. of Maine, m. of Diarmaid, s. of Fearghus.
Corbadh, 'incest,'; v. incest.
Corbmac, means 'incestuous son,' and is identical with Cormac; v.
Cormac and Cormac Conluingeas.
Corbmac Cas; v. Cormac Cas.
Corc, s. of Annluan, an. of Brian Boraimhe.
Corc, s. of Corc, s. of Lughaidh, held as hostage by Niall, s. of
Eochaidh.
Corc, s. of Fearghus and Meadhb; Corca Moruadh named from, ib.; an. of
Ciaran mac an tSaoir.
Corc, s. of Lughaidh, k. M., (Corc who was gf. of Aonghus (s. of
Natfraoch) k. M., whom Patrick baptised could hardly be a contemporary
of Patrick and of Laoghaire).
Corc, s. of Lughaidh Gaot, an. of Cormac, s. of Cuileannan.
Corc Duibhne, s. of Cairbre Muse, chief over the dss. of Fiachaidh
Suighdhe (the Deise), who came to Munster; an incestuous son.
Corca Athrach, al. Machaire Caisil, 'Plain of Cashel,' extends from
Tipraitfarran near Holycross to Dunandreas in the north of
Knockgraffan, O'Fl. II. c. 81; Deise Thuaisceirt, or Decies, extends
from r. Suir to.
Corca Baiscinn, now barr. of Clonderalaw, Moyarta and Ibricken in Co.
Clare, T.P..
Corca Duibhne, now bar. of Corcaguiny, in Co. Kerry; the old district
corresponded with the barr. of Corcaguiny, Iveragh and Magunihy in
same county;.
Corca Laighdhe, al. Corca Laighe, and Corca Luighdheach, a district in
West Munster and Co. Cork, including barr. of Carbery, Bearre, and
Bantry; the O Driscoll Country.
Corca Luighdheach, v. Corca Laighdhe.
Corca Moruadh, bar. of Corcomroe, in Co. Clare; the ancient territory
included also the bar. of Burren, in which is Corcomroe Abbey; cf. the
tl. name Morroe (pron. Moruadh) in bar. of Owenybeg, Co. Limerick;
named from Corc, s. of Fearghus, s. of Rogh.
Corcach, g. Corcaighe; city, see and county of Cork.
Corcomroe, Co. Clare, v. Corca Moruadh.
Cormac, bp. of Ath Truim, d. anno 741 Fm.
Cormac, bp. of Lathrach Briuin, d. anno 854 Fm.
Cormac, k. of the Deise, sl. in bt. of Bealach Mughna.
Cormac of Feimhean, noble, sl. in bt. of Bealach Mughna.
Cormac, s. of Aonghus Mor, an. of St. Brighid of Cill Dara, II. 48,110.
Cormac, s. of Art, al. Cormac Ulfhadha, commonly referred to as Cormac
Mac Airt, smt. as the grandson of Conn (Ceadchathach), k. Ire. forty
years (225-266 Fm.
Cormac, s. of Cairbre Musc.
Cormac, s. of Cuileannan, commonly referred to as Cormac Mac
Cuileannain; k. M., and abp. of Caiseal seven years.
Cormac, s. of Mothla, k. of the Deise, a commander in bt. of Bealach
Mughna.
Cormac, s. of Oilill, k. M., sl. anno 711 Fm.
Cormac, s. of Oilill, k. L., d. anno 535 Fm.
Cormac Caoch, 'C. the Blind,' s. of Cairbre, s. of Niall Naoighiallach,
II. 50.
Cormac Cas ('Cormac the Cruel or the Quick,', C.A.), s. of Oilill Olom, 
k. M.; an. of Brian Boraimhe.
Cormac Conluingeas, ('C. head of the exiles' C.A.), incestuous son of
Conchubhar, s. of Neasa.
Cormac Gaileang, s. of Tadhg, s. of Cian; 'Gaileang that is gai lang,
a treacherous spear,' C.A.
Cormac Gealta Gaoth, gf. of Cathaoir Mor; C. A. is unable to explain
the origin of Gealta Gaoth.
Cormac Ua Cillin, bp. of Tuaim Greine.
Cornelius Tacitus (c. 55-120), Roman historian, says that commercial
exchange and intercourse existed between Ireland and France.
Corran, Co. Sligo, v. Corann.
Corrane (al. Currane) river, v. Innbhear Sceine.
Corunna, in Spain, v. Cruinne.
Coscrach, leader of Dal gCais.
Coscrach, s. of Flonn Abhradh.
Courcey, John de, v. Curcy, Seon de.
Courceys, bar. of, Co. Cork, v. Crioch Cuirseach.
Courceys, de, the, v. Cursaigh.
Craiftine, harper of Labhraidh Loingseach.
Crannach Gheisille, the Crannach or wooded district of Geashill, in
King's Co., a limit of Meath; the western portion of Geashill bar. is
probably the wooded portion referred to; v. G. J. No. 126, p. 59.
Craobh Dhearg, one of three houses in Eamhain; arms and valuables kept
in.
Craobh Ruadh, one of three houses in Eamhain; Conchubhar and his
warriors served in.
Craobhach, Risteard, Richard Creagh, d. anno 1585, primate of Ireland;
book by on the origin of Gaelic and of the race of Gaedheal quoted;
this book was partly extant in Ware's time and in possession of Thomas
Arthur, M.D.; v. Stuart's "Armagh ", 165; Ware (Preface to Ancient
Irish Histories, anno 1633) writes of "Richard Creagh's Booke de
lingua Hibernicâ, which is yet extant in the original manuscript, and
although mixed with matter of story, leaning too much to some fabulous
traditions, yet in other respects worthy of light.".
Cratloe Mountains, Co. Clare, v. Sliabh Uidhe an Riogh.
Creagh, Richard, v. Craobhach, Risteard.
Credan Head, Co. Wat., v. Ceann Criadain.
Creidhne, artist of the T. D. D.
Cremourne, bar. of, Co. Mon., v. Modhairn and Modharnaigh.
Creoda, s. of Ceidric, an. of Aelfred.
Creta, Crete, v. Candia.
Crete, v. Candia and Creta.
Criachan, f. of Osnadh, and an. of Brian Boraimhe.
Cridhinbheal, a satirist of the T. D. D., I. 218.
Crioch Aidhne, comprised bar. of Kiltartan, Co. Galway.
Crioch Ateniensis, the Greek country in which is Athens.
Crioch Chairn, at Dun na mBarc, in Corca Dhuibhne.
Crioch Chonaill, al. Conaille Muirtheimhne, Machaire Chonaill, Magh
Muirtheimhne, and Machaire Oirghiall; a plain in Co. Louth extending
from r. Boyne to the mountains of Cuailgne or Carlingford, Fm. I. 10;
Co. Louth minus the bar. of Lr. Dundalk between Carlingford Lough and
Dundalk Bay, Au.
Crioch Chondunach (C. Chonndunach), the Condon Country, a cantred of
Feara Maighe or Fermoy, given by Cormac, s. of Art, to Mogh Ruith; v.
article Condons and Clangibbon in P. G.
Crioch Chorca Duibhne, v. Corca Duibhne.
Crioch Chuailgne, Cooley, Co. Louth; a district wider than the present
par. of Cooley between Dundalk Bay and Carlingford Lough.
Crioch Chualann, identical with Cuala (q.v.)
Crioch Chuinn, perh. for Leath Cuinn, the Northern half of Ire.
Crioch Chuirseach, the bar. of Courceys, Co. Cork.
Crioch Failghe; v. Ui Failghe.
Crioch Liathain, O Lehane's country, in Co. Cork, including
Castlelyons and Great Island.
Crioch Mhaine, O'Kelly's Country, lying roughly between rr. Suck and
Shannon.
Crioch na bhFuineadhach, 'country of remote limits,' name for.
Ireland.
Crioch Ua bhFailghe, the country of Offaly; the name is represented in
the present barr. Offaly East and Offaly West, Co. Kildare; the
ancient territory extended from Sliabh Bloom to the Hill of Allen, and
from the Sugar-Loaf Hills to the Great Heath, Fm. IV. 955; Conntae Ua
bhFailghe is the King's Co. Fm. VI. 2264.
Criomhthann, baptismal name of Columcille.
Criomhthann, f. of Beinia (m. of Eochaidh Feidhlioch).
Criomhthann, k. M., an. of Donnchadh mac Caoimh, f. of Feidhlimidh (k.
M).
Criomhthann, s. of Conaire Mor.
Criomhthann, s. of Eanna Cinnsiolach, k. L.; Eithne Uathach, da. of,
lived on human flesh;
Criomhthann, s. of Fiodhach, k. Ire. seventeen years; poisoned by his
sister, Moingfhionn, anno 378 Fm.
Criomhthann Cearr, 'C. the Crooked,' k. L.,.
Criomhthann Coscrach, 'C. the Victorious,' s. of Feidhlimidh
Foirthriun, k. Ire. seven years; sl. by Rudhruighe, s. of Sithrighe,
ib. anno 4911 Fm
Criomhthann Deilgneach, 'C. the Thorny,' k. of the South of Ireland; v.
Deisceirt Eireann.
Criomhthann Nia Nar ('C. champion of Nar'; Nar a witch, being C.'s
wife, C.A.), s. of Lughaidh Riabh nDearg, k. Ire. sixteen years,;
Christ born in the reign of (12th year).
Criomhthann Sciathbheal, 'C. Shieldmouth,' k. L.; prop. C.
Sciathbheoil.
Criomhthann Sreibh, f. of Cairbre Crom, II. 74; called C. Sreb or Srem
in C. A.; meaning of Sreibh is disputed, but probably it is from
Sreabh, a stream.
Crionna, br. of Art Aoinfhear.
Crionna, bt. of, v. Crionna Chinn Chomair, and Cath Crionna.
Crionna Chinn Chomair, al. Crionna, at Brugh Mic an Oigh, on the r.
Boyne, near Stackallan Bridge.
Crochain Croidhearg, 'C. Redskin,' m. of Meadhbh, gets government of
Raith Eochach from Meadhbh.
Croch Naomh (al. C. N. Uachtarlann), Holy Cross; Abbey of, near
Thurles, Co. Tipp., built anno 1169.
Cro-inis, in Loch Ainninn; still called Cro-inis in Irish and
Cormorant Island in English, in Loch Ennell in Co. Westmeath.
Croinseach, da. of Aodh Fionn, and w. of Maolcobha, k. Ire.
Crom Chonaill (in Au. and prob. more correctly Cron is given instead
of Crom), identified in Au. with Buidhe Chonaill (q.v.); a plague that
ravaged Ire. in reign of Diarmaid, s. of Fearghus, and killed many
saints anno 556 Au.
Cromghlaise, al. Cromghlais, in Magh Feimhin C. A. 310; Cairbre Crom
so called from having been brought up at
Cronan, St., bp. of Caondrom.
Cronan, s. of Corc, the Cuircnigh in West Meath sprung from.
Cronan, s. of Tighearnach, k. of Ciannachta Ghlinne Geimhean; sl.
Eochaidh and Baodan, jkk. Ire. anno 563 Fm.
Cronn, s. of Adhnaman.
Cronn Badhraoi, f. of Caolbhach.
Cronnmhaol, bp. of Cill Mor (C. M. Eimhire, Fm.), d. anno 765 Fm.
Cronnmhaol, f. of Flann.
Crosach, s. of Cinneide, at battle of Cluain Tarbh.
Cros Greine, al. Grian Airbh, Greane, in the bar. of Crannagh, Co.
Kilkenny, and on borders of Co. Tipp., a limit of the see of Caiseal.
Crossa, 'Crosses 'in Sliabh Uidhe an Riogh, Glennagross mountain in
bar. of Lower Bunratty, Co. Clare, a limit of the see of Luimneach.
Cruachain, al. Cruacha, Rathcroghan, in par. of Elphin, Co. Rosc.;
royal seat of the division of Connaught given to Tinne, s. of Connra;
a royal fortress built at site given by Tinne to Eochaidh Feidhlioch;
Druim na nDruadh its original name; named from Crochain Chroidhearg (m.
of Meadhbh); the poem on Dathi's burial at Cruachain beginning Ata
fut-sa ri fionn Fail, quoted almost in extenso, is published in Hy.
Fiach, 26 sq. from Mac Firbis's Book of Genealogies; O'Curry (Man. and
Cust., I. 71), forgets this and prints a translation of the Leabhar na
hUidhre copy of the poem; this last copy is probably the oldest we
possess.
Cruachan Claonta, the moat of Clane, Co. Kild.
Cruachan Feile, Fial's hill, in Connaught.
Cruinne, Corunna, in Spain.
Cruitheantuaith, al. Alba, the country of the Cruithnigh or Picts,
Scotland, the northern portion of the island of Great Britain; v.
Picti, Alba, Cruithnigh.
Cruithnigh, al. Picti, Picts,; v. Picti.
Cuailgne, v. Crioch Chuailgne.
Cuailgne, s. of Breoghan.
Cuailgne, Tain Bo, v. Tain Bo Cuailgne.
Cuaille Ciannachta, Coolkeenaght, in par. of Faughanvale, Co. Derry,
Fm. I. 1226; a limit of the see Of Ard Macha.
Cuala, a district in East Leinster "co-extensive with bar. of
Ballinacor N. and bar. of Rathdown, Co. Wicklow, and south half of bar.
of Rathdown, Co. Dublin, Au. IV. 103;" for other estimates v. Onom.
Cuan, s. of Breoghan, came to Ire. as Milesian leader.
Cuan, s. of Amhalghuidh (C. s. of Enda, Fm.), k. M., sl. in bt.of Carn
Conaill, anno 645 Fm.
Cuan, s. of Conall, k. of Ui Fidhgheinnte, sl. in bt.of Carn Conaill,
anno 645 Fm.
Cuan, the three C.'s sl. Diothorba, k. Ire., at Corann anno 4532 Fm.
Cuan an Bhainbh, 'harbour of the young pig,' Bannow Harbour on south
coast of Co. Wex.; it is scarcely a mile and a half in breadth, at its
broadest point, on its west shore are the ruins of Tintern Abbey, and
on the east shore the vil. of Bannow, once a town of importance;
Robert Fitz Stephen lands at, on the south coast of Co. Loch Garman
(Co. Wex.), at the place called Baginbun; v. Baginbun.
Cuan Mara, one of the three Cuans who sl. Diothorba at Corann, anno
4532 Fm.
Cuan Muighe, one of the three Cuans who sl. Diothorba at Corann, anno
4532 Fm.
Cuan Sleibhe, one of the three Cuans who sl. Diothorba at Corann, anno
4532 Fm.
Cuan Snamha hAidhne, Carlingford Lough; a limit of the see of Cuinnire.
Cuana, f. of Conchadh.
Cuanaidh, f. of a St. Baoithin.
Cuanna, s. of Cailchin, k. of Fearmaighe; al. called Laoch
Liathmhaine; v. Laoch Liathmhaine.
Cuarnan, s. of Aodh.
Cucharainn, s. of Duach.
Cu Choingiolt, f. of Conaing, k. of the Forthuatha.
Cu Chorb, s. of Mogh Corb, k. L.
Cuchulainn, expels the remnant of the Fir Bolg; contest for the
champion's prize between Conall Cearnach, Laoghaire Buadhach and;
story of Aoife and; sl. Conlaoch, his son; one of the party attacking
Manainn; pursues Curaoi and Blanaid,; left bound by Curaoi who cuts
off his hair; story of the birds pursued by,; plots with Blanaid the
death of Curaoi; the filés and; sl. Fear Diadh and sl. by the sons of
Cailitin.
Cudam, s. of Cutbhun, an. of Aelfred.
Cu Doiligh, s. of Cinneide, sl. at Cluain Tarbh.
Cu gan Mhathair, k. M.; an. of Donnchadh, s. of Caomh; d. anno 664
Fm.; the word signifies hound (i.e. hero, etc.) without a mother, v.
Fm. anno 664 note.
Cuibh, a slave who came to Ire. with the sons of Milidh.
Cuigeadh, fifth part, province; v. Province.
Cuigeadh Eochaidh Abhradhruaidh, the province of Eochaidh Abhradhruadh
('Eochaidh of the red eyebrows ') one of the two main divisions of
Munster, extends from Corcach (Cork) and Luimneach (Limerick) eastward
to Cumar na dtri nUisce (at Waterford Harbour).
Cuigeadh Gallda, an, 'the foreign or English province,' 'Anglica
provincia,' the English Pale.
Cuil, bt of, in which many men of Corcach fell through the prayer of
St. Midhe; this Cuil is not identified; there is Coole par. near
Fermoy in bar. of Barrymore; al. a tl. called Coole near Millstreet,
Co. Cork; in C.S. 51, the bt. is Cath Cuillne; Cul Collainge is
identified by Pl. as Kilcullen, bar. of East Muskery, Co. Cork; there
is a tl. called Kilcully (with a graveyard) a little to north of Cork,
and not far thence is a tl. Coole.
Cuil Ard, in Magh Inis, in bar. of Lecale, Co. Down; O'Lav. supposes
it to be tl. of Killard, par. of Dunsford, O'Lav. I., 101.
Cuil Breagh, Bile Teineadh (q.v.) i.e. Coill a' Bhille or Billyswood,
in the par. of Moynalty, bar. of Lower Kells, Co. Meath,.
Cuil Caicheir, not identified; Caicher, sl. by Aimhirgin in bt. of.
Cuil Caoil, prob. Kikeel, Co. Down.
Cuil Ceasrach, in Connaught; Ll. 3 and Annals of Kilronan, anno 1571,
say it is on the r. Boyle; v. Fm. I. 4.
Cull Ceasrach, in Crioch Chairn, at Dun na mBarc, in Corca Dubhne.
Cuil Conaire, in Ceara, Fm. I. 182, i.e. in bar. of Ceara or Carra, Co.
Mayo.
Cuil Dreimhne, in bar. of Carbury, Co. Sligo, north of Sligo town,
Trias Thaum., 452; v. "Stair na hEireann," vocab.
Cuil Fabhair (Cuil Fobhair, IL 296 and Fm. text, I. 42), Coolfowerbeg,
in bar. of Clare, Co. Galway.
Cuil Feadha, perh. Longwood, par. of Clonard, Meath, Onom.
Cuil Feadha, plain of, in bar of Farney, Co. Mon., prob. district
around Lough Fea, Fm. I. 36
Cuil Fraochain, the corner of Fraochan ('whortleberry') not identified.
Cuil Marta, al. Cuil Martra (O'Fl.), in Teathbha, Ll. 15.
Cuil Rathan, Coleraine, Co. Derry, prop. C. Rathain.
Cull Uinnseann, in Teathbha.
Cuileannan, f. of Cormac; v. Cormac, s. of Cuileannan.
Cuimin, the two C.'s (i.e. C., s. of Colman Beag, s. of Cearbhall, and.
C., s. of Libren, s. of Illadhan, s. of Cearbhall, Fm.); sl. Baodan s.
of Ninnidh, k. Ire., at Carraig Leime an Eich, anno 567 Fm. which
spells the name Cumain.
Cuimin Foda, 'C. the Long or Tall,' s. of Fiachna, St.; d. anno 661 Fm.
Cuinche, in Thomond, Quin, bar. of Bunratty, Co Clare; a limit of the
see of Luimneach.
Cuinnire, a champion sent by Conchubhar to interview Conlaoch.
Cuinnire, Connor, par. and village in bar. of Lower Antrim, Co.
Antrim; the village is 41/4 miles south-south-east of Ballymena; v. Dun
da Leathghlas.
Cuircnigh, the tribe name of the people who inhabited Machaire
Chuircne which included the bar. of Kilkenny West, Co. West., sprung
from Cronan, s. of Corc.
Cul, Ploughman to Partholon.
Cul Claon, f. of Seancha (an author of the Seanchus Mor).
Cumar, al. C. Cluana hArda (hAirde), a limit of Meath, between Snamh
Eugnachair (q.v.) and r. Lithfe; D. IV. 2 has (asin) cusin muir, 'to
the sea,' while Rawlinson B 512 has comuir, the latter reading may
possibly have given rise to K.'s Cumar.
Cumar Chluana hIoraird, meeting of the Boyne and Blackwater near
Clonard, Co. Meath, a limit of see of Cill Dara.
Cumar Cluana Eoais, Comar, near Clones, Co. Mon., O'R.S.; a.
limit of Meath.
Cumar Cluana hAirde, al. Cumar, the confluence of Cluain Airde; a
limit of Meath, between Snamh Eugnachair and r. Liffey; the reading in
D. IV. 2 for the quatrain in which Cumar Cluana hAirde occurs is: O
Loch Bodhbh derg co Birra, O Sinainn sair co farge, O Chomar Cluana
h(e)ois aird Go Comar Cluana hIraird; Rawlinson B 512 reads co Comar
Cluana h(e)ois aird, Sco Comar Cluana hIraird.
Cumar na dTri nUisce, the confluence of the rr. Suir, Nore, and Barrow,
near Waterford; a limit of prov. of Leinster, as possessed by
Slainghe; limit of prov. of Eochaidh Abhradhruadh; al. Bun Suaimhne,
limit of see of Lis Mor.
Cumara, Cu Mara, from whom Clann Mhic Conmara (the Macnamaras) are
named.
Cumascach, k. of the Cruithnigh.
Cumascach, k. of Ui Failghe, sl. by Maolduin, k. M. anno 752 Fm.
Cumascach, k. U., captured by the Lochlonnaigh anno 893 Fm.
Cumberland, Brigantes settled in district of.
Cumhall, s. of Treanmhor, f. of Fionn Mac Cumhaill; v. Fionn, s. of
Cumhall.
Cumhdach Cairrge Bladhruidhe, the building of Carraig Bladhruidhe, in
Murbholg, fort built by Manntan.
Cunnchaidh, s. of Fionnchaidh.
Curaoi, s. of Daire, chief of an order of champions of West Munster;
helps by his magic the champions of the Craobh Ruadh to sack the dun
of Manainn; claims Blanaid as a prize and is refused; carries off
Blanaid; pursued by Cuchulainn whom he overthrows and leaves bound;
Blanaid conspires with Cuchulainn against; sl. by Cuchulainn;
Feircheirtne, poet to, avenges him by slaying Blanaid.
Curaoi, s. of Daire, province of, extends from Bealach Chonghlais to
Luimneach, and from Luimneach westward; al. called An Mhumha Thiar,
West Munster.
Curcy, Seon de, John de Courcey, a leader in the Norman Invasion.
Curlieu Hills, the, v. Seaghais.
Cursaigh, De Courceys, came to Ire. at time of Norman Invasion.
Cus, s. of Cam.
Cuthbhuin, s. of Ceaulin, an. of Aelfred.
Cyrus, v. Cirus.

D.
Da Bhantuathaigh, 'two female chiefs' applied to Beuchuill and Danann,
two female leaders of the T. D. D..
Dabhall Dianbhuilleach, 'D. of Strong Blows,' s. of the monarch of
Lochloinn.
Dabhidh, David, k. of Israel.
Da Cearda, f. of St. Comhdhan.
Dá Chich Danann, the two Paps, mountains in bar. of Magunihy, Co.
Kerry; named from Danann (m. of Brian, Iucharbha, and Iuchar), and
situated in Luachair Deaghaidh, in Desmond.
Da Chreaga, druid, grandfather (on mother's side) of Fiachaidh
Muilleathan.
Da Fhearta, in Au. and Fm. Ath Da Fearta, so, too, LI. 25, Bb. 33 a,
Lec. 620, which means the 'ford of the two graves or of the two
miracles.' It is 'i gConallaibh.' Lec. 139; and in 'Magh Conaille '(Fm.
and Au.); it is in Sliabh Fuaid, Ll. 79; bt. of anno 817 Fm.
Daghdha Mor, an, 'the great Daghdha,' s. of Ealatha, k. Ire. 70 years;
Eochaidh Ollathar true name of; the word Daghdha is indeclinable.
Daimhin, k. of Oirghialla.
Daimhliag, 'stone house or church,' Duleek, a small town in the bar.
of Lower Duleek, 5 miles south west of Drogheda, Co. Louth.
Daimhliag Chiarain, 'Duleek of Ciaran,' seems identical with
Diaimhliag; Duleek seems to be the church intended; Daimhlaig Chiarain
is said, in a Stonyhurst MS. of the year 1700, quoted in Onom., to lie
between Cill Maighneann (Kilmainhan) and Lughmhagh (Louth); there was
a Daimhliag Cluana Mic Nois, but it was not built till the year 904,
and could not be the edifice referred to here; Daimhliag Chiarain
seems a mistake for Daimhliag Chianain. It was St. Cianan who built
Daimhliag or Duleek of Meath which was supposed to be the first stone
church built in Ire.; the passage in Cogadh Gaedhel re Gallaibh which
K. follows here has 'Damliag Cianain' which confirms the theory that
Daimhliag Chiarain is an error for Daimhliag Chianain, v. C.G. 7, 224.
Dainfhir, npl., al. Dainir, Danair, natives of Dania or Denmark; they
are a branch of the Lochlonnaigh and are called Dubhlochlonnaigh and
Duibhgheinte in the old books.
Dairbhre, Valentia Island west of Co. Kerry; a limit of the see of
Raith Mhaighe Deisceirt.
Dairchill, first name of St. Moling.
Daire, f. of Curaoi, v. Curaoi s. of Daire.
Daire, f. of Loch.
Daire, f. of Lughaidh, an. of Mac Con.
Daire, k. U., one of the nine chosen to purify the Seanchus in time of
St. Patrick; it was he who gave Patrick the site for the church of Ard
Macha, Fm. I. 142.
Daire, s. of Conghal.
Daire, s. of Cormac, s. of Art.
Daire, s. of Dluthach.
Daire, s. of Siothbholg, an. of Mac Con.
Dairearca, m. of Ciaran mac an tSaoir.
Daire Barragh, 'D. of Bushy Hair,' s., with issue, of Cathaoir Mor; an.
of Tighearnach, bp. of Cluain Eoais.
Daire Cearb, s. of Oilill Flann Beag.
Daire Doimhtheach, f. of 'the five Lughaidhs,' according to the Coir
Anmann'; Doimhtheach i. Domatach, (needy), for there was poverty and
great scarcity of food in his time, C.A.
Daire Dornmhar, one of the Earna, jk. of M..
Dairfhine, v. Sliocht Dairine.
Dairine, v. Sliocht Dairine.
Dairine, da. of Tuathal Teachtmhar; story of her marriage to Eochaidh
Aincheann, k. L., which led to the imposition known as the Boraimhe
Laighean.
Dairinis, 'oak island,' a monastery on the Abhann Mhor or Blackwater,
about 21/2 miles north west of Youghal, in Co. Water., now called Molana
from St. Maolanfaidh, its patron Saint; v. Fm. I. 343; al. Dairinis
Maolanfaidh; there was another monastery on an island of the same name
in Wexford Harbour; Dairinis of the Abhann Mhor is not now an island;
pl. by the Lochlonnaigh; from the context of this reference it would
seem that D. was in or near Eoghanacht Locha Lein; O'Rahilly in his
poem "Bhalentin Brun " says; Dairinis thiar iarla ni'l aice 'en
chlainn uir, Dairinis in the west has not an earl of the noble race.
He is referring to the downfall of the Mac Carthys and Mac Carthy Mor
was earl of Valentia, while the island of that name is called Oilean
Dairbhre in Irish; it is thus not unlikely that O'Rahilly means the
Island of Valentia west of Kerry when he speaks of Dairinis.
Dairsidhigh, the Darcys, come to Ire. at the Norman Invasion.
Dal nAruidhe, extended from Newry to Sliabh Mis (now Slemmish, Co.
Antrim) and from the sea to Linn Duachaill, now Magheralin in west of
Co. Down, Fm. III. 13, i.e. about half of Antrim Co., and Castlereagh
bar. Co. Down, Au.
Dal Cairbre, race of Cairbre Nia Fear, in Leinster.
Dal gCais, territory and tribe; the territory corresponds to
Tuadhmhumha, Thomond, or North Munster, limits of from Leim
Chongculainn to Slighe Dhala, and from Sliabh Eichtge to Sliabh
Eibhlinne, (the territory thus roughly corresponds to the old see of
Cill da Lua); Mac Neill and Westropp identify Dal gCais tribe with the
Deise Thuaisceirt, v. Proceedings R.I.A., Vol. XXIX., Section C., p.
189.
Dal bhFiatach, race of Fiatach Fionn, settled in Dal nAruidhe, in Co.
Down; named from Fiatach Fionn, k. Ire.
Dal Maschorb Laighean, al. Dal Meisincorb, said (Fm. I. 670) to he bar.
of Arklow and adjoining portions of Co. Wicklow; but D. Mescorp near
Tara, Lee. 61 in the Fortuatha of Leinster in the east of Leinster,
Feilire Oengusaa, 206; the fawn let loose at Taillte is pursued to
Howth (Beann Eadair), and is overtaken and sl. at Dal M. L. by
Lughaidh Laighdhe; the context would seem to show that it is the same
as Dal Mescorp of Lec., and near Tara.
Dal Riada, the dss. of Cairbre Rioghfhada are called; the Dal Riada of
Alba are sprung from Earc, s. of Cairbre Rioghfhada; the Dal Riada of
Ulster from Olchu, s. of Cairbe Rioghfhada, ib.; Dal Riada of Ulster,
al. an Ruta, is coextensive with the Co. Antrim north of Sliabh Mis
(Slemmish), that is what remains of Co. Antrim, when the portion of
Dal nAruidhe in the County is taken from it, but v. Trip. Life, 164,
where it seems restricted to the ancient deanery of Tuaisceirt.
Dal Riada of Alba, v. Dal Riada; a district bounded on the south by
the Firth of Clyde, separated on the east from Pictland by Druim 
Alban; its chief tribes were Cineal Loairn, Cineal Gabhrain, Cineal
Comhghaill, and Cineal nAonghusa, Skene's Chronicles of the Picts and
Scots, CXIII.; the district corresponded roughly with the present
Argyleshire.
Dall, storyteller to Conchubhar, s. of Neasa.
Dall Bronach, 'D. the Sorrowful,' f. of Comain (m. of Tuathal Maol
Garbh).
Dallan, ollamh of Cearbhall; historical poem by, quoted; the poem
which consists of only four stanzas is given anonymously in 23 K. 32,
R. I. A., p. 205.
Dallan, s. of Dubhthach.
Dallan Forgaill, al. Eochaidh Eigeas, s. of Oilill, ard-ollamh of
Ire.; composer of the Amhra Gholumcille.
Dairheudini, Beda's name for the Dal Riada.
Damh, ploughman to Partholon.
Damhan, f. of Fear Diadh.
Damhar, f. of a St. Brighid.
Dan, 'craft,' equivalent to ceard.
Danair, npl., v. Dainfhir; used for the Danes or natives of Dania or
Denmark.
Danann, da. of Dealbhaoth, and m. of Brian, Iucharbha and Iuchar, who
are also named as children of Dealbhaoth and the three gods of Danann;
said by some to have given rise to the name Tuatha De Danann, ib.; Da
Chich Danann (qv.) named from
Danann, female chief of the T. D. D., no doubt identical with Danann,
da. of Dealbhaoth.
Dane's Island, v. Oilean Ui Bhric.
Danes, Northmen, etc., v. Lochlonnaigh and Dubhlochlonnaigh.
Danes, v. Dainfhir, Danair and Dubhlochlonnaigh.
Dania, an, Denmark.
Daniel, Samuel (1562-1619), English poet and historian, author of a
history of England to the reign of Edward III. the first portion of
which coming down to end of the reign of Stephen, appeared in 1612 and
was republished in 1613.
Daol, da. of Fiachaidh, s. of Niall (k. of South Eile), w. of Lughaidh,
and step-mother of Corc.
Darcys, the, v. Dairsidhigh.
Darerca, sister of St. Patrick, brought in Niall Naoighiallach's fleet
to Ire..
Darius, k. of Persia.
Dartadha, a wrestler in the house of Neimhidh (s. of Sraibhgheann).
Dathi, s. of Fiachraidh, k. Ire. twenty-three years, death of, anno
428 Fm.
Davies, Sir John, v. Davis, Seon.
Davis, Seon, Sir John Davies (1569-1626), English writer as well as
Attorney-general for Ire. and Speaker of the Irish House of Commons.
The work on Ire. from which K. quotes a celebrated passage is
entitled: " Discoverie of the true causes why Ireland was never
entirely subdued until the beginning of his Majestie's happie raigne,"
and appeared in the year 1612; one of a group of recent (K.'s time)
English writers who have been unjust to Ire.
Daunla, in Italy; it is now called Apulia.
Deachiuath, s. of Fiachaidh Muilleathan.
Deaghaidh, v. Clanna Deaghaidh.
Deaghaidh (or Deaghatha), f. of Bratha, v. Deghatha.
Deaghaidh, s. of Cairbre Lusc.
Deaghaidh, s. of Domhnall, a leader of Dal gCais.
Deaghaidh Dearg, 'D. the Red,' s. of Deirgthine.
Deaghamhrach, s. of Deaghaidh Dearg.
Deaghatha (al. Deaghfhatha or Deaghaidh), f. of Bratha.
Deaghfhatha, f. of Bratha (f. of Midhe, druid of Neimheadh); (In Trans.
Deaghfhath and Brath).
Deaglan, Declan, St., protector of the Deise.
Deala, a slave who came to Ire. with the sons of Milidh.
Deala, s. of Loch; f. of Slainghe.
Dealbhaoth, f. (properly gf.) of Eire; Eire is da. of Fiachaidh, s. of
Dealbhaoth.
Dealbhaoth, s. of Cas, s. of Conall Eachluaith
Dealbhaoth, s. of Ealatha.
Dealbhaoth, s. of Ned.
Dealbhaoth, s. of Oghma Griain Eigis, k. Ire. ten years; gf. of Eire,
Fodhla and Banbha.
Dealbhna, the Dealbhna slain round Fionn, s. of Arb. in bt. of Bealach
Chro; these seem to be the Dealbhna Ua Maine or Dealbhna Nuadhat, v.
Onom. under Belach Cro.
Dealbhna, the seven D.'s, a family sprung from Dealbhaoth, s. of Cas,
of the race of Cormac Cas and hence of the race of Eibhear, settled in
Leath Cuinn. From them seven districts were named Dealbhna or Delvin;
these are: Dealbhna Mhor, Dealbhna Bheag, Dealbhna Eathra, Dealbhna
Iarthair Mhidhe, Dealbhna Sithe Neannta, Dealbhna Chuile Fabhair, and
Dealbhna Thire da Loch, in Connaught; the punctuation in the K. text
does not make it clear how many of the Dealbhna were in Connaught; but
v. Book of Hy Many 89 a. 2, which gives four as in Connaught.
Dealbhna Bheag, bar. of Demifore in the extreme west of Co. Meath.
Dealbhna Chuile Fabhair, in ancient Connaught; if identical with
Dealbhna Nuadhat it is in bar. of Athlone, Co. Rosc.; O'D. places it
east of Lough Corrib in Co. Gal.
Dealbhna Eathra, al. called Dealbhna mag Cochlain is in bar. of
Garrycastle in the west of King's Co. and is co-extensive with the
barony, if we exclude Lusmagh par.; it contained the church of
Clonmacnoise and many churches and castles of importance.
Dealbhna Iarthair Mhidhe in Teffia, Co. Westm.
Dealbhna Mhor, bar. of Delvin in north-east corner of Co. Westmeath.
Dealbhna Nuadhat, supposed to be identical with D. Chuile Fabhair, in
bar. of Athlone, Co. Roscom..
Dealbhna Sithe Neannta, in Connaught; Sith Neannta is now Fairymount,
par. of Kilgefin, bar. of South Ballintober, Co. Ros.
Dealbhna Tire da Loch, in Connaught; bar. of Moycullen between Lough
Corrib and Galway Bay.
Dealga, bt. of, one of a series of btt. fought against the
Connaughtmen by Cineal Eoghain; place not identified; v. Fm. I. 161,
162.
Dealgnaid, w. of Partholon.
Deaman, f. of Diothorba and s. of Airgeadmhar.
Deaman, f. of Fiachaidh.
Deaman, f. of Maolcobha, and s. of Caireall.
Dearbhorgaill, da. of Fargall, k. of Lochloinn, and w. of Lughaidh
Riabh nDearg
Dearbhforgaill, da. of Murchadh, s. of Flam, k. of Meath, and w. of
Tighearnan O Ruairc of Breithfne; story of her intrigue and elopement
with Diarmaid, Mac Murchadh.
Dearbhforgaill, w. of Toirrdhealbhach O Briain.
Deargmhosach, s. of Cathaoir Mor.
Deargraith, in Magh Feimhean; Dergrath, in see of Lismore (Taxation of
Irish Dioceses and Parishes in years 1302--1306, Sweetman and
Handcock's Calendar). Derrygrath par., Co. Tipp., 4 miles north-east
of Cahir.
Deargruathar Chonaill Chearnaigh, "the red rout of Conall Cearnach "
an Irish tract; a modern version of this tract is published by the
Gaelic League.
De, Dee, in the name Tuatha Dc Danann, represented an order or rank
according to some authorities.
Deasmhumha, Desmond or South Munster; in early times Desmond extended
from Cnoc Breanainn, Mt. Brandon, to Port Lairge, Waterford, and from
Abhann Mhor, r. Blackwater, to Corcach, Cork; at a later period it had
shrunk to the parts of Co. Kerry south of r. Maine, and some portions
of Co. Cork such as barr. of Beare and Bantry; one of the five
provinces of Ire. according to the division made by the five sons of
Deala.
Decies, the, v. Deise, Deise Mumhan, etc.
Deibhriusaigh, the Devereuxes, a family who came to Ire. at the Norman
Invasion.
Deigheall, f. of Aingceal.
Deighiarna, s. of Goll.
Deilionn Druit, an attendant of Cormac, s. of Art, with whom Cormac
exchanges dress.
Dein (or Dian), s. of Connla, an. of St. Brighid of Cill Dara.
Deirbhri, buried at Cruachain, al. Deirbhre, written Drebriu in the
Leabhar na hUidhre copy of poem Ata fut-sa, etc., one of the six
daughters of Eochaidh Feilioch, the other five being Mughain, Eile,
Meadhbh, Clothra, and Eithne.
Deirgthine, race of; v. Sliocht Deirgthine.
Deirgthine, s. of Nuadha Airgtheach, an. of Mac Con.
Deisceirt Eireann, 'the South of Ire.' the see of Cloyne is so in
MacFirbis's tract "de quibusdam episcopis," quoted in Onom.
Deise, a slave who came with the ss. of Milidh to Ire.
Deise Dheisceirt, South Deise; v. Deise Mumhan.
Deise Mumhan, Deise of Munster, al. simply Deise, the dss. of
Fiachaidh Suighdhe who were called the Deise settled in a district in
Munster called Deise, which was divided into Deise Dheisceirt, or
South Deise. and Deise Thuaisceirt, or North Deise; Deise Dheisceirt
extended from Liss Mor (Lismore) to Ceann Criadain (Credan Head),
eastern extremity of Co. Wat., and from the r. Siur southward to the
sea; Deise Thuaisceirt from the Siur to Corca Athrach or Plain of
Cashel, ib., thus comprising the present barr. of Middlethird and Iffa
and Offa East, Co. Tipp. The name Deise is represented in the modern
barr. Decies within Drum and Decies without Drum, Co. Water.
Deise Teamhrach, district near Tara, native territory of the Deise
Mumhan, or Deise of Munster before they were banished by Cormac, s. of
Art; the present small barr. of Deece, Upper and Lower, Co. Meath,
which lie within the Boyne basin represent the territory.
Deise Thuaisceirt, North Deise, v. Deise. Mumhan, Magh Feimhean, and
Dal gCais.
Deitsin, s. of Eochaidh.
Delvin, v. Dealbhna, etc.
Demal, name of demon that tormented Columcille.
Denmark, v. Dania.
Derry, v. Doire and Doire Choluim Chille.
Desmond, v. Deasmhumha.
Devereuxes, the, v. Deibhriusaigh.
Devil's Bit Mountain, v. Sliabh an Bhearnain, Sliabh Aildiuin and
Bearnan Eile.
Dialogorum Libri, a work by Caesarius (q.v.); quotation about St.
Patrick's Purgatory from.
Dian, R. of Connla; v. Dein.
Dian, s. of Roitheachtaigh, I. 136, 138.
Dianchecht, s. of Easarg, physician of the T. D. D.
Diarmaid, f. of Colman Beag.
Diarmaid, f. of Domhnall of Corca Baiscin.
Diarmaid, s. of Airmeadhach Caoch.
Diarmaid, s. of Aodh Rein, churchyard of, al. Disirt Diarmada (q. v).
Diarmaid, s. of Aodh Slaine. v. Diarmaid Ruanuidh.
Diarmaid, s. of Cearbhall, k. Ire.. identical with Diarmaid, s. of
Fearghus Ceirrbheoil.
Diarmaid, s. of Eoghan Og (according to some Seanchas), and an. to St.
Beacan.
Diarmaid, s. of Cearbhall. k. of Osruighe, placed on the throne of
Osruighe by Flann Sionna, k. Ire.; d. anno 927, Fm.
Diarmaid, s. of Fearghus Ceirrbheoil, (al. Diarmaid Mac Cearbhaill), k. 
Ire. twenty-two years.
Diarmaid, s. of Fionnachta, leader of the Luighnigh.
Diarmaid, s. of Maol na mBo, k. L.
Diarmaid, s. of Tomaltach, k. C., d. anno 832 Fm.
Diarmaid Mac Murchadha, v. Mac Murchadha, Diarmaid.
Diarmaid na nGall, 'D. of the Foreigners.' a name given to Diarmaid
Mac Murchadha, v. Mac Murchadha, Diarmaid.
Diarmaid Ruanuidh, s. of Aodh Slaine, jk. Ire. seven years.
Dil, da. of Milidh of Spain, wife and sister of Donn.
Dil, s. of Da Chreaga.
Din Dathaidh, f. of Gormghal.
Dinneach, a druid, gave advice to the Munster nobles.
Dinnseanchas, that is, legends and stories connected with place names,
Book of, written by Aimhirgin, file of Diarmaid (s. of Cearbhall);
Dinnseanchas tracts both in prose and verse are to be found in Ll.,
Bb., Lee. etc., also in a MS. in the Rennes Library; In voll. 15 and
16 of the Revue Celtique, and in Folk-Lore, II., IV. Stokes has edited
a good deal of the prose, and Gwynn has edited a considerable part of
the poetry in the Todd Lectures of the Royal Irish Academy.
Diochorb, s. of Oilill Olom, sl. in bt. of Magh Muchruimhe.
Diochu Uairiodhnach, s. of Tat Teadhmannach, II. 238.
Diodorus Siculus, a Greek historian, contemporary with Julius Caesar
and Augustus Caesar; his historical work is entitled ??ß???????
?st????? [Greek: Bibliotheke Istorike], Historical Library, in 40
books, of which the first five are extant; calls Ire. by the name of
Irin.
Diolmhainigh, Dillons, a family who came to Ire at the time of the
Norman Invasion.
Dioma, f. of a St. Brighid.
Dioma, s. of Naoi, k. of Leinster, f. of Eithne (m. of Columcille).
Dioma, s. of Ronan, k. of Gaiseal, def. Guaire Aidhne at Carn
Fearadhaigh anno 622 Fm.
Dioman, (al. Deaman), s. of Caireall, k. U. ten years, sl. by the
boors of Buireann anno 565 Fm.; v. Buireann.
Dionn Riogh, al. Dumha Shlainghe, Burgage moat in tl. of Ballyknockan,
south of Leighlinbridge on the west bank of the Barrow, an ancient
palace of the kings of Leinster.
Diothorba, s. of Deaman, k. Ire. twenty-one years.
Disirt da Chonna, v. Doire Dhisirt dha Chonna.
Disirt Diarmada, Castledermot, Co. Kild., called D. Diarmada, from
Diarmaid, s. of Aodh Roin.
Disirt Tiobraide, is mentioned as being pl. in the same context with
Dun Deargmhuighe (Dunderrow near Kinsale) Lis Mor and Inis Eoghanain
(Inishannon), thus it is prob. in the south of Ire. on or near the
Waterford or East Cork coast; D. Tiobraide may be perhaps Dysart in
par. of Ardmore, Co. Wat., where there are the ruins of an old church
and a much venerated Holy Well. The townland lying to the west of the
Youghal Railway Station is called Dysart, but does not contain old
building remains.
Diuthach, s. of Deitsin.
Dobhar, in north of Alba, r. Dour in Aberdeenshire.
Doire, al. Doire Choluim Chille. Londonderry, a favourite residence of
St. Columcille; see of, al. called see of Raith Both.
Doire Choluim Chille, Derry of Columcille, Londonderry, the Rule of,
forbidding the killing of milch cows.
Doire Dhisirt dha Chonna, O'D. (Fm. Index) identifies Disirt da Chonna
as Dysart in Feara Arda.
Domhanghort, f. of Gabhran, of Alba.
Domhnach Arda, a church blessed by Paladius, in Lower Leinster; in Ui
Garchon, Trip. Life, 297, "Nathi, s. of Garrchon lord of that country
came and banished Paladius "; Ui Garchon is a district in east Wicklow
including Arklow and extending prob. to Bray.
Domhnach Padraigh, 'Patrick's Church,' Donaghpatrick, bar. of Upper
Kells, Co. Meath.
Domhnall, br. of Murchadh (s of Brian Boroimhe), at bt. of Cluain
Tarbh.
Domhnall, f. of Alasdair; Clann Domhnaill (the Mac Donnells) of Ire.
and Alba named from; an. of Clann tSithigh (the Mac Sheehys).
Domhnall, f. of Deaghadh (a leader of Dal gCais)
Domhnall, f. of Domhnall Claon.
Domhnall, f. of Donnchadh (k. Ire.)
Domhnall, f. of Maolcolum (k. of Alba).
Domhnall, k. of Dun Cearmna, sl. in bt. of Bealach Mughna.
Domhnall, s. of Ailpin, k. of the Picti.
Domhnall, s. of Aodh, k. Ire. thirteen years; d. anno 639 Fm.
Domhnall, s. of Aodh Muindearg, def. in bt. of Corann fought
between Cineal Conaill and Cineal Eogbain.
Domhnall, s. of Conghalach; sl. Fearghal O Ruairc anno 976 Fm.
Domhnall, s. of Constantin, k. of Alba.
Domhnall, s. of Diarmaid, k. of Corca Baiscin, sl. at Cluain Tarbh.
Domhnall, s. of Donnchadh, and f. of Maoilseachlainn.
Domhnall, s. of Dubh da Bhuireann.
Domhnall, s. of Eimhin, sl. at Cluain Tarb,; he was Mormhaor of Marr
in Alba.
Domhnall, s. of Faolan; he was k. of the Deise and d. anno 995 Fm.
Domhnall, s. of Flann Sionna, and f. of Maoilseachlainn.
Domhnall, s. of Muircheartach, s. of Muireadhach.
Domhnall, s. of Muircheartach, s. of Niall Glundubh, k. Ire. ten
years; d. anno 978 recte 979 Fm.; according to Fm. he reigned 24 years.
Domhnall, s. of Muireadhach, s. of Earc, jk. Ire. one year (his
brother Fearghus reigning with him); d anno 561 Fm; Muireadhach, s. of
Earc, is smt. referred to as Mac Earca.
Domhnall, s. of Muireigen, sl. by his companions, II. 192 (anno 962 Fm.
Domhnall, s. of Murchadh, k. Ire. forty-two years; first k. Ire. of
Clann Colmain; d. anno 758 Fm.
Domhnall, s. of Tadhg O Briain, vice-k. of the Isles; proves a tyrant
and is sent back to Ire.
Domhnall Caomhanach, s. of Diarmaid na nGall; the Caomhanaigh,
Cavanaghs, named from.
Domhnall Claon, 'D. the Perverse,' k. L., rescued from the
Lochlonnaigh by Maoilseachlainn, k. Ire.; d. anno 983 Fm.
Domhnall O bhFaolain (now Whelan, Phelan, with or without O), k. of
the Deise; v. C. G. 107.
Domhnall O Neill.
Domhnall Reamhar, 'D. the Fat,' f. of Donnchadh (k. of Osruighe).
Domhnann, kingdom of, given by Tinne to Oilill Fionn; v. Iorrus
Domhnann, and Oireacht Domhnann.
Domhnanncha, dpl. Domhnannchaibh, a remnant of the Fir Bolg.
Don, r., v. Tanais.
Donn, ,s. of Milidh of Spain.
Donnabhan, seizes on Mathghamhain and gives him up to the foreigners
in violation of the protection of Colam, comhorba of Bairre, anno 976,
C. G. CXXXI. note 3; C. G. CXXV. sq. has an interesting discussion on
this event which led up to the murder of Mathghamhain; Donnabhan was s.
of Cathal and chief of Ui Fidhgeinte.
Donnagan, k. of Leinster, sl. by Donnchadh Mac Giolla Padraig on Lar
Leithghlinne.
Donnagan, k. of Oirghialla, sl. in bt. of Cill Mona anno 976 Fm.
Donnchadh, f. of Conchubhar (half k. of Meath), III. 188.
Donnchadh, f. of Domhnall, and gf. of Maoilseachlainn. II. 288.
Donnchadh, s, of Aodh Slaine, and f. of Fiannacht Fleadhach.
Donnchadh, s. of Brian Boraimhe, ok. Ire. fifty years (some say twelve
years).
Donnchadh, s. of Ceallach, f. of Mor, q. of Ire.
Donnchadh, s. of Ceallach, k. of Osruighe, f. of Sadhbh (w. of
Donnchadh, s. of Flann Sionna); buried at Saighir Chiarain; nine jet-
black crosans chant above grave of.
Donnchadh, s. of Caoinh, k. of the two Fearmaighes, leader of the land
forces of the expedition that rescued Ceallachan Caisil; eleven
ancestors of, who were kk. of Munster.
Donnchadh, s. of Dombnall, k. Ire. twenty-seven years; d. on his
pillow, i.e., a natural death, anno 791 recte 796 Fin.
Donnchadh, s. of Domhnall, s. of Murchadh; f. of Conchubhar (k. Ire).
Donnchadh, s. of Domhnall Reamhar, k. of Osruighe.
Donnchadh, s. of Dubh dha Bhuireann, k. M. fourteen years.
Donnchadh, s. of Flann Sionna, k. Ire. twenty years,; d. anno 944 Au.
which appears to be the true date.
Donnchadh, s. of Maoldomhnaigh, leader of the men of Dealbhna, in the
expedition to rescue Ceallachan Caisil.
Donnchadh Mac Giolla Padraig, k. of Osruighe.
Donn Cuan, s. of Cinneide; sl. by Conghalach (k. Ire.), anno 948 Fm..
Donnghal, f. of Ailghionan.
Donnghal, f. of Maolguala (k. M).
Donnghal, s. of Sealbhuidhe (k. of Dal Riada), imprisoned by Aonghus,
k. of the Picts anno 736 Au.
Donn Sleibhe, s. of Maolmordha, burns Ughaire in his house at Dubhloch
Leasa Cuile anno 1024 Au.
Dorcha, ploughman to Partholon.
Dorobernensis Ecclesia, the church or see of Dorobernia or Dover, i.e.
the see of Canterbury.
Dover, see of, v. Dorobernensis Ecclesia.
Downpatrick, Co. Down, v. Dun, Dun Leathghlaise, and Dun da Leathghlas.
Dris, a word identical in French (that is Gaulish) and Irish; in old
Welsh we have dryssien, a thorn, pl. dryssi; and in Breton, drézeu or
dreizeu "ronce, arbuste, épineux." "Apud Scotos a Drix quod veprem
significat declinatur drissac id est vepricula," Buchanan, Hist. Scot.,
lib. II., p. 61.
Drobhaois, r. Drowes, flows from Lough Meloin and falls into Donegal
Bay at Bun Drowes near Donegal town; it forms a boundary between Co.
Leitrim and Co. Donegal; a limit of the prov. of Connaught; a limit of
the prov. of Ulster; a limit of lorrus Domhnann.
Drogheda, v. Droichead Atha.
Droichead Atha, Drogheda, at the mouth of the Boyne; a limit of the
prov. of Leinster as ruled over by Slainghe; a limit of Ulster as
ruled over by Rughraidhe; Innbhear Colpa at; al. Bun Innbheir Cholpa.
Droichead Leithghlinne, Leighlinbridge, Co. Carlow;.
Drom, al. druim 'back 'in place names it means a hill-ridge; the more
usual form in MSS. is druim, the common living nominative is drom in
the South of Ire.
Drom Abhradh, al. Ard Fionain, Drum in deanery of Fotheret, Co. Carlow,
Taxation of Irish dioceses and parishes, annis 1302, 1306; v. Ard
Fionain
Drom Ceat, prob. Daisy Hill, in Roe Park, near Newtownlimavady, Co.
Derry (v. Onom.); date of Convention of, is given as anno 575 by Au.;
Convention of laymen and clerics at, assembled by Aodh, s. of Ainmire;
three reasons for holding Convention at, (a) to banish the filés; (b)
to impose a tribute on Dal Riada; (c) to oust Scannlan from throne of
Osruighe; two herons usually (in K.'s time) seen at ford near.
Drom Corrain, so in K., but Druim Corcain Au., I. 180; Druim Corcrain,
Fm.; bt. of anno 722 Fm.
Drom Criadh, Drumcree, tl. in par. of Kilcummy, bar. of Delvin, Co.
Westmeath.
Drom da Chon, 'hillridge of the two hounds;' for name, cf. Dromacon,
name of tll. in Co. Monaghan and Co. Cavan; not identified, but prob.
in Meath.
Drom da Mhuighe, 'Ridge-hill of the two Plains,' seems represented by
Drumomuy marked on a map of Leix, Ofaly, Irry, etc., of about the year
1563, published in Vol. IV. of Kilk. Arch. Journal at p. 344, rather
than by Dromcaw, par. of Ballynakill, King's Co., which is a good
distance to the west of it and written Brumkay on the same map; Book
of Lismore 198 b. places it at Fidh Gaibhle (Fid Gaible, now r.
Feegile) which corresponds with the position of Drumomuy as given on
the map referred to; Maoilseachlainn def. Lochlonnaigh of Ath Cliath
in bt. of.
Drom Dearg, 'red hill-ridge,' in Alba, a hill in par. of Loth, Sutherl.
(Onom.); Drust k. of the Cruithnigh def. by Aonghus k. of the
Cruithnigh in bt. of.
Drom Ineasclainn, Dromiskin, par. and round tower near
Castlebellingham, Co. Louth.
Drom Liathain, not identified; prob. in Munster; Eochaidh Faobharghlas
def. dss. of Eireamhon in bt. of anno 3727 Fm.
Dromassell (or Tory Hill), Co. Limer., v. Druim nAsail.
Dromiskln, Co. Louth, v. Drom Ineasclainn.
Drowes, r., v. Drobhaois.
Druim, v. Drom.
Druim nAsail, al. Cnoc Droma Asail, Dromassell, or Tory Hill in par.
of Croom, bar. of Pubblebrien, Co. Limk.
Druim Beitheach, in Maonmhagh (bar. of Clanrickard Co. Gal.), a
remarkable ridge extending across the plain of Maonmhagh, near
Loughrea, one of the "three best hills in Ire.".
Druim Chormaic, 'Cormac's hill-ridge,' the Dal gCais part of Ormond,
in Munster.
Druim Chuilinn, Drumcullen par. in bar. of Eglish, King's Co., a limit
of the prov. of Meath.
Druim Clasaigh, in Crioch Mhaine (q.v.) a long hill extending between
Lough Ree and the r. Suck in Hy Many; the ridge extends across the
parr. of Drum and Taghmaconnell; one of the "three best hills in Ire.".
Druim Damhghaire, al. Cnoc Luinge, Knocklong, Co. Limer.
Druim Finghin, a name still (O'D.'s time) applied to a long ridge of
high ground extending from near Castlelyons in Co. Gork to
Ringoguanach on Dungarvan Bay; it separates the two Decies; one of the
"three best hills in Ire."; note, in one place it is said to be in
Connaught and so MS. M2, but this is an error, as the K. MSS.
generally place it in Munster.
Druim Fiodhbhuidhe, 'woody hill-ridge,' old name of Rock of Cashel.
Druimleathan, 'wide hill-ridge,' Drumlane, in bar. of Loughtee. Co.
Cavan; a limit of prov. of Meath.
Druim Lighean, Drumleene, tl. in par. of Clonleig, bar. of Raphoe,
Co. Don.;
Druim na nDruadh, 'hill-ridge of the Druids,' an early name of
Cruachain; for the name cf. Drumnadrough, a tl. in Co. Antrim.
Drumcree, Co. West., v. Drom Criadh.
Drumcullen, King's Co., v. Druim Chuilinn.
Drumlane, Co. Cavan, v. Druimleathan.
Drumleene, Co. Don., v. Druim Lighean.
Drust, k. of the Cruithnigh, sl. in bt. of Drom Dearg, anno 729 Au.
Duach, al. Duach Dallta Deaghaidh, q.v.
Duach, f. of Cucharainn.
Duach, s. of Brian, s. of Eochaidh Mogh, an. of St. Molua.
Duach Dall, 'D. the Blind,' f. of Eochaidh Garbh, of the T. D. D..
Duach Dallta, Deaghaidh, al. Duach, k. Ire. ten years; sl. by Fachtna
Fathach, ib. anno 5041 Fm..
Duach Fionn, 'D. the Fair,' s. of Seadna Ionnarraidh, k. Ire. five
years; sl. by Muireadhach Bolgrach, ib. anno 4306 Fm.
Duach Galach, 'D. the Valorous,' youngest s. of Brian s. of Eochaidh
Muighmheadhoin; v. D. Teangumha.
Duach Laghrach, s. of Fiachaidh Tolgrach, k. Ire. ten years.
Duach Teamhrach, s. of Muireadhach Bolgrach.
Duach Teangumha, 'D. Brazentongue,' k. C. seven years; sl. in bt. of
Seaghais, anno 499 recte 504 Fm.
Dualghus, f. of Aodh (a leader of the Gaileanga).
Dubh, r. Duff, al. Black River, bar. of Rosclougher, Co. Leitrim,
flows into Donegal Bay; a limit of Iorrus Domhnann.
Dubh, s. of Fomhor.
Dubhabhainn, r. Blackwater, which rises in bar. of Lower Tulla, Co.
Clare and flows into the Shannon 2 miles east of Limerick;. limit of
see of Luimneach.
Dubhagan, f. of Geibheannach (k. of Feara Muighe.
Dubhchumair (al. Dubhchumar), 'black confluence,' the confluence of
the Boyne and the Blackwater at Navan; bt. of, near Taillte, in which
Fiachaidh Sraibhthine is sl. by the three Collas, anno. 322 Fm.
Dubhchumair, druid of Fiachaidh Sraibhthine who foretells
hypothetically the fate of Fiachaidh.
Dubh dha Bhuireann, noble sl. at bt. of Bealacb Mughna.
Dubh dha Bhuireann, f. of Domhnall.
Dubh dha Bhuireann, f. of Donnchadh (k. M).
Dubh Duibhne, gf. of St. Fionnbharr.
Dubh nDuin, of Cineal Cairbre, sl. Seachnasach, k. Ire. anno 669 Fm.
Dubhghall, s. of Amhlaoibh.
Dubhghaill, 'Dark or Black Foreigners' v. Dubhlochlonnaigh.
Dubhghlaise, al. Dubhghlais, 'Black Stream,' in Tir Luighdheach in
Cineal Conaill; it is given as in Magh Iotha in the Salamanca Lives of
the Saints (v. Onom.); prob. identical with Tulach Dubhglaise now
Temple Douglas (popularly Dooglas), mid-way between Gartan and
Letterkenny which tradition points to as the place where Columcille
was baptised; v. Ra. LXXI.
Dubhlachtna, al. Dubh Lachtna, s. of Maolguala, k. M. seven years, d.
anno 890 Fm.
Dubhloch Arda Ciannachta, Black Lough, tl. of Rathkenny, bar. of Upper
Slane, Co. Meath, anciently a part of the territory of Ferrard, Fm. II.
Addenda, 1189.
Dubhloch Leasa Cuile, an error of K. (or scribe) for Dubhloch
Laoighise Cuile, v. Ll. 39 c., Au. I. 552; bar. of Stradbally, Queen's
Co., Au. I. 552, 553.
Dubhlochlonnaigh, al. Duibhgheinte, al. Dainfhir, Danes or natives of
Dania or Denmark, the 'black Northmen.'
Dubhmearchon, s. of Oilill Olom.
Dubhros, on the Boyne, al. Ros na Riogh (v. MS. 23 K 37, p. 193,
R. I. A.; Dubhros ris a raidhtear Ros na Riogh) v. Ros na Riogh.
Dubhthach, al. Dubhthach Donn, f. of St. Brighid of Cill Dara.
Dubhthach, v. Dubhthach Daol Uladh.
Dubhthach, f. of Cairbre Chinn Chait.
Dubhthach, s. of Mianach.
Dubhthach Daol Uladh, al. Dubhthach. an Ulster champion of the time of
Conchubhar, s. of Neasa; Daol Uladh, a chafer, that is an object of
detestation to Ulaidh, A.C.
Dubhthach Donn, v. Dubhthach, f. of St. Brighid of Cill Dara.
Dubhthach, Mac Ua Lughair, al. Dubhthach Ua Lughair, ardollamh of Ire.
at the time of Patrick; one of the nine who purified the Seanchas of
Ire.; D. Mac Ua Lughair is for D. Maccu Lughair, that is D. of the
race of Lughar.
Dublin; v. Ath Cliath.
Duff, r., v. Dubh.
Duibheaglais, 'Black Church' in Inis Eoghain.
Duibhfhionn, sister of Cairbre Muse, and m. of his sons, Corc and
Cormac.
Duibhgheann, chief of the Lochlonnaigh, captured at Inis Cathaigh,
by Brian Boraimhe; he was s. of Iomhar, of Luimneach and in an elegy
by Mathghamhain's blind bard, he is spoken of with affection, thus "I
shall not revile the foreigners because of my friendship with
Duibhgheann," C.G. 99.
Duibhgheann, f. of Ceallach (leader of Clann Eachach).
Duibhgheann, s. of Eochaidh, at bt. of Cluain Tarbh.
Duibhgheinnte, 'Dark Gentiles,' al. Dubhlochlonnaigh, al. Dainfhir,
the Danes; v. Dubhlochlonnaigh.
Duibhghiolla, f. of Inneirghe (k. of Ui Drona).
Duibhionnracht, k. C., d., in reign of Niall Frasach anno 779 Fm.
Duibhir, 'Black Country,' a limit of Meath between Sliabh Fuaid and
Muckno, I. 114; D. IV. 2 has co clar Dubdhaire, 'to the Plain of the
Black Wood '; the place has not been identified.
Duibhlinn, camp built by Lochlonnaigh at; it is not quite clear
whether Duibhlinn here means Dublin, there were places so named in
Connaught and Ulster, but the context which states that the
Lochlonnaigh plundered Leinster and Ui Neill (i.e., Southern Ui Neill)
points to Ath Cliath or Dublin; and "their churches to Sliabh Bladhma"
points also to Dublin, which however, is generally called Ath Cliath
or Ath Cliath Duibhlinne in K.
Duibhthir Atha Luain, 'the black country of Athlone,' in the present
bar. of Athlone, Co. Ros. It was part of Ui Maine Chonnacht.
Duinnseach, da. of Duach Teanghumha, w. of Muircheartach, s. of Earc.
Duirdre, swineherd of the k. of Musgraidhe Tire.
Duitheach, f. of Aodh.
Dula, a slave who came with the sons of Milidh to Ire.
Dula, s. of Corc, held in hostage by Niall, s. of Eochaidh.
Dulane, Co. Meath, v. Tuilen and Tolan.
Duleek, Co. Louth, v. Daimhliag.
Dumha Aichir, in Ui Felmidhe in Leinster, Stowe Ms. D. II. 2, 18 a 2;
North Ui Felmidhe is bar. of Rathvilly, Co. Carlow and South Ui F. is
identical with Ui Murchadha, al. bar. of Ballaghkeen, Co. Wex. It is
probably in North Ui Feidhlimdhe and thus near Tullow, Co. Carlow,
that Dumha Aichir was.
Dumha Slainghe; al. Dionn Riogh, q.v.
Dumhacha, 'Sandmounds,' al. Teach Duinn; K. says it is in Iarthar
Mumhan, West Munster; H 4 13, T. C. D., 184, says in Corca Duibhne.
O'D., B. R., 51, and Todd, Irish Nennius, say it applies to the three
islands called the Bull, Cow, and Calf, at the mouth of Kenmare Bay
(Todd says one of the three); it is used in B. R. as a limit of prov.
of Munster, or half Eire, from Ath Cliath Laighean to Teach Duinn, and
these islands form a natural limit.
Dun, Downpatrick, v. Dun da Leathghlas.
Dun, a hill fort, a fortified dwelling; common in place names; word
identical in French and in Irish. The French word dune a sand heap on
the sea coast corresponds to Spanish and Italian duna, Latin dunum,
Greek d????? (dounon); dunum is according to Buchanan, a Gaulish word,
and is cognate with English down, Hist. Scot. lib. I., p. 67.
Dun Aonghusa, Dun Aongus in Arranmore Island, Galway Bay, so called
from a Fir Bolg chief.
Dun Aongus, in Arranmore, v. Dun Aonghusa.
Dun Broith, in the County of Loch Garman, abbey of, Dunbrody Abbey in
Co. Wexford, built in 1179 by Herimont Morti.
Dun Buicead, Dunboyke, tl. in par. of Hollywood, Co. Wicklow.
Dun Caillighe Beirre, the fort of the old woman of Beirre, O Brain or
O Broin inaugurated on.
Dun Cearmna, al. Dun Mic Padraig, in Courcy's country, a fort on the
old Head of Kinsale, v. Fm. I. 44.
Dun Ceitheirn, " Giant's Sconce," a cyclopian stone fort in par. of
Dunboe, Co. Derry.
Dun gClaire, a royal seat of the prow. of Curaoi, s. of Daire. in Ely
cf. 'Claire os Dim Claire in Eilib,' S.G.
Dun Cliach, Cnoc line, or Knockainey, in Co. Lim., O' Br. Ir.
Dict.; built or restored by Brian Boraimhe.
Dun Creige, in Dal Riada of Alba, burnt by Aonghus, k. of the
Picti.
Dun gCrot, fort at foot of Sliabh Grud, bar. of Clanwilliam. Co.
Tipp.; a royal seat of the prov. of Eochaidh Abhradhruadh; built
(restored or fortified) by Brian Boraimhe.
Dun Cuair, Rathcore, in bar. of lower Moyfenrath in Co. Meath, in
Leinster. Fm. I. 408.
Dun da Leathghlas, Downpatrick, Co. Down.
Dun Dealgan, Castletown Mount, about a mile inland frcm Dundalk (Sraid
Bhaile Dhuna Dealgan), Co Louth.
Dun Deargmhuighe (Dundermuighe, C.G.), Dunderrow, near Kinsale.
Dun Deilginse, in Cuala; a fort on Dalkey Island near Dublin; built by
Seadgha.
Dun Domhnaill, four miles south of Port Lairge (Waterford); Raymond le
Gros lands and builds an embankment at; Orpen (Ireland under the
Normans, I. 182 sq. and Papers in the Journal R. S. A. I. 1898, pp.
155-60, and 1904, pp. 354-7) thinks Dun Domhnaill is identical with
Bag in Bun and places it about fourteen (not four) miles south of
Waterford on the southern coast of Wexford. He thinks that neither
Fitzstephen nor Strongbow landed there, but only Raymond le Gros.
Dun Eadair, a fort at Howth, built by Suirghe.
Dun Eochair Mhaighe, 'fort on brink of r. Maigue,' Bruree, Co.
Limerick; a royal seat at, for prov. of Curaoi, s. of Daire; built
(restored or fortified) by Brian Boraimhe.
Dun Gair, a fort on hill of Doon over Loch Gair (Lough Gur), bar. of
Small County, Co. Limerick, belonged to Conall Eachluaith; v. Inis
Locha Gair.
Dun Iasc, v. Dun Iascaigh.
Dun Iascaigh, al., Dun Iasc, Cahir, on r. Siur, Co. Tipp.; Cathair
Duna hIasc is the full Irish name of Cahir, al. Cathair Dun Iascaigh;
a royal seat of the prov. of Eochaidh Abhradhruadh; built (restored or
fortified) by Brian Boraimhe.
Dun Inn, in the west of Ire., a fort built by Caicher; Dun Inni in
Connaught, Lec. 30 (quoted in Onom).
Dunlaith, da. of Flaithbheartach, and m. of Aodh Oirndighe.
Dunlaith, da. of Muircheartach, s. of Niall, and m. of Maoilseachlainn
(k. Ire).
Dun Leathghlaise, Downpatrick, Co. Down; v. Dun da Leathghlas and Dun.
Dun Leoghdha, al. Dun Leogha, on the Succa, in Ui Maine; Dunlo on the
r. Suck in Hy Many, a townland containing the part of Ballinasloe town
which lies to the west of the r. Suck, the name is now represented by
Dunlo Street; great bridge built at by Toirrdhealbhach O Conchubhair
(ok. Ire).
Dun Liamhna, seems from context to be in or near Magh Feimhean, and is
not to be confounded with the D. L. in the neighbourhood of Dublin.
Dun Mhaoile Tuile, 'fort of Maoltuile,' near Cashel, Co. Tipp.
Dun Mhic Padraig, name of Dun Cearmna in K.'s time; v. Dun Cearmna.
Dun na mBarc, 'fort of the ships,' Ceasair and her companions land at,
forty days before the Deluge,; for the name cf. Dunnamark fort and
castle on Bantry Bay; the name Dun na mBarc occurs in an Irish lyric
poem which was written in tbe early eighteenth century K.I. 142, says
Dun na mBarc, where Ceasair landed, is in Corca Duibhne. In a copy of
the Leabhar Gabhala in the handwriting of Torna O Maolchonaire (E 3 5
T.C.D.) made at beginning of the fifteenth century, it is said to be
'i nIorrus Deiscirt Corco Duibhne,' that is in the southern Iorrus of
Corca Duibhne. But from Ll. 6 b. we find that Sceilig is to the west
of the Southern Iorrus of Corca Duibhne; thus Dun na mBarc is shown to
be on Ballinaskellig Bay; v. M. L. 34; note that the sound between
Valentia Island and the mainland is locally called Loch mBairc.
Dun na mBreathnach, 'fort of the Welshmen,' name of a townland in Ire.
named from Welsh refugees.
Dun Seinne, al. Lis Mor, Lismore, Co. Wat.
Dun Sobhairce, Dunseverick, an isolated rock having some fragments of
the ruins of a castle, three miles to the east of the Giant's Causeway,
Co. Antrim; there is no trace of the original dun.
Dun Sraibhthine, in Connaught, Fiachaidh Sraibhthine, so called
from having been nurtured at.
Dun Tri Liag, Duntryleague, 3 miles north-west of Galbally, Co. Lim.;
built (restored or fortified) by Brian Boraimhe.
Dun Ui Fhaolain, fort on the r. Suir to the west of Inis Leamhnachta a
mile west of Clonmel; the residence of O Faolain (k. of
Deise Dheisceirt).
Dunadhach, f. of Eochaidh (prince of Clann Scannlain, sl. at Cluain
Tarbh).
Dunadhach, k. of Umhall, d. anno 808 Fm.
Dunboyke, Co. Wick., v. Dun Buicead.
Dunbrody, Abbey of, Co. Wex., v. Dun Broith.
Dundalk, v. under Dun Dealgan.
Dunderrow, near Kinsale, v. Dun Deargmhuighe.
Dundrum Bay, Co. Down, v. Loch Rudhruighe.
Dunghal, k. of Ui Turtaire.
Dunghal, s. of Ceallach, k. of Osruighe, d. anno 767 Fm.
Dunghal, s. of Fearghal, k. of Osruighe; d. anno 841, Fm.
Dunghal, s. of Laidhghein, k. of Ui Cinnsealaigh.
Dunghal, s. of Scannal, k. of the Cruithnigh, burned at Dun Ceitheirn
by Maolduin anno 679 Fm.
Dunghal Mac Giolla Padraig, sl. by Maoilseachlainn, k. Ire.
Dunghalach, officer of Dathi (k. Ire.); brought hostages across the
sea from the west,(but v. O'D. H. F. 26); buried at
Cruachain.
Dungorey, Co. Gal., v. Durlas Guaire.
Dunlaing, f. of Eithne Ollamhdha.
Dunlaing, f. of Ughaire (k. L).
Dunleer, Co. Louth. v. Lana Leire.
Dunlo, on river Suck, v. Dun Leoghdha, and Dun Leogha.
Dunseverick, Co. Antr., v. Dun Sobhairce.
Duntryleague, Co. Limer., v. Dun Tri Liag.
Durlas Guaire, al. Dun Guaire, Dungorey, tl. and fort near and to the
east of Kinvara, bar. of Kiltartan, Co. Galway; Bothar na Mias, 'Road
of the Dishes,' name given to the five mile path between there and the
well near Buireann.
Durmhagh, in Osruighe, Durrow in Ossory, bar. and town in bar. of
Clarallagh, Queen's Co.; part of par. is in bar. of Galmoy, Co. Kilk.;
the town is in Queen's Co.
Durmhagh, Durrow, a par. 21 miles north of Tullamore and partly in bar.
of Moycashel, Co. West., but mostly in bar. of Ballycowan, King's Co.
Durrow, near Tullamore, v. Durmhagh.
Durrow, in Queen's Co., v. Durmhagh in Osruighe.
Durrthacht, f. of Eoghan (prince of Fearnmhagh).
Dursey Island, v. Inis Baoi.
Duthaigh Aradh, in the North of the bar. of Owney and Arra, Co. Tipp.
Duthaigh Ui Sheachnasaigh, O'Shaughnessy's Country; al. Ui Fiachrach
Eidhne, q.v.

E.
Eachdonn, s. of Alasdair,.and f. of Sitheach (from whom the Mac
Sheehys).
Eachrais Uladh, name of the k. of Ulster's establishment at Tara.
Eachtach, da. of Uilceathach, and m. of Cormac, s. of Art.
Eachtar Ard, f. of a St. Brighid.
Eadaman, al. Eadhaman (II. 124), s. of Mal, an. of Mac Con.
Eadaman, s. of Gosaman, an. of Mac Con.
Eadar, w. of Gann (a chief of the Fir Bolg).
Eadarlamh, s. of Orda, f. of Eirnin.
Eadbhard, an cead E., Edward the first.
Eadbholg, s. of Daire, an. of Mac Con.
Eadgar, k. of Breatain, had authority over Ire., according to Spenser.
Eafa, s. of Eomhua (Eowua), an. of Aelfred.
Ealatha, s. of Ned, of the T. D. D., al. Ealatha, s. of Dealbhaoth, s.
of Ned.
Ealcmhar, s. of Dealbhaoth, and f. of Cairbre Crom of the T. D. D.
Ealloit, s. of Aghnon, leader of the dss. of Gaedheal on their
expedition to Gothia.
Ealloit, s. of Art, an. of Cathaoir Mor.
Ealloit, s. of Nuadha, s. of Neanual, al. Ealloit, s. of Neanual.
Ealoir Dhearg, hound of Oilill Olom, from his familiarity with which
Lughaidh, s. of Maicniadh was called Mac Con.
Eamhain, Feis of, one of the three general assemblies of Ire.
Eamhain, v. Eamhain Mhacha.
Eamhain Mhacha, w. of Cronn (s. of Adhnaman), forced to run, while
pregnant, with the horses of Conchubhar, s. of Neasa; curses the men
of Ulster; Eamhain Mhacha named from.
Eamhain Mhacha, al. Eamhain Uladh, and Eamhain, Latinised Emania,
Navan fort, in par. of Eglish, bar. and county of Armagh, two miles
west of Armagh town; the ancient palace of the kings of Ulster from
its foundation down to its destruction by the three Collas, anno 332;
nom. Eamhain gen. na hEamhna
Eamhain Uladh, Eamhain of Ulster, a stanza from a poem beginning
"Eamhain Uladh ionmhain liom" quoted, M. 78; v. Eamhain Mhacha and
Poems.
Eanbhoth, s. of Tighearnmhas.
Eanna, f. of a St. Brighid, II. 110.
Eanna, s. of Neachtain, a Munsterman, sl. Aonghus Ohnucaidh (k. Ire.)
in bt. of Sliabh Cua. (Fm. gives the bt. as Carmann and date 3790).
Eanna, s. of Niall Naoighiallach by his second w. Rioghnach.
Eanna Aighneach, s. of Aonghus Tuirbheach Teamhrach. k. Ire. twenty-
eight years.
Eanna Airgthioch, s. of Eochaidh Mumho, k. Ire. twenty-seven years.
Eanna Cinnsealach, k. L.; called Cinnsealach from his gean salach
(foul laugh) on transfixing Ceadnathach, the druid.
Eanna Dearg, 'Eanna the Red,' s. of Duach Fionn, k. Ire. twelve years;
d. of plague on Sliabh Mis,  anno 4319 Fm.
Eanna Nia, 'Eanna the Champion,' gf. of Eithne Ollamhdha (m. of
Cairbre Lithfeachair).
Earbhus, the bt. of Cuil Fabhair on; v. Cuil Fabhrair.
Earc, da. of Lodharn (k. of Alba) and m. of Muircheartach, s. of Earc
(commonly called Muircheartach Mac Earca); al. m. of Fearghus, s. of
Earc (commonly called Fearghus Mor Mac Earca), and rt. in name Feargus
Mor Mac Earca.
Earc, f. of Oilill; gf. of Eochaidh Eigeas (Dallan Forgaill).
Earc, s. of Eochaidh Muinreamhar; Dal Riada of Alba sprung from
Earc, s. of Eochaidh, s. of Colla Uais, and an. of St. Maodhog of
Fearna, II. 136.
Earc, s. of Fearadhach, gf. of St. Maodhog of Fearna.
Earc, s. of Oilill Molt, sl. in bt. of Tortan; Fir Cheara sprung from.
Earc, s. of Rionnal, and f. of Eochaidh (last Fir Bolg k. of Ire).
Earchaidh, s. of Ealloit, I. 34, 56.
Earglan, son of Beoan, a warrior of the children of Neimheadh.
Earna Mumhan, the Erna or Ernai of Munster, a tribe of the race of
Conaire Mor (k. Ire.); the dss. of Fiachaidh Suighdhe, al. the Deise,
wrongly called Earna.
Earndolbh, s. of Rionnal Dagharmagh.
Easaman Eamhna, s. of Blathacht, an. of Eochaidh Feidhlioch.
Easarg, v. Easarg Breac.
Easarg Breac, s. of Ned, of the T. D. D.
Easmontaigh, the Esmonds, a family who came to Ire. at the Norman
Invasion.
Eas Ruaidh, Assaroe Falls on r. Erne at Ballyshannon Co. Donegal; Aodh
Ruadh (k. Ire.), drowned at; named from Aodh Ruadh (k. Ire.), the full
name being Eas Aodha Ruaidh, the Cataract of Aodh the Red,; a limit of
the sees of Cill Aladh and Doire (or Raith Both).
Eatan, a leader of the Sons of Milidh, on their coming to Ire.
Eatharlach, dat. Eatharlaigh, I. 288; g. Eatharlach, II. 112; the Glen
of Aherlow (watered by a river al. called Aherlow) in bar. of
Clanwilliam, Co. Tipp., and partly in bar. of Coshma. Co. Lim.; beside
Sliabh gCrot.
Eathena, a city on the plain of Senar in which Feinius Farsaidh set up
language schools.
Eathor, of the race of Gomer of Greece, f. of Gaedheal (the sage and
language teacher).
Eathor, f. of Andoid (who lived through the Deluge).
Eathra, v. Dealbhna Eathra.
Eathur, s. of Cearmad Milbheoil; proper name of Mac Cuill; v. Mac
Cuill.
Eborach, g., cathair Eborach, city of York, in North of England.
Echtghe, Eichtghe, al. Sliabh Eichthge; Slieve Aughty, or Slieve
Baughta, a range of mountains on the borders of Galway and Clare; it
extends 14 miles south eastward from a point 5 miles south west of
Loughrea to the neighbourhood of Scariff Bay; a limit of the see of
Cill Dalua; a limit of the see of Cluain Fearta, v. Sliabh Eichtghe.
Echtghe Ethcheann, king of the Fomhoraigh or Fomorians.
Echthighearn, s. of Cinneide, Chief of Thomond; sl. anno 948 Fm.
Edarlamh, of the race of Neimheadh.
Eduin, s. of Athelfrid, banished Cadualin, a Welsh King, to Ire., in
the year 635.
Egbert, s. of Etalmund, and gf. of Aelfred.
Egberthus, prop. Egfertus or Egfrid, k. of Northumbria; Beda, cited at
II. 140, says "Ecfrid rex Nordanhymbrorum misso Hiberniam cum exercitu
duce Bercto vastavit misere gentem innoxiam et nationi Anglorum semper
amicissimam ita ut ne ecclesiis quidem aut monasteriis manus parceret
hostilis " (Lib. IV. cap. 26); the Annals of Ulster (anno 684) say
that it was Magh Breagh they plundered; host of pl. a large part of
Ire. as well as the Orkney Isles in the year 684.
Egbertus, or Egbert, "St." (c. 639, d. 729) a Northumbrian monk
educated in I; In year 716 he went from Ire. to Iona where he remained
till he died.
Egfrid, k. of Northumbria, had authority over Ire., according to
Spenser v. Egberthus.
Eibhear, s. of Ir., s. of Milidh, a leader of the Milesian expedition
to Ire; gf. of Cearmna and Sobhairce, 124.
Eibhear, s. of Milidh, v. Eibhear Fionn, s. of Milidh.
Eibhear, s. of Saile; fourth in descent from Sem, lived 464 years, 16.
Eibhear, s. of Tat; Caicher and Cing two ss. of; d. in island of
Caronia.
Eibhear, s. of Tighearnmhas, sl. Conmhaol (k. Ire.) in bt. of Aonach
Macha.
Eibhear Fionn, 'E. the Fair,' al. Eibhear; s. of Milidh, jk. Ire. one
year; Clann Mac Con Mara (Macnamara) sprung from; Hibernia said by
some to be so named from.
Eibhear Gluinfhionn, 'E. Fairknee' s. of Laimhfhionn.
Eibhear Mor, 'E. the Great,' s. of Modhna, k. of Castile, f. of Beara
(w. of Eoghan Mor).
Eibhear Scot, s. of Sru; the Irish called the Scotic race from,
according to a certain author.
Eibhle, s. of Breoghan, leader of the sons of Milidh in their invasion
of Ire.
Eibhlinn or Eibhle, in or near parr. of Kilnoe and Killnavan, Co.
Clare.
Eibric, s. of Eibhear, s. of Ir, and f. of Cearmna.
Eibric Glas, al. Eibric, s. of Eibhear Gluinfhionn.
Eichen, s. of Brian, s. of Eochaidh Muighmheadhoin.
Eidhne, i.e., Aidhne, q.v.
Eidirsceol, s. of Ceallach, bp. of Gleann da Loch, d. anno 809 Fm.
Eidirsceol, s. of Eoghan, k. Ire. six years; sl. by Nuadha Neacht,
anno 5089 Fm.
Eidirsceol Teamhrach, s. of Eochaidh Foiltleathan, and f. of Conall
Collamhrach, (k. Ire).
Eile, Ely, the district in North Munster comprising the barr. of
Clonlisk and Ballybrit in King's Co. and barr. of Ikerrin and
Eliogarty (Eile Dheisceirt) in Co. Tipp.; this district if we omit bar.
of Eliogarty is al. called Eile Ui Chearbhaill, 'Eily O'Carroll,' and
Eile Thuaisceirt or North Ely.
Eile Dheisceirt, South Ely, al. Eile Ui Fhogartaigh, bar. of Eliogarty,
Co. Tipp..
Eilim, s. of Gonnra, k. Ire, twenty years; sl. by Tuathal Teachtmhar,
anno 76 Fm.
Eilim, of Roitheachtaigh, k. Ire. one year; sl. by Giallchaidh, s. of
Oilill Olchaoin anno 4177 Fm.
Eille, a district in Dal nAruidhe to the east of r. Bann and including
par. of Coleraine.
Eire, da. of Fiachaidh, s. of Dealbhaoth, al. referred to as Eire, da.
of Dealbhaoth, and w. of Mac Greine; Ire. called Eire from.
Eire, Ireland.
Eireannagh, a., Irish.
Eireannaigh, npl.; gpl. Eireannach; the Irish.
Eiric (eric), legal compensation for the injury done to a person; for
manslaughter, as a custom in Ire.; now (K.'s time) practised by the
foreigners.
Eirne, r. Erne, which flows into Donegal Bay at Ballyshannon;
Eirnin, da. of Eadarlamh.
Eirnin, s. of Duach, an. of St. Molua.
Eiscir Riada, a continuous line of low hills stretching from Dublin.
to Clarinbridge, Co. Galway; for name cf. Esker near Lucan, Co. Dublin
and Eskerboy, near Loughrea; boundary between Eibhear's and
Eireamhon's divisions of Ire. (according to some seanchas); divides
Leath Cuinn or Conn's half of Ireland from Leath Mogha or Mogh's half.
Eisidh, s. of Sidh, and f. of Meanman (leader of Clann Choilein at
Cluain Tarbh).
Eithiar, druid, sl. in bt. of Sliabh Mis.
Eithne, da. of Breanainn Dall, and w. of Aodh Slaine.
Eithne, da. of Diorna, and m. of St. Columcille.
Eithne, da. of Fearghal, queen of Ire. (i.e., w. of Conghalach, s. of
Maoilmithidh, k. Ire.), d. anno 951 Fm.
Eithne, da. of k. of Alba, and w. of Fiachaidh Fionnolaidh.
Eithne, da. of Lughaidh, s. of Daire, and m. of Conaire, s. of Mogh
Lamha,.
Eithne, da. of Oraidh and second w. of Dathi (k. Ire.) and m. of
Oilill Molt (k. Ire.) 2.
Eithne, r. Inny, in the south-west of Leinster, flows from Lough.
Sheelan into Lough Ree.
Eithne Ollamhdha, 'Eithne the Accomplished,' da. of Dunlaing and m. of
Cairbre Lithfeachair; foster-child of Buicead, ib.
Eithne Taobhhfada, 'Eithne Longside,' da. of Cathaoir Mor, and.
according to some seanchas, w. of Cormac, s. of Art, II. 300;.
chronology against the latter opinion, ib.
Eithne Uathach, 'E. the Loathsome,' da. of Eochaidh Feidhlioch, (k.
Ire).
Eithne Uathach, 'Eithne the Loathsome,' da. of Criomhthann, s. of
Eanna Cinnsealach; fostered by the Deise and fed on the flesh of
infants; w. of Aonghus, s. of Natfraoch,; sl., in bt. of Ceall Osnadh,
by Muircheartach, s. of Earc anno 489.
Eithneann, f. of Lugh of the T. D. D.
Eithrial, s. of Irial Faidh, k. Ire. twenty years.
Eithrighe, name of an ox belonging to Partholon.
Elesa, s. of Gebhus, an. of Aelfred.
Eliogarty, Co. Tipp., v. Eile Dheisceirt.
Ely, district in Munster, v. Eile.
Emania, v. Eamhain Mhacha.
Emly, Co. Tipp., v. Imleach Iobhair.
En, al. Un, s. of Oige, a leader of the sons of Milidh; built fort at
Ard Suird, 98 (in Lec. 61 Raith Suird is said to be built by Caicher).
England, v. Sacsa, Saxain, and Anglia.
English, the, v. Gaill.
Enna, s. of Bathach, of the T. D. D.
Enna, s. of Iobath, an. of Nuadha Airgeadlamh (k. Ire.);Euna in Text.
Enoch, s. of Iared; lives 365 years.
Enos, s. of Seth; lives 905 years.
Eochagan, f. of Aodh (k. of U).
Eochaidh, proper name of the Daghdha.
Eochaidh, the two E.'s, i.e., Eochaidh Eadghothach and Eochaidh
Apthach, the first two kings of the race of Lughaidh, s. of Ioth, who
held the sovereignty of Ire.
Eochaidh, bp. of Tamhlacht, d. anno 807 Fm.
Eochaidh, f. of Aodh (k. of Innis Fionnghall).
Eochaidh, f. of Conghalach,.
Eochaidh, f. of Muireadhach (k. U).
Eochaidh, f. of Orca Mac Eirc.
Eochaidh, king of Leinster, v. Eochaidh, s. of Eanna Cinnsealach. 
Eochaidh, king of Munster, and an. of Donnchadh, s. of Caomh (k. of
the two Fearmuighes); identical with Eochaidh,
s. of Aonghus, s. of Natfraoch, q.v.
Eochaidh, s. of Aonghus, s. of Natfraoch; this Eochaidh was k. M. and
d. anno 523, Fm.
Eochaidh, s. of Ardghal, k. U., with Maoilseachlainn. (k. Ire.),
plundered Ath Cliath and rescued captives from the Lochlonnaigh.
Eochaidh, s. of Breasal, an. of Cormac, s. of Cuileannan.
Eochaidh, s. of Cairbre, sl. Fraoch, s. of Fionnchaidh in bt. of
Graine, anno 476 Fm. which gives Granard as the place of battle, v.
Graine.
Eochaidh, s. of Cairbre Ard, an. of St. Finnbharr.
Eochaidh, s. of Colla Uais, an. of St. Maodhog.
Eochaidh, s. of Connlo, s. of Caolbhach, s. of Crann Badhraoi, k. of
Ulster, d. anno 548 Fm.
Eochaidh, s. of Daire Cearb, s. of Oilill Flann Beag.
Eochaidh, s. of Donnchadh, prince of Clann Scanlainn, sl. in bt. of
Cluain Tarbh.
Eochaidh, s. of Domhnall, jk. Ire. three years, II. 74; sl. by Cronan,
k. of Ciannachta Ghlinne Geimhean, anno. 563 Fm.
Eochaidh (al. Eochaidh, k. L.), s. of Eanna Cinnsealach. k. L.
Eochaidh, s. of Earc, k. Ire. ten years; sl. in ht. of Magh Tuireadh,
anno 3303 Fm.
Eochaidh, s. of Innreachtach, goes to bt. of Cluain Tarhh.
Eochaidh, s. of Muireadhach, and f. of Brandubh (k. L).
Eochaidh, s. of Oilill Fionn, k. Ire. seven years.
Eochaidh, s. of Oilill Olom, sl. by Mac Con, anno 195 Fm.
Eochaidh, s. of Sin.
Eochaidh Abhradhruadh, v. Cuigeadh Eochaidh Ahhradhruaidh.
Eochaidh Aincheann, story of his marrying two daughters of Tuathal
Teachtmhar (k. Ire.), which led to the imposition on Leinster of the
tribute called the "Boraimhe,".
Eochaidh Airiomh, s. of Fionn, k. Ire. twelve years.
Eochaidh Aontsuile, 'Eochaidh One eye,' an. of Siol Suilleabhain (the
O'Sullivans).
Eochaidh Apthach, s. of Fionn, k. Ire. one year.
Eochaidh Bailldhearg, 'Eochaidh of the red wen,' an. of Brian Boraimhe.
Eochaidh Buadhach, 'Eochaidh the Victorious,' f. of Ughaine Mor and
Badhbhchaidh.
Eochaidh Ceinnfhionnan, 'E. Whitehead,' s. of Starn, k. Ire. five
years.
Eochaidh Cobha, s. of Lughaidh.
Eochaidh Doimhlein, s. of Cairbre Lithfeachair, and f. of the three
Collas; br. to Fiachaidh Sraibhthine, 356; Aileach, da. of Udhaire (k.
of Alba); an. of Cobhthach Caol mBreagh and his descendants; an. of
Mac Mathghamhna (Mac Mahon) of Ulster.
Eochaidh Eachbheoil, br. of Morann Mhanannach.
Eochaidh Eadghothach, s. of Daire, of the race of Ioth, k. I. four
years; 1st k. Ire. of the race of Ioth; sl. by Cearuna, s. of Eibric,
anno 3667 Fm.
Eochaidh Eigeas, s. of Oilill, al. Dallan Forgaill, chief ollamh of
Ire. in time of Columcille; v. Dallan Forgaill.
Eochaidh Eolach, (Author of historical poem, describing the Feis of
Tara, and beginning "Feis Teamhrach gach treas bliadhna,"), Eochaidh
Eolach O Ceirin, flourished in the twelfth century (O'Curry Ac. Cat, p.
8521); there are historical poems by him in Lec. and Bb.
Eochaidh Faobharghlas, s. of Conmhaol, k. Ire. twenty years; sl. by
Fiachaidh Labhruinne in bt. of Carman, anno 3727 Fm.
Eochaidh Feidhlioch, s. of Fionn, k. Ire. twelve years; f. of the
three Finneamhnas whom he sl. in bt. of Drom Criadh.
Eochaidh Fiadhmhuine, 'Eochaidh the Huntsman.' jk. Ire. five years; sl.
by Lughaidh Laimhdhearg, anno 4361 Fm.
Eochaidh Fionn, 'Eochaidh the Fair,' v. Eochaidh Fionn Fuath nAirt.
Eochaidh Fionn Fuath nAirt, 'Eochaidh the Fair hateful to Art.' s. of
Feidhlimidh Reachtmhar, brother of Conn Ceadchathach.
Eochaidh Foiltleathan, 'Eochaidh of the wide-spreading locks,' s. of
Oilill Caisfhiaclach, k. Ire. eleven years.
Eochaidh Garbh, 'E. the Rough,' s. of Duach Dall, a chief of the T. D.
D.
Eochaidh Gunnat, s. of Fiach, k. Ire. one year; sl. by Lughna Feirte,
anno 267 Fm.
Eochaidh Laimhdhearg, 'Eochaidh Red Hand,' s. of Meisin Gorb.
Eochaidh Meann, 'Eochaidh the Stutterer,' son of k. of the Fomorians.
Eochaidh Mogh, 'Eochaidh the Slave,' an. of St. Molua.
Eochaidh Muighmheadhon, s. of Muireadhach Tireach, k. Ire. seven
years; correctly E. Muighmheadhoin.
Eochaidh Muinreamhar, 'Eochaidh Thickneck,' s. of Aonghus Feart, of
the race of Cairbre Lithfeachair, an., through his son Earc, of Dal
Riada of Alba, and, through his son Olchu, of Dal Riada of Ulster.
Eochaidh Mumho, s. of Mo Feibhis, k. Ire. twenty-one years.
Eochaidh O Tuathail, bp. of Lughmhagh, d. anno 820 Fm.
Eochaidh Righeigeas, chief filé, banished to Ulster with the files of
Ire. when Fiachna, s. of Baodan, was k. U.
Eochaidh Salbhuidhe, 'Eochaidh Yellowheel,' of Connaught, f. of Neasa
(m. of Conchubhar).
Eochaidh Seideadh, f. of Fial.
Eochaidh Teimhin, son, leaving issue, of Cathaoir Mor.
Eochaidh Tiormcharna, f. of Aodh (k. C.); sl. Duach Teangumha (k. C.),
anno 499 Fm.
Eochaidh Ua Floinn, 'Eochy O Flynn,' a poet, was the author of
historical and dinnseanchus poems which are preserved in Ll., Lec.,
Bb., Leabhar Gabhala, etc., v. a list of his poems in O'Reilly's Irish
Writers, LXIV sq.; d. anno 984 (O'Reilly).
Eochaidh Uaircheas, s. of Lughaidh Iardhonn, k. Ire. twelve years,; sl.
by Eochaidh Fiadhmhuine and Conuing Beigeaglach, anno 4356 Fm.
Eochaidh Uichtleathan, 'Eochy Broadchest,' f. of Cloithfhionn (w. of
Eochaidh Feidhlioch).
Eoghan, a chief of the T. D. D., sl. Fiachaidh, s. of Dealbhaoth, at
Ard mBric (Ard Breac in Trans).
Eoghan, f. of Oilill (a noble sl. in bt. of Bealach Mughna).
Eoghan, s. of Durrthacht, prince of Fearnmhagh.
Eoghan, s. of Fiachaidh Suighdhe, a leader of the Deise on their
coming to Munster.
Eoghan, s. of Niall Naoighiallach and Rioghnach; of the race of
Eireamhon; baptised by St. Patrick; a beautiful and romantic account
of the interview between Eoghan and Patrick at which Eoghan is
converted and "believes in God and Patrick" is given in The Tripartite
Life of St. Patrick, pp. 150-154.
Eoghan, s. of Oilill, and gf. of Conaire Mor.
Eoghan, s. of Oilill, s. of Iar, and f. of Eidirsceol (k. Ire).
Eoghan Beal, k. of Connaught thirty-five years.
Eoghan Fidhfheacach, 'E. Woodbending' (from feacad bending and fid a
wood, according to Coir Anmann), a name for Eoghan Mor, s. of Oilill
Olom.
Eoghan Mor, 'Eoghan the Great,' s. of Oilill Olom; v. Mogh Nuadhat.
Eoghan Og, 'Eoghan the Young,' a name given to Eoghan Mor, s. of
Oilill Olom.
Eoghan Sreibh, s. of Duach Galach, and an. of Duach Teangumha. (k. C).
Eoghan Taoidhleach, 'E. the Splendid,' a name for Eoghan Mor, s. of
Oilill Olom.
Eoghanacht Chaisil, 'Eoghanacht of Cashel' now Middlethird (a bar. in
Co. Tipp).
Eoghanacht Locha Lein, 'Eoghanacht of Lough Leine,' a district around
the Lakes of Killarney, corresponding roughly to the present bar. of
Magunihy.
Eoghanacht Mhuighe Geirrghin, 'Eoghanacht of Magh Geirrghin' in Alba,
sprung from Cairbre Cruithneach, s. of Corc.
Eoghanachta, the Eoghanachts, districts held by dss. of Eoghan Mor, s.
of Oilill Olom; Ll. 14 gives the seven Eoghanacts of Munster as: E. of
Caiseal, E. of Aine, E. of Loch Lein, E. of Rathlinn, E. of
Gleannamnach, E. of Ara, and E. of Ros Airgit.
Eoghanachts, the; v. Eoghanachta.
Eolus, druid of Partholon.
Eomhua, Eowua, s. of Ingeld, an. of Aelfred.
Eonbhric, s. of Lughaidh, s. of Ioth.
Epiphanius; prob. Epiphanius Scholasticus is rt. who flourished in the
sixth century; Becanus (not Buchanan as in Trans.) quotes on the
sovereignty of the Scythians.
Er, s. of Eibhear, a leader of the Milesian expedition to Ire.; jk.
Ire. (with his three brothers) for a part of a year; sl. in bt. of Ard
Ladhrann.
Er, s. of Partholon, gets from Partholon the part of Ire. lying
between Aileach Neid and Ath Cliath Laighean
Eremod, s. of Itermod, an. of Aelfred.
Erne, r., v. Eirne.
Esmonds, the, v. Easmontaigh.
Etalmund, s. of Eafa, an. of Aelfred.
Etgna, comhorba of Patrick, attends a general assembly of the men of
Ire. together with Maoilseachlainn (k. Ire.) at Raith Aodha Mic Bric.
Etimonn, k. of Sacsa, d., in the reign of Conghalach, s. of
Maoilmithidh.
Euchtach, s. of Eadarlamh, and f. of Nuadha Airgeadlamh (k. Ire).
Eusebius (c. 260 -- c 340), Ecclesiastical historian, computed time
between Adam and Christ as 5190 years.
Eustaces, the, v. Eustasaigh.
Eustasaigh, the Eustaces, said by some (but falsely) to be sprung
from Donnchadh, s. of Brian Boraimhe.
Exnich, bp. of Tealach.

Fabhar, Fore, Co. Westmeath; al. Fobhar (q.v).
Fachtna, s. of Seancha, one of the Pagan authors of the Seanchus Mor.
Fachtna Fathach, 'Fachtna the Wise,' s. of Cas (of the race of Ir, s.
of Milidh), f. of Conchubhar (s. of Neasa).
Failbhe, s. of Cas Ceadchaingneach, of the race of Eibhear.
Failbhe Fionn, 'Failbhe the Fair,' k. of Desmond, leader of the sea-
force sent to rescue Ceallachan Caisil; overpowered and beheaded by
the Lochlonnaigh.
Failias, a city of the Fionnlochlonnaigh or Norwegians.
Fal, ns., g. Fail, poetic name for Ire., used even at the present day,
equivalent to Inis Fail (In Trans. Fail is used), v. Inis Fail and Lia
Fail.
Fan Mic Connrach, the church of the son of Connraidh (al. Fan Connrach,
Dun Fain Connrach, v. C. G. 106); in Deise Mumhan not far from
Waterford.
Faobhar, f. of Conaing, of the Fomorian race.
Faolan, f. of Bran (k. L).
Faolan, f. of Brian (k. of Laoighis).
Faolan, f. of Domhnall, f. of Mothla (k. of the Deise, sl. at Cluain
Tarbh); Faolan was k. of the Deise and sl. by Iomhar (Ivar) of
Luimneach, C. G. 72.
Faolan, f. of Tadhg (k. of Ui Cinnsealaigh).
Faolan, s. of Muireadhach, k. L.; d. anno 940 Fm.
Faolan, St., not a bastard son of a k. of Leinster, as Hanmer asserts;
son of Aodh Beannain (k. M).
Faolchur, f. of Ceallach (k. of Osruighe).
Farannan, primate, banished with his clergy from Ard Macha by
Turgesius, anno 841. C. G. Intr.
Fargall, k. of Lochloinn, f. of Dearbhorgaill (w. of Lughaidh Riabh
nDearg).
Farney, bar. Co. Mon., v. Fearnmhagh, and Magh Fearnmhaighe.
Fas, one of the seven principal women who came to Ire. with the sons
of Milidh.
Fathachta, s. of Magog, an. of Partholon; an. of Neimheadh; an. of T.
D. D.; an. of Attila who long perturbed the Roman State; dss. of
called Greeks of Scythia; written Fathacht in some passages of Trans.
Fathaidh Canann, s. of Mac Con, s. of Macniadh; Mac Ailin (al. Mac
Cailin) and its genealogical branches sprung from him
Fathan, Co. Don., v. Fothain Mhor and Fothain Bheag.
Fe, a rioghdhamh, or chief poetess, of the T. D. D.
Fea, a slave who came to Ire. with the sons of Milidh, I. 104. Feabhal
Mic Lodain, 'Foyle of Mac Lodain,' the district over which Loch
Feabhail (Lough Foyle in north of Ulster) burst.
Feadha, s. of Tortan, the first man of Partholon's people to die in
Ire.
Feale, r., v. Feil and Innbhear Feile.
Feara Ceall, a district in ancient Meath comprising the barr. of
Fircall (which preserves the name but is now called Eglish) Ballycown
and Ballyboy; it bounds Eile Ui Chearbhaill; Giolla Brighde O
Maolmuaidh
Fearadhach, noble, sl. in bt. of Bealach Mughna.
Fearadhach, s. of Fiachiaidh, an. of St. Maodhog, of Fearna.
Fearadhach, s. of Muircheartach, s. of Muireadhach, s. of Eoghan, s.
of Niall Naoighiallach.
Fearadhach, s. of Oilill Earann, and an. of Eidirsceol (k. Ire).
Fearadhach, s. of Rochorb, s. of Gollan, sl. in bt. of Carn
Fearadhaigh anno 3656 Fm.
Fearadhach Fionn, 'Fearadhach the Fair,' al. Fionnchormac, k. of Alba.
Fearadhach Fionn Feachtnach, 'Fearadhach the Fair and Truthful,' s. of
Criomhthann Nia Nar, k. Ire. twenty years; d. in Liath Druim, anno 36
Fm.
Fearadhach Foghlas, s. of Nuadha Fullon, and an. of Cathaoir Mor.
Feara Maighe, Fermoy, the present bar. of Fermoy as well as the barr.
of Condons and Clangibbon.
Feara Maighe (Muighe), al. an Da Feara Maighe, 'the two Feara
Maighes'; bar. of Fermoy, Co. Cork, together with barr. of Condons and
Clangibbon.
Feara Morc, al. (but not in K.) Fir (Feara) Morca, a district in West
Munster near Luachair Deaghaidh, Ll. 269; Ui Conaill Gabhra.
(according to O'Fl. 262) (cf. Lec. 386, 189), that is barr. of Upper
and Lower Connello, Co. Limer.
Fear Arda, s. of Roitheachtaigh, of race of Eibhear.
Feara Rois, al. Crioch Rois, a district comprising portions of barr.
of Farney, Co. Monagh., of Ardee, Co. Louth, and a part of Co. Meath;
Carrickmacross (Carraig Machaire Rois) in bar. of Farney and not far
from the junction of the counties of Monaghan, Meath and Louth is in
Feara Rois.
Feara Teabhtha, al. Teabhtha, Teffia, a large district comprising
about the western half of Co. Westmeath and a portion of Co. Longford;
North Teffia contains Granard; South Teffia contains Ardagh; North and
South Teffia were separated by the r. Eithne (Inny), v. O'Fl. 402, Fm.
II. 156; v. Teabhtha.
Fearb, f. of Breasal (k. U.), (read Fearb in Trans. for Firb).
Fearb, s. of Mal, of the race of Ir.
Fearchar, Feargus, s. of, 1st k. of Scotland of the Scotic race.
according to Hector Boetius.
Fear Corb, s. of Mogh Corb, s. of Cobhthach Caomh, k. Ire. Eleven
years,; sl. by Connla Cruaidhchealgach anno 4737 Fm.
Fear Corb, s. of Mogh Corb, s. of Cormac Cas, and f. of Aonghus
Tireach; an. of Brian Boraimhe.
Fear Diadh, s. of Damhan, sl. by Cuchulainn.
Fear Firb, s. of Muireadhach, ollamh over Ulster.
Fearghal, f. of Dunghal (k. of Osruighe).
Fearghal, f. of Eithne (w. of Conghalach, s. of Maoilmithidh, and thus
queen of Ire).
Fearghal, s. of Maolduin, k. Ire. seventeen years; def. with great
slaughter, and sl., by Murchadh, s. of Bran, k. L. in bt. of Almhuin,
anno 718 Fm.
Fearghal O Ruairc, k. C.; sl. by Domhnall, s. of Conghalach (k. Ire.)
anno 964 Fm.
Fearghus, the three F.'s, sons of Fionnchaidh (prop. sons of Iomchaidh,
s. of Fionnchaidh), i.e. Fearghus Dubhdheadach, Fearghus Caisfhiaclach,
Fearghus Fuiltleabhair.
Fearghus, two F.'s, sons of Muireadhach, s. of Eoghan, s. of Niall.
Fearghus, two F.'s, sons of Earc, s. of Eochaidh Muinreamhar, go to
Alba twenty years after bt. of Ocha.
Fearghus, bp. of Daimhliag, d. anno 778 Fm.
Fearghus, f. of Aonghus (k. of the Picts).
Fearghus, f. of Ciar, an. of St. Breanainn; an. of St. Mochuda.
Fearghus, s. of Cathaoir Mor.
Fearghus, s. of Eochaidh Muighmheadhoin.
Fearghus, s. of Fearchar (k. of Ire.); according to Hector Boetius the
first k. of Alba of the Scotic race; but no Fearchar was k. of Ire.;
note:-- the name Fearghus, s. of Fearchar, may have been got from
Fearghus Fogha, s. of Fraechar Foirtruin, king of Ulster, sl., anno
331 Fm.
Fearghus, s. of Leide, gets prov. of Ulster from Eochaidh Feidhlioch.
Fearghus, (prop. Forgus or Forcus, v. Arch. Hib. II., 59, 60), s. of
Muircheartach, s. of Earc, al. s. of Mac Earca, jk. Ire. one year.
Fearghus, s. of Muireadhach Mal, and f. of Duach Teangumha (k. C).
Fearghus, s. of Niall [prop. F., s. of Neillin; Fm. I. 204, has Fergus
Mac Nelline, the Ann. of Clonmacnoise reads Fergus Mac Nellyne, and Au.
has Fergus Mac Neilleni, sl. Ainmire (k Ire.),  nno 566 Fm.
Fearghus, s. of Rogh, usually known as Fearghus Mac Roigh (Rogh or
Roigh being his mother).
Fearghus Caisfhiaclach, 'Fearghus of the twisted teeth,' one of the
"three Fearghuses," s. of Fionnchaidh (prop. s. of Iomchaidh, s. of
Fionnchaidh), with his brothers commits an outrage on Cormac, s. of
Art; sl. and beheaded by Lughaidh Lamha anno 226 Fm.
Fearghus Ceannfhoda, 'Fearghus Longhead,' s. of Conall Gulban, gf. of
St. Columcille.
Fearghus Ceirrbheoil, Fearghus Wrymouth,' s. of Conall Creamhainne, s.
of Niall Naoighiallach; f. of Diarmaid (k. Ire.), who is also known as
Diarmaid Mac Cearbhaill (Ceirrbheoil), v. Diarmaid, S. of Fearghus
Ceirrbheoil.
Fearghus Duibhdheadach, 'Fearghus Blackteeth,' s. of Iomchaidh, s. of
Fionncbaidh, k. Ire. one year; sl. and beheaded by Lughaidh Lamha (at
the instigation of Cormac) in bt. of Crionna.
Fearghus Fairrge, f. of Rossa Ruadh (who got prow. of Leinster from
Eochaidh Feidhlioch),; an. of Conchubhar Abhradhruadh (k. Ire.); an.
of Cathaoir Mor (k. Ire).
Fearghus Fanad, s. of Conall Gulban, II. 142.
Fearghus Fiannaithe, of Ciarraidhe Luachra, pagan author of the
Seanchus Mor.
Fearghus Filé, one of the three ollamhs who purified the Seanchus of
Ire. in conjunction with St. Patrick.
Fearghus Fogha, k. of Eamhain, (i.e. k. of Ulster; he was the last k.
of Ulster who resided in Eamhain), sl. in bt. (of Achaidh Leith
Dheirg) by the Collas, anno 331 Fm., and from this date onwards Ulster
shrinks to 'Ulidia'; v. Ulaidh and Fearghus s. of Fearchar.
Fearghus Foghlas, s. of Tiobraide Tireach, of the race of Ir.
Fearghus Fortamhail, 'Fearghus the valiant,' s. of Breasal Breac, k.
Ire. twelve years.
Fearghus Fuiltleabhair, 'Fearghus Longlocks,' s. of Fionnchaidh, one
of the " three Fearghuses,"; sl. and beheaded by Lughaidh Lamha anno
226 Fm.
Fearghus Laoibdhearg, s. of Fothach, (al. Fothadh), k. C., an. of St.
Caoimhghin of Gleann da Loch d. anno 842 Fm.
Fearghus Leithdhearg, Fearghus Redside,' s. of Neimheadh; f. of
Briotan Maol.
Fearghus Mor, 'F. the Great,' s. of Earc, first k. of Alba of the
Scotic race, notwithstanding Hector Boetius.
Feargna, s. of Dallan, and f. of Muireadhach Muindearg (k. U.)
Feargna, s. of Eibhear, jk. Ire., with his three brothers, a part of a
year.
Feargna, s. of Partholon.
Feargraidh, s. of Ailgionan, k. of Munster, in succession to
Ceallachan Caisil.
Fearmaighe (al. Feara Maighe) bar. of Fermoy, Co. Cork.
Fearna, Fearna Maodhog, v. Fearna Mor Maodhog.
Fearna Mor Maodhog, al. Fearna, Fearna Mor, and Fearna Maodhog, Ferns,
a town, see and par. in the Co. of Wexford; the see is al. called Loch
Garman, in K..
Fearnmhagh, bar, of Farney, Co. Monagh., it includes the town of
Carrickmacross.
Featon, a man who, according to some, lived through the Deluge.
Fearon, s. of Eibhear. jk. Ire., with his three brothers, a part of a
year; a leader of the Milesian Expedition to Ire.
Feart Conmhaoil, the Mound of Conmhaol (s. of Eibhear and k. Ire.), on
the south side of Aonach Macha (at Eamhain near Armagh), on Druim
Conmhaoil or Drumconvel in par. of Armagh.
Feart Fionntain, Fiontan's Mound, over Tultuinne in Duthaigh Aradh
near Loch Deirgdheirc; Tultuinne is now modernised to Tonn Tuinne or
Tounthinna and is situated in the par. of Templechala or Temple Callow
in the barony of Duharra and county of Tipperary, Fm. I. 1189; named
from Fionntain (who survived the Deluge).
Fearta Conaill, 'the mound of Conall' (Eachluaith); in Feimhean; in
the Dal gCais part of Ormond, v. Lee.; belonged to Conall Eachluaith.
Fear Uillne, s. of Deaghamhrach, of the race of Ioth.
Fear Uillne, s. of Eadbholg, of the race of Ioth.
Feichin Fabhair, St. Feichin of Fore (Co. West.); Feichin was founder
of Fore and d. anno 665 or 668, Au.
Feidhlim, da. of Cobhthach, and w. of Eochaidh, s. of Eanna
Cinnsealach, k. L.
Feidhlim, s. of Tighearnach, k. M., d. anno 586 Fm.
Feidhlimidh, s. of Cas, s. of Fiachaidh Aruidhe, of the race of Ir.
Feidhlimidh, s. of Criomhthann, k. M.; abp. of Leath Mogha (i.e. of
Cashel), d. (after being 27 years k. M.) anno 845 Fm., 847 Au. which
speaks of him as optimus scribe et ancorita).
Feidhlimidh, s. of Dall, storyteller to Conchubhar, s. of Neasa; birth
of Deirdre at a feast in the house of.
Feidhlimidh, s. of Eanna Cinnsealach.
Feidhlimidh, s. of Fearghus Ceannfhoda, and f. of St. Columcille.
Feidhlimidh Fiorurghlas, s. of Cormac Gealta Gaoth, and f. of Cathaoir
Mor.
Feidhlimidh Foirthriun, s. of Fearghus Fortamhail of race of Eireamhon.
Feidhlimidh Reachtmhar, 'Feidhlimidh of the laws,' k. Ire. nine years.
Feidhlim Nuachrothach 'F. Freshfavoured,' da. of Conchubhar, s. of
Neasa, and w. of Cairbre Nia Fear (k. I.).
Feidhlioch, meaning of, II. 184.
Feig, f. of Fidhic (k. of a division of Connaugbt).
Feig, s. of Fidheic Caoch, k. M., sl. treacherously by the
Athachthuaith.
Feil, Feale, a river partly in Co. Limerick but principally in Co.
Kerry. It rises nearly at the point where the Counties of Cork, Kerry
and Limerick meet and flows westward along the boundaries between the
barr. of Clanmaurice and Iraghticonnor, and after uniting with the
Galy and the Brick and changing its name to the Cashen or Casheen, it
flows into the estuary of the Shannon; a limit of the see of Raith
Mhaighe Deisceirt and of the see of Luimneach,.
Feilire, better known as the Feilire of Aonghus, an Irish metrical
Martyrology, or Festology, ed. by Stokes in vol. XXIX. of the Henry
Bradshaw Society's publications.
Feimhean, a slave who came to Ire. with the Milesians; v. Magh
Feimhean.
Feimhean, in Bregia, bt. of, fought by Cairbre Crom against Colman
Beag; cf. "Cath Femin i mBreaghaibh," Lec. 574 (quoted in Onom).
Feine, the tribe, named from Feinius Farsaidh; one of the three chief
tribes of Ire., the others being the Ulaidh and the Gaileoin (Ancient
Laws of Ireland, I. 70.)
Feinius Farsaidh, s. of Beath, s. of Magog; an. of the race of
Gaedheal.
Feircheas, s. of Coman Eigeas, sl. Mac Con (k. Ire.), with the spear
called ringcne at the command of Cormac, s. of Art, anno 225 Fm.
Feircheirtne Filé, 'Feircheirtne the poet,' a Pagan author of the
Seanchus of Ire..
Feircheirtne, poet to Curaoi, s. of Daire,.
Feirghein, al. Feargna, q.v.
Feis, an assembly legislative, literary, business, or social.
Feis Chruachan, one of the three general assemblies of Ire.
Feis Eamhna, the Feis or assembly of Eamhain, one of the three general
assemblies of Ire.
Feis Eamhna, 'the Feis of Eamhain,' an Irish historical tract,
mentioned in a list of such tracts;(the list is printed in O'Curry, MS.
Mat. 584 sq).
Feis Teamhrach, 'Feis or Assembly of Tara'.
Felix, the third, elected pope in the tenth year of the reign of
Lughaidh, s. of Loghaire. The date of Felix's election is 483.
Feoir, the r. Nore, rises among the Devil-Bit Mountains (Sliabh an
Bhearnain), a mile and a half north-east of Moneygall; rises from the
brow of Sliabh an Bhearnain, not from brow of Sliabh Bladhma (Slieve
Bloom), as stated by Cambrensis.
Feoras, Clanna Feorais, the Birminghams, a family that came to Ire. at
the Norman Invasion.
Fermoy, abbey of, Co. Cork, v. Mainistear Fear Muighe.
Fermoy, bar. of, Co. Cork, v. Feara Maighe, and Fearmaighe.
Ferns, Co. Wex., v. Fearna and Fearna Mor Maodhog.
Fiach, f. of Fidheach (who got a portion of Connaught from Eochaidh
Feidhlioch), v. Feig.
Fiach, s. of Iomchaidh, and f. of Eochaidh Gumat (k. Ire).
Fiachaidh; 'the two Fiachaidhs' i.e., F., son of Baodan, and F., s. of
Deaman; in the annals generally the name of this pair is written
Fiachna.
Fiachaidh, f. of Flann (f. of Sioda, m. of Mogh Nuadhat).
Fiachaidh, k. of Cineal Eoghain.
Fiachaidh (generally Fiachna as in Fm. and Au.), s. of Deaman.
Fiachaidh (generally Fiachna as in Fm. and Au), s. of Baodan, k. U.
twenty-five years; d. anno 622 Fm.
Fiachaidh, s. of Dealbhaoth, of the T. D. D., k. Ire. ten years.
Fiachaidh (should be Fiachra), s. of Eochaidh Muighmheadhoin.
Fiachaidh, s. of Fearghus, s. of Rogh.
Fiachaidh, s. of Fionnachta, or race of Ir, k. Ire. thirty years.
Fiachaidh, s. of Niall, a servant of God of the race of, has a vision
of an angel who instructs him how to banish the crosans; perhaps
identical with Fiachaidh, s. of Niall, k. of South Eile.
Fiachaidh, s. of Niall Naoighiallach.
Fiachaidh Aiceadha, s. of Cathaoir Mor, an. of Siol mBruin,
Tuathalaigh, and Caomhanaigh; an. of St. Mobhi, called Bearachan of
the Prophecy; an. of St. Caimin.
Fiachaidh Aruidhe, s. of Aonghus Gaibhnionn, of the race of Ir.
Fiachaidh Casan, a leader of the remnant of the free tribes of Ire..
Fiachaidh Fear da Liach, 'F. Man of Two Sorrows,' a name given to
Fiachaidh Muilleathan on account of the loss of his father soon after
his conception, and of his mother soon after his birth, v. Fiachaidh
Muilleathan.
Fiachaidh Fear Mara, 'F. Man of the Sea,' incestuous s. of Aonghus
Tuirbheach (k. Ire).
Fiachaidh Fionnamhnus, s. of Irial Glunmhar, of the race of Ir.
Fiachaidh Fionnoladh, 'Fiachaidh of the White Cattle,' s. of
Fearadhach Fionn Feachtnach, k. Ire. twenty-seven years; sl. by the
Athachthuaith, anno 56 Fm.
Fiachaidh Fionscothach, 'F. of the wine flowers,' (so also Fm. text,
but Ann. of Clonmacnoise derives his name from white flowers which
derivation seems more probable), s. of Seadna, k. Ire. twenty years;
sl. by Muineamhon, s. of Cas Clothach, anno 3867 Fm.
Fiachaidh Foibhric, f. of Breasal Breac; s. of Oilill Glas.
Fiachaidh Labhruinne, 'Fiachaidh of the r. Labhruinne,' (q.v.), k. Ire.
twenty years or thirty-seven years; sl. in bt. of Bealgadan by
Eochaidh Mumho anno 3751 Fm.
Fiachaidh Lonn, 'Fiachaidh the Fierce,' s. of Caolbhadh, k. of Dal
nAruidhe, fights against Oilill Molt (k. Ire.) in bt. of Ocha anno 478
Fm.
Fiachaidh Muilleathan, 'F. Flathead,' s. of Eoghan Mor, s. of Oilill
Olom.
Fiachaidh Rioghfhada 'F. Longarm,' s. of Feidhlimidh Reachtmhar, sl.
in bt. of Magh Croich.
Fiachaidh Sraibhthine, 'Fiachaidh of Dun Sraibhthine,' s. of Cairbre
Lithfheachair, k. Ire. thirty three years; Sraibhthine means 'of the
fire stream 'according to Coir Anmann; the three Collas are sons of
Eochaidh Doimhlean, his br.
Fiachaidh Suighdhe, br. of Conn Ceadchathach.
Fiachaidh Tolgrach, (F. Tolgach, from tolg a couch, is the form in
Coir Anmann), s. of Muireadhach Bolgrach, k. Ire. seven years; sl. by
Oilill Fionn, ib. anno. 4404 Fm.
Fiachna, f. of St. Cuimin Foda.
Fiachna, s. of Baodan, k. U., v. Fiachaidh, s. of Baodan.
Fiachna, s. of Conchubhar, sl. by Fearghus, s. of Rogh.
Fiachna, s. of Fearadhach, and f. of Suibhne Meann, (k. Ire).
Fiachna Fionnamhnas, s. of Irial Glunmhar, of the race of Ir.
Fiachraidh, (more correctly Fiachra), s. of Amhalghuidh, an. of St.
Maodhog of Fearna.
Fiachraidh, (more correctly Fiachra), s. of Eochaidh Muighmheadhoin,
and f. of Dathi.
Fiadh Mic Aonghusa, 'Land of the son of Aonghus,' hill of Uisneach in
Co. Westm. according to a marginal note in the Fm. MSS. in which the
synod or council held there is called Synodus de Usnach, v. Colgan,
Trias. Thaum., p. 300, and Fm. I. 991; a council held at, in the year
1105; Fm. and Au. date this council anno 1111.
Fiadhna (g. -at), parent of a St. Brighid.
Fial, one of the seven chief women who came with the sons of Milidh to
Ire.; w. of Lughaidh, s. of Ioth; Innbhear Feile is named from her.
Fial, da. of Eochaidh, from whom Cruachan Feile is named; first w. of
Dathi (k. Ire).
Fial, da. of Eochaidh Seideadh, story of her giving his name to Oilill
Molt.
Fian, "na bhfeartaibh Feine,' in their Fenian tombs.
Fian, g. Feine, dat. Fein, a semi-military semi-hunting body of men
organised to help the kings of Ire. in the administration of justice
and in the defence of the harbours. That the method of cooking meat
attributed to the Fian, is old world, and has been and still is
practised by primitive peoples will appear if the passage beginning
"And it was their custom to send... " be compared with the following;
"Their usual methods of cooking are roasting and boiling. Roasting is
usually effected by making a fire, letting it die down into red-hot
ashes, and then putting the food without wrap or covering into the
ashes, turning it from time to time. They also roast by holding the
food on sticks in the flame of the burning fire, turning it
occasionally. Stone cooking is adopted for pig and other meats. They
make a big fire, on the top of which they spread stones; when the
stones are hot enough they remove some of them, place the meat without
wrap or covering on the others, then place the removed stones on the
meat, and finally pile on these stones a big covering of leaves to
keep in the heat. Stone-cooking in the gardens is done in a slightly
different way; there they dig in the ground a round hole about one
foot deep and from 4 to 2 feet in diameter, and in this hole they make
their fire, on which they pile their stones, and the rest of the
process is the same as before. This hole-making process is never
adopted in the village. The only reason for it which was suggested was
that the method was quicker and that in the gardens they are in a
hurry. Of course holes of this sort dug in the open village enclosure
would be a source of danger, especially at night." From " The Mafulu
Mountain People of British New Guinea." Robert W. Williamson
(Macmillan, 1912).
Fian Laighean, the Fian of Leinster, a name for the Fian (q.v).
Fianghal, leader under Failbhe Fionn, drowned himself and Sitric.
Fianghalach, s. of Donn Cuan, goes to bt. of Cluain Tarbh.
Fiannaidheacht, the organisation or society of the Fian.
Fiatach Fionn, 'Fiatach the Fair,' s. of Daire, k. Ire. three years;
sl. by Fiachaidh Fionnoladh, anno 39 Fm.
Fiatach Fionn, 'F. the Fair,' the eponymous head of Dal bhFiatach.
Fidheac, s. of Feig, gets third part of Connaught from Eochaidh
Feidhlioch.
Fidheac, al. Fidhic, a limit of Tinne's division of Connaught and al.
of Fidheac's division.
Fidheac Caoch, 'Fidheac the Blind,' f. of Feig (k. M.); nom. al.
Fidheic.
Fidheang, da. of k. of Connaught, and w. of Criomthann, (k. Ire).
Fidhic, s. of Feig, v. Fidheac, s. of Feig.
Fidhic, v. Fidheac.
Finbar, St., v. Bairrfhionn and Fionnbharr.
Fine Ciannachta, that is Ciannacht Breagh, which extended from r.
Liffey to Dromiskin, Co. Louth.
Fine Ghall, Fingal, the part of Co. Dublin north of the Liffey; smt.
used loosely for the English Pale or as equivalent to Magh Breagh.
Fingal, Co. Dublin, v. Fine Ghall.
Finghin, f. of Maonach (k. M).
Finghin, s. of Aodh Dubh, k. of all Munster.
Finghin Faithliaigh, 'Finghin Surgeon' cured Conchubhar, s. of Neasa.
Finghin Mac Carrthaigh, Florence Mac Carthy Mor (c. 1563 -- c. 1640),
booklet by, on the History of Ire. quoted from by K.
Finglas, r., v. Fionnghlaise.
Fingodmhulf, Fingodwulf.
Finias, a city of Norway in which the T. D. D. taught sciences.
Finn, r., v. Fionn.
Finneamhna, npl., the three F.'s, sons of Eochaidh Feidhlioch at a
birth.
Finnen, St., of Magh Bile, St. Finnian of Moville; d. anno 579 Au.
Fiodhach, s. of Daire Cearb, and f. of Criomhthann (k. Ire).
Fiodh Gaibhle, 'Wood of Gabhal,' Feegile, a river, of which a
tributary is Feavoylagh, in par. of Clonsast, N. of Portarlington,
Queen's Co.; the wood has now disappeared, but must have been situated
on either side of the river.
Fionan, St., of Ard Fionain, of the race of Fiachaidh Muilleathan.
Fionghaine, f. of Cathal (k. M).
Fionghaine, s. of Cathal, k. M..
Fionn, the r. Finn, between Cineal Eoghain and Cineal Conaill, one of
the rivers found in Ire. by Partholon.
Fionn, the three Fionna rivers; one of these is the Finn which flows
through the bar, of Raphoe, Co. Don.; there is al. a r. Finn in
Monaghan and Fermanagh, which may be another of the three; the third
may be a tributary of the first.
Fionn, s. of Arb, sl. at Tiobraid Fhinn, anno 751 Fm.
Fionn, s. of Bratha, of the race of Ir, k. Ire. twenty (or thirty)
years; sl. by Seadna Ionnaraidh, anno 4270 Fm.
Fionn, s. of Cianan (or Fionn Mac Cianain), bp. of Cill Dara, present
at the Council of Ceanannus (Kells).
Fionn, s. of Cumhall, usually termed Fionn Mac Cumhaill, of
Scandinavian origin according to Hanmer; but of the race of Nuadha
Neacht, k. L.; made leader or 'Ri Feinnidh 'over the Fian.
Fionn, s. of Fionnlogha,; f. of Eochaidh Aireamh.
Fionn, son of Oilill, of race of Ioth.
Fionnabhair (al. F. Maighe Inis), Finnabrogue, a tl. in par. of Inish,
two and a half miles north of Down.
Fionnach, f. of a St. Baoithin.
Fionnachta, f. of Diarmaid (leader of the Luighnigh q.v).
Fionnachta, s. of Connla, an. of O Meachair.
Fionnachta, s. of Ollamh Fodla, of the race of Ir; d. in Magh Inis,
anno 3942 Fm.
Fionnachta Fleadhach, 'Fionnachta of the Feasts,' s. of Donnchadh, k.
Ire. seven years; sl. at Greallach Doluidh, anno 693 Fm.
Fionnbhall, br. of Fiachaidh Casan.
Fionnbharr, al. Bairrfhionn, St. Finbar, of Cork; Luan his name at
first.
Fionnchaidh, f. of Fraoch (sl. in bt. of Graine).
Fionnchaidh, s. of Muireadhach, of the race of Ir.
Fionnchaidh, s. of Oghaman (Oghamal), gf. of 'the three Fearghuses,';
in one place the three F's are said to be ss. of Fionnchaidh (the link
Iomchaidh being omitted).
Fionncharn, 'White Cairn,' on Sliabh Fuaid, probably the highest peak
of the Fews Mountains, near Newtown-Hamilton, Co. Armagh; a boundary
between the two divisions of Oirghialla.
Fionndruinne, a metal, perhaps bronze.
Fionn File, 'Fionn the Poet,' s. of Rossa Ruadh.
Fionnghlaise, 'white stream,' r. Finglas, flowing from Cahirconree
into Tralee Bay.
Fionnloch Ceara, 'White Lake of Ceara,' Carrowmore Lake in bar. of
Erris, Co. Mayo, one of the three lakes found by Partholon in Ire.
Fionnlochlonnaigh, 'the Fair Lochlonnaigh,' the Norwegians as
distinguished from the Dubhlochlonnaigh, or Danes.
Fionnlogha (or Fionnlogh), s. of Roighnen Ruadh,.
Fionn O Cionga, a crosan, learnsedby rote the lay the crosans chanted
above the grave of Donnchadh, s. of Ceallach, k. of Osruighe,.
Fionntain, Gospels belonging to him copied by Columcille; Finnen is
the form of name given in Fm.
Fionntain, comes to Ire. with Ceasair and others before the Deluge;
Feart Fiontain named from; author regards invasion of as a legend;
called Roanus (or Ronanus) by Cambrensis; Hanmer's story of his living
to time of Patrick, being baptised by him, and becoming a saint,
arises from confounding three different persons.
Fionntan, f. of Ciombaoth (k. Ire.) of the race of Ir.
Fionntan of Cluain Eidhneach, St.; Book (or Annals of), v. Cluain
Eidhneach Fionntain.
Fionntraigh, Ventry Harbour on the west coast of Kerry, Battle of
("Cath Fionntragha") not history but a poetical Romance.
Fios, druid to Partholon.
Fir Bolg, 'the men of the leathern bags,'. In the Irish Version of
Nennius they are called Viri Bullorum while bullum in Latin of the
middle ages signified 'baculum pastoris', 'a shepherd's staff' (Todd's
Nennius 44); some connect the name with Belgae; usually called in
English Firbolgs; a tribe who took possession of Ire. at an early age,
and held its sovereignty only for a period of thirty-six years, while
remnants of the tribe held their ground to a much later period.
Firbolgs, the, v. Fir Bolg.
Fir Cheara, a branch of Ui Fiachrach in the bar. of Cara, Co. Mayo.
Fir Domhnann, a tribe included under the general name Fir Bolg; Iorrus
Domhmann said to be named from.
Fir Falgha, i.e. Fir Manann, the Manxnmen or natives of the Isle of
Man; "Forbhais bhFear bhFalga" is the name of an Irish romance
mentioned in Ll. 189.
Fir na Craoibhe, a division of Connaught extending from Fidheac to
Luimneach, given by Eochaidh Feidhlioch to Fiohhac, s. of Feig; Fir na
Craoibhe were a branch of Fir Olnegmacht.
Fir Teabhtha, on the north border of Meath; v. Feara Teabhtha and
Teabhtha.
Fitheal, a sage, chief brehon of Cormac, s. of Art. I. 338; a pagan
author of the Seanchus of Ire.
Fithir, da. of Tuathal Teachtmhar (k. Ire.), story of her being taken
as wife by Eochaidh Aincheann (k. L.), while his real wife (her sister
Dairine) was alive; died of shame on discovering that her sister was
alive; the 'Boraimhe 'or tax on Leinstermen was the result of this
tragedy.
Fitz Aldelmel, v. Mac Aldelmel.
Fitz Bernard, Robert, v. Mac Bearnaird, Roibeard.
Fitzgilbert, Richard, v. Mac Gilbirt, Risteard.
Fitzgerald, Maurice, v. Mac Gearailt, Muiris.
Fitzgerald, William, v. Mac Gearailt, Uilliam.
Fitzgeralds, the, v. Gearaltaigh.
Fitzpatrick, v. Mac Giolla Padraig.
Fitz Stephen, Robert, v. Mac Stiabhna, Roibeard.
Fitzursula (for Fitz Urse) an English surname said by Spenser to be
the origin of Mac Mathghamhna (Mac Mahon).
Flaithbheartach, s. of Ionmhainen, ab. of Inis Cathaigh (Scattery
Island); becomes k. M. on death of Dubh Lachtna; Flaithbheartach "went
on his pilgrimage" anno 920 Fm.; was taken by the foreigners on the
island of Lough Cre, and conveyed to Luimneach, anno 921 Fm.; d., 942
Fm.
Flaithbheartach, s. of Loingseach, k. Ire. seven years; d. at Ard
Macha, anno 729 Fm; O'Fl. places accession of, anno 727; k. of Cineal
Conaill; f. of Dunlaith (w. of Aodh Oirndighe).
Flaithbheartach, s. of Muireadhach, of the Fochla.
Flaithbheartach an Trostain, 'Flaithbheartach of the Pilgrim's Staff,'
I. 26; v. Flaithbheartach O Neill.
Flaithbheartach O Neill, al. F. an Trostain, 'F. of the Pilgrim's
Staff,' goes to Rome on a pilgrimage anno 1073.
Flaithnia, bp. of Biorar, d. anno 851 Fm.
Flaithri, s. of Fitheal, a sage of the time of Cormac, s. of Art.
Flanagan, s. of Ceallach, gf. of Conghalach (k. Ire.); f. of
Maoilmithidh (k. of Breagha).
Flann, br. of Murchadh, and s. of Brian Boraimhe, goes to Cluain Tarbh.
Flann, f. of Murchadh (k. L).
Flann, f. of Murchadh (k. of Meath).
Flann, s. of Conaing and f. of Gormfhlaith (w. of Flann Sionna, k.
Ire).
Flann, s. of Cronnmhaol, bp. of Reachra (in Trans. Reachrainne, prop.
the gen.), d. anno 739 Au., anno 734 Fm; Au. and Fm. give him as Flann,
s. of Ceallach, s. of Crunnmael).
Flann, s. of Fiachaidh, one of the Earna and f. of Sioda (w. of Mogh
Nuadhat).
Flann Abhradh, f. of Coscrach (Corcrac in text).
Flann Cathrach, k. M., an. of Donnchadh, s. of Caomh (k. of the two
Fearmaighes).
Flann Ruadh, 'Flann the Red,' s. of Rothlan, of the race of Ioth.
Flann Sionna, 'F. of the Shannon,' s. of Maoilseachlainn, k. Ire.
thirty-eight years; d. anno 914 Fm.
Flannagan, poet; the poet is prob. Eochaidh Ua Floinn or Ua Flannagain.
Flodias, m. of Nia Seaghamain, power of magic of.
Flondrus, Flanders.
Florianus del Campo, a Spanish author, says that the Brigantes were
Spanish by origin and went to Ire. from Spain; both Camden and Hanmer
quote Florianus on the Brigantes.
Fobhar, Fore, a village in bar. of Demifore, Co. Westm., 21/2 miles east
of Castlepollard; al. Fabhar (q.v).
Fobhna, Oona Water in Co. Tyr., a tributary of the r. Blackwater; one
of the three black rivers of Ire.
Fochair Maigh, i.e., Eochair Mhaighe, Bruree, Co. Limer., belonged to
Conall Eachluaith; v. Eochair Mhaighe.
Fochla, a name used loosely for the Northern half of Ire., but often
restricted to the kingdom of Aileach or Northern Ui Neill.
Fochmorc, druid to Partholon.
Focloir Laidne, Latin Dictionary, by Thomasius; v. Thomasius.
Fodhla, v. Fodla.
Fodla, al. Fodhla, da. of Fiachaidh, s. of Dealbhaoth of the T. D. D.;
Ire. called Fodla from.
Fodla, al. Fodhla, a name for Ire., from Fodla, the w. of Mac Ceacht.
Foghartach, s. of Niall, k. Ire. one year; sl. by Cionaoth in bt. of
Beilge, anno 719 Fm. which gives Cath Deilgean for K.'s Cath Beilge.
Foghartach, s. of Suibhne, k. of Ciarraidhe, sl. at Bealach Mughna.
Foidhbghein, s. of Seangann, k. Ire. four years; sl. by Eochaidh, s.
of Earc in Magh Muirtheimhne.
Foirthren (Lat. Verturiones), one of the seven provinces of the
Cruithnigh or Picti of Alba, Bb. 113 a (apud Onom.); used often
loosely for Pictland or Cruitheantuaith, as opposed to Dal Riada; cf.
Reeves, Ad., 202; Skene says Foirthren lay west of r. Tay and that its
chief seat was Dundurn (Chiron. of the Picts and Scots CXX.); usually
Foirtrenn.
Follach, s. of Eithrial, and f. of Tighearnmhas (I.:. Ire.)
Follamhain, s. of Oilill, k. of Fotharta Feadha, among the victors of
Bealach Mughna.
Fomhoir, npl., the Fomorians; v. Fomhoraigh.
Fomhor, s. of Airgeadmhar, and f. of Dubh, of the race of Ir.
Fomhoraigh, npl.; ns. Fomhorach, the Fomorians, navigators or seamen
of the race of Cham from Africa; destroyed by Partholon in bt. of Magh
Iotha; v. Fomhoir.
Fomorians, the, v. Fomhoir and Fomhoraigh.
Forann, poet for Pharao; v. Pharao.
Forannan, primate of Ire., expelled from Ard Macha by Turgesius anno
841, C. G. Intr. XLII.
Forbhais bhFear bhFalgha, the siege of the Fir Falgha or of the
Manxmen; Forbhais bhFear bhFalgha is also the name of an Irish Romance,
to which our author probably refers here; v. Fir Falgha.
Forbhuidhe, s. of Conchubhar, sl. Meadhbh, at Inis Clothrann by means
of a treacherous artifice.
Fore, Co. Westmeath, v. Fobhar and Fabhar.
Foreigners, the, esp. the English; v. Gaill.
Foreigners, new, the, v. Nua-Ghaill.
Foreigners, old, the. v. Sean-Ghaill.
Forga, s. of Fearadhach, of the race of Eireamhon.
Formaoil na bhFlan, 'Fermoyle of the Fian' (the name Fermoyle occurs
in MSS. relating to the Esmonde family, v. Onom.); now (K.'s time)
called Luimneach Laighean, and at the present day called Limerick and
Little Limerick; a village in par. of Kilkevan, 31/2 miles north of 
Gorey, Co. Wexford; v. Luimneach Laighean.
Fors, a man said to have survived the Deluge.
Forth, bar. of, Co. Carlow, v. Fotharta Feadha and Fotharta.
Forth, bar. of, Co. Wex., v. Fotharta.
Forthola, Tola and F. are between Cluain Fearta Molua (Clonfertmulloe
a par. in bar. of Clandonagh, Queen's Co.), and Saighir Chiarain
(Seirkieran to south-east of Birr), v. Tola.
Forthuatha, npl. (Forthuath in Trans. is the gen. pl.), al. Forthuatha
Laighean, a district in Co. Wicklow including Imail and Glendalough.
Forus Feasa, Fundamental knowledge; Forus Feasa ar Eirinn, the
Fundamental knowledge of Ireland, i.e., an account of the origins of
Irish History, the title of our author's work.
Fosadh da Ghort, 'the Habitation of the two fields,' prob. Fossa tl. a
little to the west of Killarney; bt. of won by Eochaidh Faobharghlas
over race of Eireamhon; (the mention of bt. of Luachair Deaghaidh in
the context makes it prob. that the Killarney Fossa is the place
referred to; there is a parish called Fossy or Timahoe 4 miles south-
south-west of Stradbally, Queen's Co).
Fossa, Co. Kerry, v. Fosadh da Ghort.
Fothaidh Airgtheach, s. of Mac Con, jk. Ire. one year; sl. by the Fian
in bt. of Ollarbha.
Fothaidh Cairptheach, s. of Mac Con, jk. Ire. one year; sl. by his
brother Fothaidh Airgtheach, anno 285 Fm.
Fothain Bheag, prob. in par. of Lower Fathan (which includes town of
Buncranna), in Innishown, Co. DoneGal.
Fothain Mhor, village of Fahan in par. of Upper Fathan (21 miles south
of Buncranna) in Innishowen, Co. Doneg.
Fotharta, bar. of Forth, Co. Wexford.
Fotharta, k. of, makes muster with k. of Laoighis in general
assemblies; the Fotharta here referred to is principally Fotharta
Feadha, i.e., bar. of Forth, Co. Carlow, but it is uncertain what
other Fotharta it included; thus k. of Fotharta Feadha is given as
being present at bt. of Bealach Mughna.
Fotharta, the seven F.'s of Leinster got by Eochaidh Fionn for himself
and his dss., for expelling the Munstermen from Leinster; the name
Fotharta (from Eochaidh Fionn Fuath Airt) is still represented in barr.
of Forth in Wexford and Carlow which are nearly of equal size and only
some thirty miles apart, also in the Forth Mountains, Co. Wexford;
there were seven Laoighises, corresponding to the seven F.'s of
Leinster; of the seven Fothartas the following are mentioned in K., F.
Oirthir Lithfe, F. Airbhrioch, F. Feadha, F. at mouth of r. Slainghe.
Fotharta Airbhrioch, the territory around Hill of Crogan (Cruachan Bri
Eile, in the King's Co.)
Fotharta Feadha, bar. of Forth, Co. Carl.
Fotharta Oirir Lithfe, the F. east of r. Liffey, in the Co. Wicklow,
Tighearnmhas (k. Ire.), smelted gold there.
Fothart Muirtheimhne, F. in Muirtheimhne, Faughart, tl. in br. of
Lower Dundalk, Co. Louth.
Fraimint, gs. of Magog, (Framant in Trans).
Fraingc, Frainc (in I.), n. an Fhraingc, g. na Fraingce, France.
Fraingc, Frainc (in I.), npl.; gpl. Frangc, dpl. Frangcaibh, people of
France.
Fraingcis, the French language (or rather the Breton or Gaulish
language) has some words in common with Irish.
France, v. Fraingc, and Gallia.
Frangcaigh, Francaigh (in I.) npl.; ns., Frangcach, the French.
Fraoch, s. of Fionnchaidh, k. L.; sl. in bt. of Graine by Eochaidh, s.
of Cairbre.
Fraochan Faidh, 'Fraochan the Seer,' sl. in bt. of Glaise Fraochain.
Freaghobhal (al. Freaghobhail) the Ravel or Ravel Water forming part
of boundary between the barr. of Kilconway and Lower Antrim.
Frealaf, s. of Fritilbhald, an. of Aelfred.
Freamhainn Midhe, 'Freamhain of Meath,' both F. Midhe and F. Teathbha
are referred to in Irische Texte.
Freamhainn Teathbha, Frewen in Teffia, a hill over west shore of Lough
Owel in tl. of Wattstown, Co. Westm.
French, the, v. Frangcaigh and Fraingc.
Frewen, Co. West., v. Freamhainn Teathbha.
Fritilbhald, s. of Frealaf, an. of Aelfred.
Frizer, now Frazer, a Scottish family name.
Froto, k. of Lochlainn, said by Hanmer to have been k. of Ire. at
birth of Christ.
Fuad, s. of Breoghan, a leader of the sons of Milidh when invading
Ire.; sl. on Sliabh Fuaid when pursuing the T. D. D.
Fuad, w. of Slainghe.
Fulman, a leader of the sons of Milidh, in their invasion of Ire.
Fursa, St., of the race of Lughaidh Lamha; said by Hanmer to have been
a bastard son of a k. of Leinster.

G.
Gabhail Liuin, Galloon par. and tl. in Co. Ferm.; the parish is
situated in three barr., viz., Clonkelly, Knockninny and Coole; a
limit of the see of Clochar.
Gabhala Eireann, the Invasions of Ire.
Gabhaltus Gall, 'the Invasion of the Galls or Foreigners,' the Norman
or Anglo-Norman Invasion (annis 1171, 1172).
Gabhaltus na Sean-Ghall, 'Invasion of the old Foreigners,' that is of
the Normans, v. Gabhaltus Gall.
Gabhar, nf.; g. Gabhra, dt. and ac. Gabhair; g. Gabhra largely used as
nom., Gowra; al. Gabhair Aichle, 'Gowra of Aichill '(hill of Skreen
near Tara), Gowra is now name of a stream in the par. of Skreen which
flows into the Boyne at Ardsallagh; bt. took place anno 284, Fm.
Gabhar Lithfe, Gabhar or Gowra of Lithfe (da. of Ronan of Breagha,
from whom r. Liffey is named), a place between two mountains (Duanaire
Fhinn 1), prob. at or near the source of the Liffey; bt. of, won by
Fearghus and Domhnall, jkk. Ire., over the Leinstermen, anno 559 Fm.,
anno 565 or 572 Au.
Gabhra, v. Gabhar.
Gabhraidhe Shuca, the 'Gabhraidhe of the r. Suck 'in Connaught, a non-
Gaelic tribe of Ire.; said by some to be of the Fir Bolg.
Gabhran, Gowran, a vil. in par. and bar. of same name, Co. Kilk.;
eastern limit of Urmhumha.
Gabhran, race (Cineal) of, in Alba; v. Cineal Gabhrain.
Gabhran, s. of Domhanghurt, chief of Dal Riada and k. of Alba.
Ga bolg, a weapon used by Cuchulainn.
Gaedheal, meaning of the name; v. Gaedheal, s. of Eathor.
Gaedheal, an, the Gael, or Irishman; used as an alias for an
tEireannach.; v. Gaedhil.
Gaedheal, s. of Eathor, a sage placed by Feinius Farsaidh over his
school in the Plain of Senar; Gaelic (Gaedhealg) named from.
Gaedheal Glas, al. Gaedheal, s. of Niul; dss. of Lughaidh, s. of Ioth,
sprung from, but not from Milidh.
Gaedhealach, a., Irish, Gaelic.
Gaedhealg, g. Gaedhilge, Gaelic, the Irish language.
Gaedhil, npl.; gpl. and ns. Gaedheal; the Gaels; the inhabitants of
Ire. and of Scotland sprung from Gaedheal Glas, and more closely from
the sons of Milidh, that is, practically all the Irish race and their
Scottish offshoot.
Gaelic, v. Gaedhealg, and Scoitbhearla.
Gaels, the, v. Gaedhil.
Gaileanga, the country of O'Hara and O'Gara of Connaught; comprised
the see of Ardagh in the counties of Mayo and Sligo; Gallen a bar. in
North Mayo preserves the name, Fm. IV. 1314.
Gaileanga, al. Gaileanga Mora, Morgallion bar., Co. Meath; def. at bt.
of Aonach Tailltean by Conchubhar, s. of Donnchadh, k. Ire., anno 827
Au.
Gaileoin, one of the three leading tribes of Ire., the other two being
the Feini and the Ulaidh (Ancient Laws of Ireland, I. 70); said by
some to have come from the Fir Bolg.
Gailian, province of, i.e., Laighin or Leinster; v. Gaileoin.
Gaill, npl.; ns. and gpl. Gall; foreigners, especially and almost
exclusively in K. the English, including the Norman invaders of Ire.
in the time of Henry II.; these latter are sometimes called Seanghaill,
'old English,' to distinguish them from the Nuaghaill or 'modern
English'; opposed to Gaedhil, 'the Gaels or Irish'; the primary
meaning is natives of Gallia or Gaul.
Gairbhfhearann Luighdheach, 'the rough land of Lughaidh', extends from
Eichtge (Aughty) to Limerick, and from the Shannon west to Leim
Chongculainn (Loop Head).
Galamh, called Milidh of Spain; v. Milidh Easpainne.
Galicia, v. Galisia.
Galisia, Galicia, formerly a kingship and province in the western
angle of Spain; Eireamhon, s. of Milidh of Spain, born in (at
Breoghan's tower).
Gallda, v. Cuigeadh Gallda.
Galldacht, the, of Alba, or Scotland, that is the portion nearest
England; roughly speaking the Lowlands; inhabited by Saxons.
Gallen, bar. of, Co. Mayo; v. Gaileanga.
Gallghaedhil, npl.; Galloway, in Scotland.
Galli, Gauls, destroyed the records of the countries they invaded.
Gallia, France, the Gaill or Galls of Ire. named from.
Gallia Lugdunensis, the region between the Loire and Seine in France;
it extends from Brittany in the west to Lyons in the south-east.
Galloon, Co. Ferm., v. Gabhail Liuin.
Galloway, v. Gallghaedhil.
Gallowglass (galloglach), a mercenary soldier.
Galway, v. Gaillimh.
Gamhanruidh, of Iorrus Domhnann (Erris, Co. Mayo), the second of three
great contemporary orders of champions in Ire.; Oilill Fionn leader
of; build Raith Cruachan for Eochaidh Feidhlioch (k. Ire.), building
the rampart theref in one day.
Gandeville (al. Gundeville and Gunderville), Hugo de, left by Henry I.
in defence of Port Lairge, when returning to England anno 1172; the
name Hugo de Gunderville occurs among the witnesses of Henry's charter
for Dublin.
Gann, a Fear Bolg; jk. Ire., with his brother Geanann, four years.
Gann, a Fomorian leader, sl. in bt. of Ros Fraochain, in Connaught.
Gaoithin, s. of (or Mac Gaoithin), burns the dun of Amhlaoibh, k. of
Lochlainn.
Gaoithine, bp. of Dun Leathghlaise, d. anno 956 Au.
Gaothlaidhe, npl., Gothia, Colpa of the Sword born in Gleann Colpa in.
Garaidh Glundubh, 'Garaidh Blackknee,' s. of Morna, from whom Gleann
Gharaidh in Ui Faithche is called.
Garbh, s. of Ughmhor, and gf. of Cical.
Gascony, v. Gascuin.
Gascuin, Gascony, a province in the South of France acquired by Henry
I. through his marriage with Eleanor.
Gauls, the, v. Galli.
Gavelkind, 'gabhail cinidh,' a division of land between brethren.
Geada, s. of Caetua, an. of Aelfred.
Geanann, a Fomorian leader, sl. in bt. of Ros Fraochain.
Geanann, a Fear Bolg, jk. Ire. four years.
Geanann Gruadhsholus, 'Geanann of the brow of light,' s. of Cathbhadh, 
of the Clanna Rudhruighe, directs his followers to bind grey wool to
their faces to represent beards whence they were called Ulaidh.
Gearaltaigh, Fitzgeralds, a family who came to Ire. at the beginning
of the Norman Invasion.
Gearmain, an Gh., Germany.
Gearmain, npl., the Germans, used by God as a scourge to deprive the
Britons of sovereignty.
Gearmaineach, a., German; a G. host under Hengist brought to Britain
by Vortigern.
Geasa, npl. (ns. geas, g. geise), injunctions or restrictions of a
punitive or fateful character.
Gebhus, s. of Brond, an. of Aelfred, I. 92.
Geibheannach, s. of Dubhagan, k. of Feara Muighe, sl. at Cluain Tarbh.
Geidhe Ollghothach, 'Geidhe Great Voice,' s. of Ollamh Fodla, k. Ire.
seventeen years; sl. by Fiachaidh, s. of Fionnachta, anno 3971 Fm.
Geinnte, Gentiles, applied to the Lochlonnaigh or Northmen.
Geirrgheann, s. of Mollaidh, a champion sl. by Fearghus, s. of Rogh.
Geisill, Geashill, par. and tl. in King's Co..
Gelasius, St. Gelasius I., Pope, assumed the Pontificate, March 1st,
492 and d. Nov. 19th, 496; was Pope the last year of the reign of
Lughaidh (k. Ire.); (Fm. gives Lughaidh's last year as 503; Au. anno
493 has " Gelasius having been ordained 47th bishop of the Church of
Rome lived three years.")
Gentiles, v. Geinnte.
Germain, St., v. Germanus.
Germans, v. Germain.
Germanus, Germain, St. (c. 380-448), bp. of Auxerre, sent to preach
against Pelagianism to the Britons.
Germany, v. Gearmain.
Giallchaidh, s. of Cumchaidh, of race of Ir.
Giallchaidh, s. of Oilill Olchaoin, k. Ire. nine years; sl. in Magh
Muaidhe by Art Imleach. (anno 4186 Fm.
Giallchaidh Fionn, 'G. the Fair,' s. of Fionnchadh, of race of Ir.
Gifford, Scottish family name.
Gildas (c. 516-570), an old British author; author of " De Excidio
Britanniae Liber Querulus "
Giollan, f. of Niall (who lived thirty years without food or drink).
Giolla Brighde O Maolmhuaidh, G. B. O Molloy, k. of Cineal Fhiachaidh
and of Feara Ceall.
Giolla Caomhain, al. Giolla Caoimhghin, author of some important
historical poems, d., 1072, v. O'Reilly's Irish Writers, 80 sq.; poem
by beginning; "Gaedheal Glas o dtaid Gaedhil," quoted from.
Giolla Ceallaigh, comhorba of Patrick and primate of Ire., at Council
of Raith Breasail.
Giolla Coimhdhe O Corain, v. O Corain, Giolla Coimhdhe.
Giolla Comhghaill O Sleibhin (Slevin), ollamh to Maoilseachlainn (k.
Ire.); d., 1033 Fm.
Giolla Deacair, " Imtheacht an Gh.D." an Irish Fenian Romance;
published in O'Grady's Silva Gadelica.
Giolla Easpuig (cf. Gillespie), bp. of Luimneach, pope's legate
presiding at Council of Raith Breasail.
Giolla Mar, said falsely by Campion and others to have been k. Ire. in
the time of k. Arthur (anno 519); said to be s. of k. of Thomond, 48.
Gionga, s. of Rudhruighe Mor.
Glaise Fraochain, 'the stream of Fraochan 'in bar. of Murrisk, Co.
Mayo; must be in neighbourhood of Ros Fraochain, (Rosreaghan) in same
bar.; Fraochan Faidh sl. in bt. of,anno 3790, Fm. where Ros Fraochain
is the name of the bt.
Glaislinn, a boundary of Magh Finn or Keogh's Country, Co. Rosc.
Glaisne, s. of Conchubhar, s. of Neasa.
Glais Neara, at Drom Ineasclainn (Dromiskin) between Castlebellingham
and Dundalk.
Glanaroughty, Co. Kerry, v. Gleann Ua Ruachta.
Glanmire, near Cork, v. Gleann Maighir.
Glas, s. of Nuadha, of the race of Eibhear.
Glascharn, in par. of Mullingar, Co. West., Raith Lochaid in.
Glasraidhe, named from Glaisne (perhaps Glaisre), s. of Conchubhar, s.
of Neasa.
Glastenburi, Glastonbury, in Somersetshire.
Glastonbury, v. Glastenburi.
Gleannagross, Co. Clare, v. Crossa.
Gleannamhain, Glenworth, Co. Cork.
Gleann Caoin, Glenkeen par. and valley in North-East of bar. of
Kilnamanagh, Co Tipp.; a limit of the see of Cill Dalua.
Gleann Colpa, in Gaothluidhe (or Gotia); Colpa of the Sword born in.
Gleann da Loch, 'Book of, Book of Glendalough'; one of the chief old
books of Ire. The book so well known at present as the "Book of
Leinster" has been sometime known as "The Book of Glendalough," but it
is uncertain whether it is the book referred to by K..
Gleann da Loch, Glendalough, Co. Wick.
Gleann Fais, Glenfaush, in tl. of Knockatee, par. of Ballycashlane,
bar. of Troughanacmy, some seven miles west of Tralee; at present
(K.'s time) called Gleann Fais; so called from Fas. w. of Un, having
been sl. there.
Gleann Geimhean, the Ciannachta of; v. Ciannachta Ghlinne Geimhean.
Gleann Gharaidh, in Ui Faithche, in par. of Shanrahan at south side of
the Galtees, called from Garaidh, s. of Morna.
Gleann Maighir, Glanmire, four miles north of Cork.
Gleann Mama; near Liamhain (Hill of Lyons).
Gleann Righe, the vale of Newry; a limit of the see of Cuinnire
(Connor), v. Dun da Leathghlas.
Gleann Ua Ruachta, Glan-a-rought, the glen through which r. Roughty
flows, in the bar. of Glanarought in the south east corner of
Co.Kerry; a limit of west Munster.
Glendalough, Co. Wick., v. Gleann da Loch.
Glenkeen, Co. Tipp., v. Gleann Caoin.
Glenofaush, Co. Kerry, v. Gleann Fais.
Glenworth, Co. Cork, v. Gleannamhain.
Gluiniarann (prop. Gluiniarainn)''Iron-knee,' k. of the Lochlonnaigh
in Ireland.
Gnaithbhearla, the common language or dialect, a division of Irish; v.
Bearla.
Gnaithfhian, an Gh., the common ranks of the Fian; v. Fian.
Gobnuid, St., patron saint of Muscraidhe Mic Diarmada; Gobnaid is
commemorated annually at Whitsuntide at Ballyvourney, Co. Cork. where
the is a well at which rounds are paid.; the name is common among the
females of Muskerry, and is sometimes anglicised for shortness Gobbey
and Abbey (Abigail or Abina.)
Goodin, i.e., goethin, noble, I. 10.
Gogan, Miles, Myles Cogan, a Norman leader, assists in the capture of
Ath Cliath; left wits, a company of men to hold Ath Cliath.
Goibhneann, smith of the T. D. D..
Goistean, a Fear Bolg chief, (Goiste in Trans).
Goistean, a leader of the Milesian expedition to Ire.; sl. at bt. of
Bru Bhriodain in Geisill (anno 3501 Fm.
Golamh, al. Milidh, s. of Bile; v. Milidh and Galamh.
Goll, s. of Gollan.
Gollan, f. of Goll.
Gomer, s. of Iapheth; an. of Gaedheal, s. of Eathor.
Good, Mr., an English priest, who taught school at Limerick, his
character of the Irish written anno 1566.
Gorguntius, a king of Britain, supposed to reign more than 300 years
before Julius Caesar came to Britain; sons of Milidh came to Ire. more
than 900 years before the time of.
Gorias, a city of Norway, where the T. D. D. taught science.
Gormfhlaith, da. of Donnchadh (k. Ire.), and m. of Aodh Finnliath.
Gormfhlaith, da. of Flann, s. of Conaing, m. of Donnchadh, s. of Flann
Sionna, k. Ire.
Gormfhlaith, da. of Murchadh, s. of Flann, k. L.; w. of Brian Boraimhe,
and m. of Donnchadh, s. of Brian.
Gormfhlaith, sister of Ceallachan Caisil and w. of Domhnall O Faolain
(k. of the Deise).
Gormghal, al. Gormghall, s. of Din Dathaidh, bp. of Lann Leire.
Gort an Oir, 'the field of the gold,'; beside Deargraith in Magh
Feimhean, to the west of Ath na gCarbad; near Derrygrath, four miles
east of Cahir, C. E. I. 477; the name is possibly represented in
Gortanoora, a tl. in bar. of Lower Ormond, Co. Tipp.; according to O'D.
the name Gort an Oir was in use at the date of the Ordnance Survey,
and there is still a Pairc an Oir in the neighbouring townland of
Knockagh.
Gortighern, a name given to the common language of mankind before the
Confusion of Tongues.
Gortniad, k. of Britain, f. of Bearta (w. of Feig, k. M).
Gosaman, s. of Sin, of the race of Ioth.
Gothfraidh, Godfrey, chief of Loch Cuan, plunders Ard Macha.
Gothfraidh, Godfrey, s. of Aralt, and f. of Raghnall (k. of the
Isles); f. of Oleanus or Amhlaoibh, heir to the crown of the Isles.
Gothfraidh, s. of Sitric, pl. Ceanannus.
Gothia, v. Gaothlaidhe.
Gothland, in the Baltic Sea; v. Gotia.
Goths, v. Goti and Gotia.
Goti, Gothi, Goths.
Gotia, Gothia, the country of the Goths, Partholon and his people
settled there before coming to Ireland.
Gotia, Gothland, an island in the Baltic, belonging to Sweden.
Gowra, Co. Meath, v. Gabhar and Gabhra.
Gowran, Co. Kilk., v. Gabhran.
Gowran Pass, v. Bealach Gabhrain.
Graces, the, v. Grasaigh.
Graig na mBreathnach, 'the Welsh Grange,' Graiguenamanagh, Co.
Kilkenny; named from Welsh settlers in Ire.
Graiguenamanagh, Co. Kilk., v. Graig na mBreathnach.
Graine, Graney, in South of Co. Kild., near Castledermot (Chron. Scot.,
Index); Fraoch, s. of Fionnchaidh sl. by Eochaidh, s. of Cairbre, in
bt. of, anno 476 Fm.
Grainne, da. of Cormac, s. of Art, and w. of Fionn, s. of Cumhall.
Grame, Graham, Scottish family name.
Graney, Co. Kild., v. Graine.
Grasaigh, the Graces, a family who came to Ire. at the Norman Invasion.
Greag, an Gh., Greece.
Greag Mheadhonach, 'Mid Greece,' al. Mygdonia, a province of Macedonia
at west of Thrace between the rivers Axius and Strymon; Partholon
comes to Ire. from.
Greagaigh (al. Greugaigh), npl., Greeks; tyrannise over the dss. of
Simeon Breac; v. Greig.
Greagha, s. of Corc.
Greaghoir, k. of Alba, pl. Ire. in the year 877 (according to
Buchanan).
Greagoir Mor, 'Gregory the Great,' Pope Gregory I. (590-604); sent St.
Augustine, the Monk, to propagate the Catholic Faith in Britain.
Greallach Dabhaill; "at G. Da. phill, near r. Casse (Caise) in the
plain of the Liffey between two hills, Erin, and Albu," Lu. 118 b;
prob. near tl. of Mullacash (Mullach Caise) south of Naas, Co. Kild.
Greallach Doluidh, prob. Grallagh Greenan, tl. in the lower half of
bar. of Upper Iveagh, Co. Down; Fionnachta (k. Ire.) sl. at, anno 693
Fm.
Greallach Eilte, west of Crossakeel, bar. of Upper Kells, Co. Meath,
Tuathal Maol Garb (k. Ire.), sl. at, anno 538 Fm.
Greane, Co. Kilk., v. Cros Greine.
Greane Hill, Co. Kilk., v. Grian Airbh.
Greece, v. Greag.
Greek language, v. Greigis.
Greeks, the, v. Greig and Greagaigh.
Greenan Elly, Co. Don., v. Oileach Neid, Aileach Neid, Oileach, and
Aileach.
Gregorius, Gregory, Henry I. commands Radulphus, abp. of Canterbury to
give episcopal consecration to
Gregory, v. Gregorius.
Gregory the Great, v. Greagoir Mor.
Greig, npl., Greeks, dpl., Greagaibh; v. Greagaigh.
Greigis, the Greek language, one of the three chief languages; loan
words from in the four divisions of Irish.
Greine, bp. of Ath Cliath, at Council of Ceanannus.
Grian, a god to Ceathur (called Mac Greine), s. of Cearma.
Grian, al. Cnoc Greine, Pallasgreen, Co. Limer., Mogh Nuadhat def.
Conn Ceadchathach in bt. of; Pallasgreen is a more probable site of
the battle than the r. Graney flowing into Lough Graney, bar. Upper
Tulla, Co. Clare.
Grian Airbh, Greane Hill, bar. of Cranagh, Co. Kilk., limit of see of
Cill Chainnigh.
Grianan na ninghean, 'the Ladies' Summer House,' a house at Tara where
the provincial queens dwelt in time of the Feis.
Grianog, prob. Greenoge, tl. in bar. of Newcastle, Co Dub., a limit of
the see of Gleann da Loch.
Griffin ap Conan, a Welsh prince of the time of Henry I., whose m. was
Irish; v. Hanmer's Chronicle (1809 edition), p. 17; he is the Griffith
ap Conan who regulated the canons of Welsh music bv Irish tradition at
Dublin and Glendalough, v. Bunting's Ancient Music of Ireland, p. 46
sq.
Grimston (prop. Grimstone), Edward, translator and original writer;
translated many historical and other works from the French and other
languages such as " A Generall Historie of the Netherlands continued
to 1608," published in 1608; " A general inventorie of the Historie of
France," published in 1607; " The General' Historie of Spain,
translated and continued to the year 1612".
Gros, le, and de la, v. Raymond le Gros.
Gruige, s. of Maolchu, k. of the Cruithnigh, def. the Albanians.
Guaire, s. of Colman, became k. C. in reign of Tuathal Maol Garbh.
Gud, chief of the Cruithnigh or Picts.
Guineth, f. of Birardus (a Welsh prince).
Gulielmus Nubrigensis, William of Newburgh (c. 1136 -- c. 1198), an
Augustinian canon of Newburgh in Yorksbire, author of " Historia Rerum
Anglicarum," which treats of the period 1066-1198, and is divided
into ,five books.
Gurlay, Scottish family name, II. 388.

H.
Hackluite, Hakluyt, Richard (c. 1550-1616), author of "The Principall
Navigations, Voiages and Discoveries of the English Nation made by sea
or overland, etc.," a work which has been called by Froude "the prose
epic of the modern English nation"; 'Chronicle' of quoted regarding
the government of the Isles by Tadhg O Briain.
Hamton, Bevis of; v. Bevis.
Hanmer, Meredith, Doctor of Divinity (1543-1604), author of "Chronicle
of Ireland" first published by Sir James Ware in 1633. K. refers to
this work throughout his history, and from this it follows that K.'s
work did not assume its final form earlier than 1633; K. quotes the
24th page of Hanmer on the origin of Fionn, s. of Cumhall, and this
corresponds exactly with the paging of Ware's edition of 1633; states
that Bartholinus (i.e., Partholon) was leader of the Gaels on their
coming to Ire. (this is in the first page of Hanmer's Chronicle).
Haralt, Harold, s. of Earl Godwin; flies to Ire.
Harold, v. Haralt and Aralt.
Harolt Conan; v. Conan.
Hastings, Philip de, left in Loch Garman by Henry I.
Hay, Scottish family name, I. 386.
Hebrides, the, v. Inse Gall.
Hector Boetius, v. Boetius.
Hengist, a Saxon chief who invaded Britain; brought to Britain with
his German host by Vortigern against the Picts and Scots (Irish).
Henri, Henry I., k. of England (1100-1135).
Henri, Henry II., k. of England (1154-1189); v. also Gabhaltus Gall,
Sacsa, Eire, Normandie and Adrianus.
Henri, Henry VIII., k. of England (1509-1547).
Hermit, Mochua, his three animals.
Heron-cleric, Collumcille so called by queen of Ire.
Hieronimus, Jerome, St.; v. Titus and Ierom.
Holm Peel, Isle of Man; v. Inis Padraig.
Holy Cross, abbey of, Co. Tipp.; v. Croch Naomh.
Howth Hill, v. Beann Eadair.
Hy Fiachra, v. Ui bhFiachra Eidhne and Ui bhFiachrach.
Hy Kinselagh, v. Ui Chinnsealaigh.
Hy Many, in Connaught, v. Ui Mhaine.
Hy Niall, v. Ui Neill.
Hypodigma, v. Ipodigma.

I.
I, al. I Columcille (in K. I is indeclinable), the Island of Hy or
Iona, in Scotland, also the monastic institution therein
Iar, s. of Deaghadh, an. of Conaire Mor.
Iar, son of Neama.
Iarainghleo Fathach, 'I. the Wise,' s. of Meilge Molbhthach, k. Ire.
seven years; sl. by Fear Corb, anno 4726 Fm. which gives Irereo as the
name.
Iarbhonel Faidh, 'I. the Seer,' al. I. Fathach; s. of Neimheadh, s. of
Agnoman.
Iardobhar, in north of Alba; Dobhar, according to Skene (Chronicle of
the Picts and Scots, I. 166), is r. Dour in Aberdeenshire; Iardobhar
is 'West Dour.'
Iared, s. of Malaleel; lived 962 years.
Iarlaithe, 3rd bp. of Ard Macha, after Patrick.
Iarmhor, f. of Iarus (k. of Lochloinn).
Iarmhumha, 'West Munster,' the fifth division of Munster; length of
from Luachair Deaghaidh to the Western Sea, breadth from Gleann Ua
Ruachta to the Shannon.
Iarthacht, s. of Beoan.
Iarthair, npl.; dpl. Iartharaibh, 'the Western regions,' the West;
Magh Foithin in; Bb. 23 b. however, has in Airthearaibh and Lec. 574
has 'Magh Fothan in Airgiallaigh in Oirthearaibh.'
Iarthar Connacht, West Connaught, the land of the O Flahertys,
formerly extended beyond Loch Orbsen (Corrib) and the r. and town of
Galway to the barr. of Kilmaine, Clare and Dunkellin; v. Connachta.
Iarthar Lithfe, 'Western Liffey,' that part of county of Kildare west
of the r. Liffey in its horseshoe winding; Maolmordha, k. of, v. C.G.
lxxxix. where the writer thinks that Airthear Lithfe, 'Eastern
Liffey,' is intended in this passage.
Iarus, k. of Lochloinn, sl. by Mogh Corb.
Idrone, East and West, Co. Carl; v. Ui Dhrona.
Ierna, v. Iernia.
Iernia, al. Iuerna, al. Ierna, al. Uernia, eleventh name of Ire.
Ierom, San. I., St. Jerome, charges the Irish with eating human flesh
(in his writings against Iovinian); the passage in S. Jerome referred
to is as follows: Quid loquar de caeteris nationibus cum ipse
adolescentulus in Gallia Atticotos gentem Britannicam humanis vesci
carnibus et cum per silvas porcorum greges et armentorum pecudumque
reperiant, pastorum nates et feminarum, et papillas solere abscindere
et has solar ciborum delicias arbitrari (Hieronymus adversus
Iovinianum; Cursus Completus Theologiae, Tom. XXII. No. 335). In this
passage Erasmus and Marianus read Scotos for Atticotos, which can
scarcely be the true reading as it. is against all the MSS., v. Tom.
XXII.,No.415.
Iffa and Offa, bar of, Co. Tipp.; v. Ui bhFaithche.
Ikerrin, v. Ui Chairin.
Ile, Islay, the southernmost island of the inner Hebrides, Argyllshire,
Scotland.
Imokilly, bar. of, Co. Cork; v. Ui Mac Collie.
Ingheanach, w. of Gabhran (k. of Alba).
Ingild, s. of Coenrad, an. of Aelfred.
Inis, ns.; gpl., na n-Inseadh; in plus., the Isles, that is the
Western Islands of Scotland.
Inis Banbha, a name of Ire.; v. Banbha.
Inis Baoi (Inis Bui), an island off the west coast, Lu. 54 a; Dursey
Island (Baoi Bheirre).
Inis Bo Finne, 'Island of the White Cow,' Inisboffin off the coast of
Mayo, and in bar. of Morisk; St. Colman, bp. of, d. anno 676 Au., anno
674 Fm.
Inis Brighde, St. Brighid of, II. 110.
Inis Cathaigh, 'Scattery Island,' in the Shannon, a mile south-west of
Kilrush.
Inis Cealltra, al. I. Cealltrach; Inniscalthra, al. Holy Island in
Lough Derg, in bar. of Leitrim, Co. Galway.
Inis Clothrann, Inniscloghrann, an island in Lough Ree and bar. of
Rathline, Co. Longf.
Iniscourcey, Co. Down, v. Inis Cumhscraigh.
Inis Cumhscraigh, Iniscourcey, al. Inch, a par. in bar. of Lecale, Co.
Down, 22 miles north of Downpatrick; Sitric, s. of Amhlaoibh, pl.,
anno 1001 Fm.
Inis Daimhli, Little Island, in the r. Suir, 21/2 miles below Waterford;
pl. by the Lochlonnaigh (two plunderings anno 820 and anno 823 are
recorded in Fm.); Inis Temhni and Inis Uladh are aliases of Inis
Daimhli.
Inis Dornghlais, on r. Moy in Tirawley.
Inis Ealga, 'noble island,' name for Ireland.
Inis Eoghain, Inishowen, a peninsular bar. in north-east of Co.
DoneGal.
Inis Eoghanain, Inishannon, small town in par. of same name on a bend
of the r. Bandon, 31/2 miles north-east of Bandon town.
Inisfail, v. Inis Fail.
Inis Fail, Inisfail, 7th name of Ireland; derived from the stone
called Lia Fail.
Inis Fide, said to be Inis Caorach, Mutton Island, in bar. of Ibrickin,
Co. Clare; for name cf. Whiddy Island (Faoide) in Bantry Bay.
Inis Fionnghall, the 'Island of the Norwegians'; Mor, da. of Aodh, s. 
of Eochaidh, k. of, w. of Sitric.
Inishannon, Co. Cork, v. Inis Eoghanain.
Inishmurry, v. Inis Muireadhaigh.
Inishowen, v. Inis Eoghain.
Inis Labhrainne, burnt by the Lochlonnaigh; an island at the mouth of
the r. Labhrainne (nom. properly Labhrann) which is prob. Casan
Chiarraidhe, or the Cashen river; the r. or estuary gave his name to
Fiachaidh Labhrainne, k. Ire.
Inis Leamhnachta, 'the Island of the New Milk,' Inislounaght, about a
mile west of Clonmel, Co. Tip., residence of O Faolain, k. of the
Deisi, on the r. Siur to the west of.
Inis Locha Ce, the island of Lough Ce, fortified by Brian Boraimhe; in
C. G. this is Inis Locha Cend, Loch Cend being identified by Todd as a
dry lake near Knockany, Co. Limerick v. C. G. clx.
Inis Locha Gair, the island of Lough Gur, near Bruff, Co. Limerick,
fortified by Brian Boraimhe.
Inis Locha Saighlionn, the island of Lough Saighlionn fortified by
Brian Boraimhe; cf. tl. of Singland (though it is Saingeal in Irish)
bar. of Clanwilliam, Co. Lim.
Inislounaght, Co. Tipp., v. Inis Leamhnachta.
Inis Muireadhaigh, Inishmurray in Donegal Bay, off the coast of Sligo;
burned by the Lochlonnaigh, anno 802, Fm., 807 Au, 804 Annals of
Clonmacnoise.
Inis na bhFiodhbhadh, 'Island of the Woods,' name for Ireland.
Inis Padraig, Patrick's Island or Holm Patrick; Holm Peel, Isle of Man.
Inis Saimher, now (O'D.'s time) called in Irish Inis Samhaoir,
immediately under the great cataract at Ballyshannon; Partholon's
first dwelling place in Ire.; in English Fish Island.
Inis Teimhin, al. I. Temhni (C. G.), al. I. Daimhli and I. Uladh,
Little Island at the mouth of the Siur, near Waterford.
Inis Tiog, al. I. Teoc (C. G.), Inistiogue, par. and townland on r.
Nore, in bar. of Gowran, Co. Kilk.; the place is thus in Ossory,
though in the context in K. and C. G. (text and Appendix) it is
associated with places in Ui Cinnsealaigh.
Inistiogue, Co. Kilk., v. Inis Tiog.
Innbhear Colpa (al. I. Colptha), estuary of Colpa; estuary of the
Boyne at Drogheda; a limit of the province of Ulster; strand of, a
limit of the province of Leinster; mouth of, called Droichead Atha; on
boundary line between Cearmna's and Sobhairce's parts of Ire.; cf.
Colp tl. and par. near Drogheda.
Innbhear Deaghaidh, prob. estuary of the Avoca, just below Arklow;
this river, in its earlier stage called the Dee, rises in the region
of Glendalough, as the Avonmore it joins the Avonbeg at the 'Meeting
of the Waters,' and as the Avoca it joins the Aughrim at the "Second
Meeting of the Waters," and thence flows through a distance of about
four miles to the sea; in the lower part of Leinster; O'D. and others
say the estuary of the Vartry at Wicklow Harbour.
Innbhear Domhnann, al. Innbhear Mor (O'Fl. 171), in the extreme west
of Ire., in Iorras Domhnann (O'Fl. ib.); Geanann and Rughraidhe land
at.
Innbhear Feile, r. Feale, which, towards its mouth, after it has
joined the Brick and the Galy becomes tbe Cashen, flowing into the
estuary of the Shannon; named from Fial, w. of Lughaidh, s. of Ioth.
Innbhear Fleisce, the r. Flesk, which flows into Lough Lein, Co.
Kerry; There is, however, a Fleasc Ruadh or Reddish Flesk, which joins
the r. Maine; v. Innbhear Mainge.
Innbhear Labhruinne, prob. the estuary of the Feale which is called
the Cashen. This conjecture of O'D.'s is strengthened by its being
grouped with Innbhear Fleisce and Innbhear Mainge in the texts of the
chroniclers; it is in Liathmhagh, Bb. 20, etc.
Innbhear Mainge, the r. Maine, which joins the Flesk Roe (Fleasc
Ruadh) and flows into Castlemaine Bay, Co. Kerry.
Innbhear Mor, 'the great estuary,' the estuary of the r. Avoca near
Arklow; breadth of Ire. measured from to Iorrus Domhnann; v. Turlach
Innbhir Mhoir.
Innbhear na mBarc, 'the Estuary of the Ships'; Ui Neill def. the
Lochlonnaigh at; the mouth of Bray river near Bray; the Ui Neill
referred to are the Southern Ui Neill who possessed Meath from the
Shannon to the sea. In the K. text the phrase O Shionainn go Muir'
between (or from) the Shannon and (to) the sea' should strictly go
with Ui Neill.
Innbhear Sceine, r. Corrane which connects Lough Corrane with
Ballinskelligs Bay, Co. Kerry, and is only about half a mile long
Innbhear Slainghe, r. Slaney flowing into Wexford Harbour, al. estuary
of the Slaney; named from Slainghe (k. Ire).
Inne, da. of Lughaidh, and w. of Niall Naoighiallach.
Inneacht, da. of Lughaidh, and m. of Caolbhaidh, k. Ire.
Inneirghe, s. of Duibhghiolla, k. of Ui Drona, among the victors of
Bealach Mughna.
Inniscaltra, in Lough Derg, v. Inis Cealltra.
Inniscloghrann, in Lough Ree, v. Inis Clothrann.
Innreachtach, s. of Donn Cuan, goes to bt. of Cluain Tarbh.
Innreachtach, s. of Maolduin, sl. at Teamhair, by the party of
Feidhlimidh (k. M.)
Innreachtach, s. of Muireadhach (k. C.), and f. of Meadhbh (m. of
Niall Naoighiallach); f. of Aodh Balbh (k. C.,); d., 719 Fm.
Inse an Ghalll Dhuibh, 'the Island of the Black Foreigner'; fortified
by Brian Boraimhe.
Inse Gall, the Hebrides.
Invasions, Book of, v. Leabhar Gabhala and Leabhair Gabhala.
Iobath, s. of Beothach, a chief of the race of Neimheadh; an. of the T.
D. D.
Iobath, s. of Magog, and an. of the Amazons, Bactrians, and Parthians.
Iobcan, s. of Starn, s. of Neimheadh, sl. in bt. of Cnamhros.
Iobhar, bp. who 'lived and blessed 'in Beigeirinn; Loichead baptismal
name of.
Iobhar Cinn Tragha, al. Iobhar Cinn Trachta, Newry, Co. Down; abbey of
built by St. Malachias in the year 1144.
Iobhar Cinn Trachta, v. I. C. Tragha.
Iobhar Coilltean, see of Ard Carna, extends from Ceis Chorainn to, v.
and for name cf. Iubhar Coillte al. Urchuilte
Iobhinian, Jovinian (condemned as a heretic, anno 390, d., c. 402).
Iollann, s. of Scannlan Mor (k. of Osruighe).
Iomaire, name of an ox belonging to Partholon's ploughmen.
Iomchaidh, s. of Breasal.
Iomchaidh, s. of Connla, an. of O Cearbhaill.
Iomchaidh, s. of Feidhlimidh, of the race of Ir.
Iomchaidh, s. of Fionnchaidh.
Iomhar, a Lochlonnach chief, comes to Ire. with his 2 brothers on
pretext of trading after the death of Turgesius.
Iomhar, a Lochlonnach chief, wins bt. of Ceann Fuaid over the
Leinstermen; this bt. was fought in year 916; Fm. and Au. say that
this bt. was won by Sitric, gs. of Iomhar, and C. G. is to be
understood in the same sense; v. C. G., 24.
Iomhar, chief of Lochlonnaigh captured at Inis Cathaigh by Brian
Boraimhe, anno 972 Fm.
Iomhar, f. of Aralt (chief of theLochlonnaigh of Luimneach).
Iomhar, f. of Blathchuire (k. of Normandy).
Iomhar, f. of Sitric (k. of the FionnLochlonnaigh and
Dubhlochlonnaigh).
Iomhar, f. of Sitric (leader of the Lochlonnaigh of Port Lairge)
Iomhas, ploughman to Partholon.
Iona, v. I and I Columcille.
Ionas, Abbot (flourished 1st half of the seventh century), author of a
Life of St. Columbanus and of other hagiological works.
Ionbhoth, f. of Samhra.
Iondaoi, s. of Allaoi, of the race of Neimheadh.
Iondaoi, s. of Dealbhaoth.
Ionmhainen, f. of Flaithbheartach (ab. of Inis Cathaigh, etc).
Ionnadmhar, s. of Nia Seaghamain, k. Ire. three years; sl. by Breasal
Boidhiobhadh, anno 4990 Fm.
Iorard Mac Coise, primate, 'priomhaidh', of Ard Macha; Urard Mac
Coisse, chief eigeas of the Gaels, d. anno 990 according to Annals of
Tighearnach, also Erard Mac Coisse, chief chronicler of the Gaels d.
anno 1023, Fm.; it is probable that K.'s "primate of Ard Macha " is
intended for the qualifications of the first of these.
Iorghalach, f. of Cionaoth (k. Ire).
Iorras Domhnann; includes bar. of Erris, Co. Mayo, one of three
divisions of Connaught, al. Erris. Head 41/2 miles north of Belmullet in
the same bar..
Iosa Criost,(Jesus Christ, Son of God, put to death by the Jews.
Ioseph, Joseph, bp. of Cluain uais, d. anno 839 Fm., Au.
Iosephus (c. 37 -- c. 100), Josephus, Jewish historian, author of
"Antiquities of the Jews " and "Wars of the Jews," both written in
Greek.
Iotaile, Italy.
Ioth, s. of Breoghan.
Ipodigma, Hypodigma, a work by Thomas Walsingham, which is a history
of the Dukes of Normandy and was written about the year 1419; quoted
with regard to a Scythian nobleman expelled from Egypt (i.e., Sru).
Ir, s. of Milidh, first of the Milesians buried in Ire.; Ire. named
Irlanda from.
Ir, s. of Uinnseach, f. of Morann Mhanannach (m. of Curaoi, s. of
Daire).
Ireland, v. Eire.
Irena, an island clse to Thrace; Ir born in.
Irial Faidh, 'Irial the Prophet,' s. of Eireamhon, k. Ire. 10 years.
Irial Glunmhar, 'I. Great knee,' s. of Conall Cearnach;
Irin, twelfth name of Ireland, I. 102.
Irish, old, the, v. Sean-Ghaedhil.
Irish, the, v. Eireanriaigh and Gaedhil.
Irlanda, thirteenth name of Ireland.
Isabella, da. of Strangwell, marries William Maruscal.
Isidoir, Isidore of Seville (c. 560-636), St. and Spanish historian.
Island of Saints, a name given to Ire., v. Oilean na Naomh.
Islay, v. Ile.
Isles, The, v. Oileain, and Inis.
Itermod, s. of Atra, an. of Aelfred.
Ith, v. Ioth.
Iubhar Coillte, al. Urchuilte; see of Cluain Ioraird extends from to
Cluain Conaire,; v. and cf. Iobhar Coilltean.
Iuchar, s. of Dealbhaoth.
Iuchar, s. of Danann (the queen a quo T. D. D. ).
Iucharbha, s. of Danann.
Iuerna, v. Iernia.
Iul Caesar, Julius Caesar, quoted as to the immunities enjoyed by the
druids in France; v. also Caesar.
Iustin, Justin Martyr (c. 100 - c. 165), extant works that are
believed to be authentic are 1°, Dialogue against the Jews; 2°, the
Apology (the so-called Second Apology is only a continuation of the
first); quoted as to the bravery of the Scythians.
Iustinian, Impir, Justinian, Emperor of Rome (527-565).
Ivaha, Co. Cork, v. Ui Eachach Mumhan.
Iveagh, Upper and Lower, Co. Down, v. Ui Eachach.
Iveragh, bar. of, Co. Kerry, v. Ui Rathach.

J.
James, v. Seamus.
Jerome, St., v. Ierom.
John, v. Seon.
Justin, v. Sairbhreathach.

K.
Keating, Gcoffrey, v. Ceitinn, Seathrun.
Keatings, the, v. Keitinigh.
Keitinigh, the Keatings, a family who came to Ire. at the Norman
Invasion; prob. from Mac Etienne, (Fitz Stephen).
Kells, Co. Meath, v. Ceanannas, and Ceanannas na Midhe.
Keogh, v. Mac Eochadha.
Kerry, v. Ciarraidhe.
Keshcorran, Co. Sligo, v. Ceis Chorainn.
Kilclief, Co. Down, v. Cill Chleite.
Kilcullen, Co. Kild., v. Cill Chuillinn.
Kildare, v. Cill Dara.
Kilian, St., v. Kilianus.
Kilianus, Kilian, St., apostle of Franconia (c. 640 -- ), said by Beda
to have come from 'Hibernia, island of the Scots,'
Kilkeel, Co. Down, v. Cuil Caoil.
Kilkenny, v. Cill Chainnigh.
Kilkevan, Co. Wex., v. Cill Caomhain.
Killaloe, Co. Clare, v. Cill Dalua.
Killeevy, Co. Armagh, v. Cill Sleibhe.
Kilmacrenan, Co. Don., v. Cill Mic Creannain.
Kilmainham, near Dublin, v. Cill Maighnionn.
Kilmallock, Co. Lim., v. Cill Moicheallog.
Kilmona, Co. West., v. Cill Mona.
Kilmore, Co. Cavan, v. Cill Mhor.
Kilnamanach, Co. Tipp., v. Coill na Manach.
Kilpeacon, Co. Tipp., v. Cill Beacain.
Kilskeer, Co. Meath, v. Cill Scire.
Kincora, v. Ceann Choradh.
Kineigh, Co. Kild., v. Ceann Eich.
Kinnaweer, Co. Don., v. Ceann Maghair.
Kinnity, King's Co., v. Ceann Eitigh.
Kinvarra, Co. Gal., v. Rinn mBeara.
Knockainey, Co. Limer., v. Dun Cliach and Cnoc Aine Cliach.
Knockgraffon, Co. Tipp., v. Cnoc Rathfonn.
Knocklong, Co. Limer., v. Druim Damhghaire and Cnoc Luinge.

L.
Labhan Draoi, 'Labhan the Druid,' a poet of Alba, story of his getting
an eye from Eochaidh Aontsula.
Labhraidh, s. of Cairbre, s. of Ollamh Fodla, of race of Ir,.
Labhraidh Loingseach, 'L. the Mariner or Exile,' s. of Oilill Aine, k.
Ire. 10 years; al. called Maon; first to introduce into Ire. laighne
or spears with broad greenish blue heads (whence are named Laighin or
Leinstermen); an. of all true Leinstermen of the race of Eireamhon
except O Nuallain; story of his having horse's ears; an. of Diarmaid
Mac Murchadha; the story of the horse's ears is of course only a
variant of the story of Midas the Phrygian king, if even that be the
original; Midas decided a musical contest which was between Apollo and
Marsyas (or Pan) against the god, and hence his ears were changed into
those of an ass. He hid them under his Phrygian cap, but his barber
discovered the secret which so weighed him down that he relieved the
strain by whispering it to the ground through a hole he had made. He
covered in the hole, but reeds grew above it which kept repeating the
secret. The phrase 'Ta dha chluais capaill ar Labhra Ua Loinsiglh.'
Labhra O'Lynch has two horse's ears 'is still said or sung in Irish-
speaking districts.
Labhraidh Lorc, al. Labhraidh Loingseach (called ,Lorc from being gs.
of Laoghaire Lorc), v. Labhraidh Loingseach.
Labhraidh Lorc, s. of Eanna Aighneach.
Lachtna, .f. of Lorcan (k. of Thomond); an. of Brian Boraimhe.
Lachtna, s. of Cinneide, goes to bt. of Cluain Tarbh.
Lacy, Hugo de, one of five Norman leaders of evil deeds;; sl. by a
young nobleman in the guise of a clown, according to K.; Au. says he
was sl. by Ua Miadhaigh (O'Meyey) of Breghmuna at the instigation of
Sinnach (or. Fox) Ua Catharnaigh, and Fm. says it was Gilla gan
Mathair O'Meyey who slew him at the instigation of "Sionnach" and of
O'Breen; the old translation of the Au. in the British Museum has:
"A.D. 1186 Hugo de Lacy killed by a workman. Hugh de Lacy spoyler of
churches and privileges of Ireland, killed by one of Brewny by the Fox
O Catharny, etc."; it would seem from this passage that the translator
rendered O Miadhaigh by 'a workman.' From the Annals of Kilronan we
learn that O Meyey was foster-son of the Fox, chief of Teffia. In none
of the existing Irish accounts is the incident given precisely as in
K., nor is it probable that K. ever saw the old translation of Au.
which says he was sl. by a workman; K. may have used a document now
lost, v. Fm. II. 72; and Orpen, I. 67.
Lacy, Hugo Og de, Hugo de Lacy the Younger, s. of Hugo de Lacy.
Ladhra, one of three men said to have come to Ire. before the Deluge.
Laegria, now Anglia, name given by Laegrus, s. of Brutus, to his
division of Britain; England is called Lloegr in Welsh.
Laegrus, s. of Brutus, gets Laegria (Anglia) for his portion of the
island of Britain.
'Laetare Jerusalem' Sunday, the fourth Sunday. in Lent (the 3rd.
Sunday in Lent according to the Sarum rite).
Lagore, Co. Meath, v. Loch Gabhair.
Laidcheann, s. of Bairrchidh, druid to Niall Naoighiallach.
Laidhghein, f. of Dunghal (k. of Ui Cinnsealaigh).
Laigheanmhagh, the plain of Leinster; identical with Magh Lithfe.
Laighin (the Province), npl.; gpl. Laighean, dpl. Laighnibh, smt.
Laighin, Leinster.
Laighin (men of), npl.; gpl. Laighean; dpl. Laighnibh, the Leinstermen,
or Lagenians.
Laighne, s. of Eireamhon, jk. Ire. three years; sl. in bt. of Ard
Labhrann, anno 3519 Fm.
Laighneach, f. of Aidheit (k. U).
Laighneach, Giolla na Naomh, bp. of Gleann da Loch.
Laimhfhionn, 'the Whitehanded,' s. of Aghnon; a leader in the
expedition from Scythia to Gothia.
Laimhiach, Lamech; lived 777 years.
Laitheach Mhor, Baile na Laitheach (Ballynalahagh) par of in Knockany,
Co. Limerick, C. E. 789; a limit of the see of Luimneach.
Lambay Island, v. Reachruinn.
Lamhghlas, 'the blue-green hand,' s. of Aghnon.
Landell, Scottish family name.
Lanfrancus, Lanfranc, abp. of Canterbury (1070-1089)
Lann, da. of Dunghal, and m. of Flann Sionna (k. Ire).
Lann Leire, Dunleer, Co. Louth (note also par. of Moy Lary and
Moy Lary Cross between Dunleer and Monasterboice);
Gormghall, bp. of, d. anno 843 Fm.
Lanna, s. of Conchubhar, s. of Neasa.
Lannraidhe, a place named from Lanna, s. of Conchubhar, s. of Neasa.
Laogh Liathmhaine, the warrior of Liathmhaine, al. Cuanna, s. of
Cailchin, k. of Fearmaighe, a rival of Guaire in hospitality; the
Liathmhaine here referred to is al. Cloch Liathmhaine, Cloghleafin tl.
in bar. of Condons and Clongibbons, Co. Cork.
Laogh, s. of Rian Gabhra, gets ready the ga bolg for Cuchulainn.
Laoghaire, s. of Niall Naoighiallach, k. Ire. 30 years; killed by
lightning at Greallach Dabhaill, anno 458 Fm.
Laoghaire Buadhach, 'Laoghaire the Victorious,' contest of at Eamhain
for the champion's prize.
Laoghaire Lorc, s. of Ughaine Mor, k. Ire., two years; sl.
treacherously by his brother Cobhthach Caol mBreagh, anno 4608 Fm.
Laoi, r. Lee, in Munster, through Muscraidhe (Muskery) to Corcach
(Cork).
Laoighis, Latinised Lagesia, Leix, a district in the Queen's Co.,
comprising the barr. of Stradbally, Cullenagh, and East and West
Maryborough, and a part of bar. of Silvermines. It was divided into
seven parts of which the most distinguished was Laoighis Riada al. Mag
Riada (q. v).
Laoighis Riada, al. Magh Riada; v. Magh Riada.
Laoighseach Ceannmhor, 'Laoighseach Large Head,' foster s. of Eochaidh
Fionn; an. of the kings of Laoighis.
Laosan, Colman, bp. of, sl. by Ui Turtaire, anno 739 Fm.
Laraghbryan, v. Lathrach Briuin.
Lar Leithghlinne, the field or plain of Leithghlinn (q v. )
Lathrach Briuin, Laraghbryan, near Maynooth in the bar. of Salt
and Co. of Kild; Cormac, bp. of, d. anno 854.
Latteragh, in Upper Ormond, v. Leathrach.
Leabaidh Dhiarmada Ui Dhuibhne agus Ghrainne, the Bed of Diarmaid O
Duibhne and Grainne; at Poll Tighe Liabhain in Ui Fiachrach Eidhne,
which is now called Duthaigh Ui Sheachnasaigh (O'Shaughnessy's
Country); Leabaidh Dhiarmada agus Ghrainne is a general name for a
cromlech.
Leabhar Ard Macha, 'the Book of Armagh,' one of the chief books of the
Seanchus of Ire.; this book is now lost.
Leabhar Bainseanchuis, 'the Book of remarkable women,' an Irish tract
contained in some of the chief books of the Seanchus; not identified.
Leabhar Breac Mic Aodhagain, Speckled Book of Mac Egan, now unknown, a
chief book of the Seanchus, written some 300 years ago (K.'s time).
Leabhar Buidhe Moling, 'The Yellow Book of Moling,' now unknown, one
of the chief books of the Seanchus of Ire..
Leabhar Chluana Mic Nois, 'the Book of Clomnacnoise,' now lost, but
may have been the Annals of Clonmacnoise of which an English
Translation, made in 1627, is extant; one of the chief books of the
Seanchus of Ire.
Leabhar Comhaimseardhachta, 'The Book of Synchronisms,' probably the
Synchronisms attributed to Flann Mainistreach (Flann of Monasterboice)
which are to be found in Lec. and Bb., v. O'Curry's MS. Mat. 520 sq.;
Flann the author of this work was professor of divinity at
Monasterboice, Co. Louth, and d. anno 1056; the tract begins with Adam
and comes down to the Roman Emperor Aurelianus who is synchronised
with Lughaidh Mac Con.; there are synchronal poems attributed to Flann
also to be found in various MSS.; interesting historical poems
attributed to him have been published by Mac Neill in Archivium
Hibernicum II; the Synchronisms from the Book of Ballymote have been
published by MacCarthy, Todd Lectures II.
Leabhar Dinnseanchuis, 'the book of famous places,' a tract in the
chief books of the Seanchus; v. Dinnseanchus.
Leabhar Droma Sneachta, 'the Book of Drom Sneachta,' al. Cin Droma
Sneachta, 'the Vellum Stave Book of D. S.'; a book. of Seanchus, now
lost, but quoted in Lec. and Bb. and by K.; v. O'Curry MS. Mat. 13 sq.
Leabhar Dubh Molaga, 'The Black Book of St. Molaga,' now unknown; one
of the chief books of the Seanchus of Ire.
Leabhar Fionntain Chluana hEidhneach, 'the Book of St. Fionntain of
Cloneenagh,' now unknown; one of the chief books of the Seanchus of
Ire.; v. under Cluain Eidhneach.
Leabhar Gabhala, 'Book of Invasion,' generally in K. an L. G., 'the
Book of Invasion,' there are several such tracts in the old books and
it is not clear to which K. is referring when he says an L. G.; in
three passages he speaks of na Leabhair G., 'the Books of Invasion,'
which is a just description of the facts. In one passage he refers to
'a certain L. G.' and in another he calls Cin Droma Sneachta a L. G.
It seems certain that K. never saw O'Clery's Leabhar Gabhala which was
compiled in 1630-1631. In compiling this work O'Clery does not put any
ancient tract forward as an L. G., but he gives his sources which are:
Leabhar Bhaile Ui Mhoilchonaire, which was copied from Leabhar na
hUidhre, Leabhar Bhaile Ui Chleirigh, written in the time of
Maoilseachlainn, s. of Domhnall, k. Ire.; Leabhar Mhuinntiri
Dhuibhghionnain, also called Leabhar Ghlinne do Locha; Leabhar na
hUacongmhala etc. Leabhar Gabhala tracts are to be found in Lec., Bb.,
etc. The oldest L. G. known is in the Stowe MS. D. iv. 3. R.I.A.; it
was written in the year 1300.
Leabhar Ghlinne Da Loch, 'the Book of Glendalough; probably the book
now known as 'the Book of Leinster;' one of the chief books of the
Seanchus of Ire..
Leabhar Irsi, 'Book of Chronicles,' now unknown, a tract called
Leabhar Oiris, published in Eiriu I. 74, contains none of the things
quoted from the Leabhar Irsi in K. and cannot be the same work.
O'Halloran, author of a History of Ireland, however. seems to have had
a larger tract passing under the name Leabhar Oiris than any now
extant.
Leabhar Muimhneach, 'Book of Munster,' an interesting historical and
genealogical tract, beginning with the Creation and dealing with the
history of Ire., but especially of the Southern province. No ancient
copy of it is now known to exist. It has much genealogical information
about the great Munster families; a good paper copy will be found in
23 G 1, R.I.A..
Leabhar na nAos, 'the Book of the Ages,' no doubt is the well-known
tract " Sex sunt aetates Mundi," which is given in Rawlinson B 502
(facsimile edition), p. 69 sq., also in Bb. 1 a sq. and Lee. 36 b sq.
and in several modern MSS.; a tract in the old books of the Seanchus;
the tract is said to have been translated into Irish by Duibhlitir Ua
hUathghaile of Gleann Uiseann.
Leabhar na gCuigeadh, 'the Book of the Provinces,' an Irish tract
occurring in the older books of the Seanchus; not identified.
Leabhar na hUachongmhala, the book of Uachongmhail, (q.v.), one of the
chief books of the Seanchus, I. 78, III. 32; now unknown; it was used
in compiling a genealogical tract which is to be found in 23 F. 15,
R.I.A. (v. p. 2).
Leabhar Ruadh Mic Aodhagain, 'the Red Book of Mac Egan,' now unknown.
Leabharcham, censorious woman to Conchubhar, s. of Neasa, intermediary
between Deirdre and Naoise.
Leacaoin, in Lower Ormond; O'Kennedy Finn lived at, M. L. 181.
Leacmhagh, al. Leagmhagh, a plain in Munster cleared of wood by
Neimheadh (Leagmmhagh).
Leac Mic Eochadha, the flagstone of Mac Eochadha (Keogh); Mac Eochadha
inaugurated the lord of Ui Cinnsealaigh on.
Leac na gCead, 'the flagstone of the hundreds,' an old name of the
Rock of Cashel.
Leac na Riogh, 'the flagstone of the kings,' the kings of Ire.
inaugurated on at Tara.
Leagmhagh, v. Leacmhagh.
Leamhain, g. Leamhna, the Vale of Leven in Dumbartonshire, in Alba;
the Maormor of Leamhain or Leven named from, now (K.'s time) called
the Duke of Lenox.
Leamhnaigh, the Lennoxes of Alba, sprung from Maine Leamhna, s. of
Corc.
Leannain sidhe, 'fairy lovers,' could they have handed down the pre-
Deluge traditions?
Lear, f. of Manannan, of the T. D. D..
Leathan, a Pict who came from Thrace.
Leath Cuinn, or L. Chuinn, 'Conn's Half 'of Ire., the portion of Ire.
north of the line of hills known as Eiscir Riada, between Dublin and
Galway.
Leath Mogha, al. Leath Mhogha, Mogh's Half of Ire., the half of Ire.
south of Eiscir Riada, a line of hills between Dublin and Galway.
Leathrach, Latteragh, in Upper Ormond, Co. Tipp.; Odhran, saint of, d.
anno 548 Fm.
Lee, r., v. Laoi.
Leide, m. of Fearghus.
Leighe, a slave who came to Ire. with the sons of Milidh.
Leighlinbridge, Co. Carl, v. Droichead Leithghlinne.
Leighlinn, Leighlin, Co. Carlow.
Leim an Chon, v. Leim Chon gCulainn.
Leim an Eich, 'the Horse's Leap '; murder of Baodan (k. Ire.,) by
Coman, s. of Colman, at, anno 567 Fm.; v. Carraig Leime an Eich.
Leim Chon gCulainn, 'Cuchulainn's Leap,' al. 'Leim an Chon', Loop Head,
the extreme south-western extremity of Co. Clare.
Leinin, son of, that is, St. Colman of Cloyne (Cluain Uama); d. anno
600 Fm.
Leinster, v. Laighin.
Leinstermen, Lagenians, v. Laighin and Laighnigh.
Leisigh, the De Lacys, a family of good deeds who came to Ire. at the
Norman Invasion.
Leithdhearg, an, v. Fearghus Leithdhearg.
Leithead Lachtmhaighe, in Murbholg of Dal Riada; Onom. suggests Layd,
tl. and par., Co. Antrim.
Leithghlinn, v. Droichead Leithghlinne.
Leitrim, v. Liathdruim.
Leix, Queen's Co., v. Laoighis.
Lemanaghan, King's Co., v. Liath Mhanchain.
Lennox, v. Magh Leamhna.
Lenoxes, the, v. Leamhnaigh.
Leon, v. Cathair Leon.
Leven, in Dumbartonshire, v. Leamhain.
Li, the bar. of Coleraine, Co. Derry, and the land to the south of r.
Moyola.
Lia Fail, a stone brought by the T. D. D. to Ire., which 'roared'
under the rightful k. of Ire.; silent since time of Conchubhar.
Liag, an ox belonging to Partholon's ploughmen.
Liagh, a female tax-gatherer of the Fomorians.
Liathdruim, ancient name of Teamhair or Tara.
Liathdruim or Liathdhruim, Leitrim, prob. Letrim in par. of
Monasteroris, King's Co.
Liath Mhanchain, Lemanaghan par., King's Co.
Liber Dialogorum, 'the Book of Dialogues,' a work by Caesarius, quoted
in reference to Patrick's Purgatory; (the real title of the book is
'Dialogus Magnus visionum atque miraculorum'); v. Caesarius.
Libhrean, f. of Cuimin.
Life,Liffey, r., v. Lithfe.
Lighcan, a slave who came to Ire. with the sons of Milidh.
Limerick, v. Luimneach.
Linn Atha an Daill, 'Pool of the Blind Man's Ford,' on Sliabh Fuaid,
Co. Armagh; a limit of the prov. of Meath.
Linn Duachaill, al. L. (D)uachaille, in Casan Linne, Martyrology of
Tallaght; at Annagassan on brink of estuary of r. Dee some 8 miles s.
of Dundalk.
Liobhra, w. of Fuad, one of the seven principal women who came to Ire.
with the sons of Milidh.
Liobhra, w. of Rughruidhe.
Lios, a fort, an enclosed space.
Lios Beannchair, Lisbanagher, in Co. Kerry.
Lios Mor, Lismore, Co. Waterford, a limit of Deise Dheisceirt.
Lios na Laochraidhe, 'The Lios of the Warriors,' name of fortress
built by Corc at Cashel.
Lisbanagher, Co. Kerry, v. Lios Beannchair.
Lismore, Co. Wat., v. Dun Scinne and Lios Mor.
Lithfe, a slave who came to Ire. with the sons of Milidh.
Lithfe, the r. Liffey, in Leinster, flowing into Dublin Bay; a limit
of Meath.
Little Island, near Waterford, v. Inis Daimhli and Inis Teimhin.
Lobhaois, a French gentleman who wrote a general chronicle of Spain.
Loch, s. of Daire, of Cruitheanthuaith (or Pictland).
Loch, s. of Teacht, and f. of Deala, a Fear Bolg.
Loch nAillinne, Lough Allen, an early expansion of the Shannon almost
entirely in Co. Leitrim (it slightly touches the eastern limit of Co.
Rosc.)
Loch Ainninn, Lough Ennell, al. Belvidere Lake, two miles south of
Mullingar, Co. Westm..
Loch an Chuigidh, 'the lake of the fifth part or province'.
Loch Bagha, Lough Bach, near Castleplunket, Co. Ros.
Loch Bo Dearg, Lough Boderg, on the Shannon in Co. Leitrim, a limit of
Meath.
Loch Breunainn burst over Magh nAsail in Ui Niallain (Ui Nuallain in
O'Fl. 169); v. Magh nAsail.
Loch Bricirne (in Au. I. 332 L. Bricerna, in Fm. I. 446 L. Bricrenn),
Lough Brickland, bar. of Upper Iveagh, Co. Down; pl. by the
Lochlonnaigh, anno 832 Fm.
Loch Buadhaigh, in Ceara, Connaught, Lec. 168; Lough Boy, either that
in par. of Mantilla or that in par. of Islandeady, H. F. 205.
Loch Ce, Lough Key, bar. of Boyle, Co, Rosc.
Loch Cime, Lough Hacket, Co. Gal., named from Cime Ceithircheann, a
Fear Bolg.
Loch Con, Lough Con, between Crosmolina and Foxford, Co. Mayo.
Loch Craoi, in the south of the Co. Tyr., C. E. I. 785; a limit of see
of Ard Sratha.
Loch Cuan, Strangford Lough; Gothfraidh, chief of, pl. Ard Macha, anno
921 C. G. XCI.
Loch Cutra, Lough Cooter, in district of Aidhne, Co. Galw.
Loch Da Bhaill, Lough Dabhaill (name obsolete), in Oirghialla,; the r.
Dabhaill flows through Richhill and falls into the Blackwater near
Charlemont, Co. Arm.; Lough Dabhaill is in the same vicinity, Fm. IV.
1330.
Loch da Chaoch, Waterford Harbour (which washes the shores of the
Leinster counties Kilkenny and Wexford).
Loch da Chaoch, in Ulster.
Loch da Eun, 'the Lake of two Birds,' a limit of the province of
Meath; from the context it must be near Cluain Eois (Clones, Co.
Mon.); is at Sliabh Aghi Mic Ugaine, Lis. 231 b..; appears to have
been near Ballybay, Co. Mon. (Lloyd G. J, No. 126, p. 60).
Loch Dairbhreach, Lough Derravaragh, in Westm.
Loch Deicheat, al. L. Teicheat, Lough Gara, in counties Sli., Ros. and
Mayo.
Loch Deirgdheirc, Lough Derg, expansion of Shannon between Portumna
and Killaloe, some 23 miles in length.
Loch nEachach, Lough Neagh.
Loch Eachtra, in Oirghialla, between Sliabh Mudhairn and Sliabh
Fuaid; Feartais Locha Eachtra is between Sliabh Fuaid and Eamhain
Macha, Ybl.. 581 (rt. in Onom.)
Loch Einbheithe, in Oirghialla; in Ui Creamhthainn, Lec. 579 (apud
Onom).
Loch Eirne, Lough Erne, mostly in Co. Ferman.
Loch Feabhail, Lough Foyle, Co. Der.
Loch Fionnmhaighe, Lough Finvoy, al. Garradice Lough, to the east of
Ballinamore, bar. of Carrigallen, Co. Leitrim.
Loch Foirdreamhain, Tralee Bay, Co. Kerry.
Loch Gabhair, Lagore, near Dunshaughlin and Ratoath, Co. Meath, a dry
lake of much antiquarian interest from the human and other remains
found there in great abundance.
Loch Gair, Lough Gur, par. of Knockaney, Co. Limer., a limit of the
see of Luimneach.
Loch Garman, Wexford Harbour, also Wexford Town; see of, al. see of
Fearna.
Loch Garman, county of, i.e., County of Wexford.
Loch nGasain, al. L. na nGasan (but cf. Ath na gCasan), burst over
land in Magh Luirg, in time of Aonghus Olmucaidh (k. Ire.); Magh Luirg
is bar. of Boyle, Co. Rosc. and L. nG. is in Clann Cathail Mic
Muireadaigh of same bar.
Loch Greine, Lough Graney, bar. of Upper Tulla, Co. Clare.
Loch nIairn, Lough Iron. in barr. of Moygois and Corkaree, Co. Westm.;
burst over land in reign of Tighearnmhas.
Loch Laighlinne, in Ui Mac Uais Breagh, a district in East Meath, to
the south-west of Tara, burst forth in time of Partholon and is named
from his son Laighlinne.
Loch Laogh (prop. L. Laoigh), 'The Calf's Lake '('Stagnum Vituli' is
the Trans. given by O Donnell in his life of Columcille, v. Reeves, Ad.
214), Belfast Lough.
Loch Laoghaire, Lough Mary, in Baronseourt demesne, two miles
west of Newtownstewart, Co. Tyrone.
Loch Lein, the Lakes of Killarney, also the bar. of Magunihy in which
the lakes are; Lough Leine is now the name of the Lower Lake.
Loch Lein, Eoghanacht of, v. Eoghanacht Locha Lein.
Loch Lughdhach (this form also in Lee. 420, etc). al. Loch
Luighdheach; Lough Corrane, in bar. of Iveragh, Co. Kerry.
Loch Luimnigh, the Shannon below Limerick, one of the three lakes
found by Partholon in Ire.; Loch Luimneach in Trans.
Loch Measc, Lough Mask, in bar. of Ross, Co. Galway, and in barr. of
Ceara and Kilmain, Co. Mayo.
Loch Muinreamhair, burst over Magh Sola in Leinster in time of
Neimheadh; Magh Soled is equated to 'Magh Asal i Laighnibh,' B. Hy.
148 (quoted in Onom).
Loch Oirbsean, Lough Corrib, Co. Galway; named from Oirbsean (i.e.,
Manannan) and burst over land on the digging of his grave.
Loch Rein, Lough Reane, near Fenagh, Co. Leitrim.
Loch Riach, Loughrea, a lake in bar. of Loughrea, and parr. of
Loughrea and Killeenadeema, Co. Gal..
Loch Ribh, Lough Ree, an expansion of the Shannon, 14 miles in length,
between Lanesborough and Athlone; a limit of Meath.
Loch Rudhruighe, Dundrum Bay, Co. Down.
Loch Saighlionn, Lough Sheelin, on the borders of Meath, Westmeath and
Cavan.
Loch Sailgheadain, burst over Magh Luirg (near Boyle, Co. Rosc.) in
time of Aonghus Olmucaidh
Loch Uair, al. L. nUair, Lough Owel, near Mullingar, Co. West., named
from Uar, s. of Ughmhor, of the Fir Bolg.
Lochan Bhealaigh Cro, 'the lake of Bealach Cro,' near where the bt. of
Bealach Cro took place, named from the battle; the Dealbhna who were
sl. in the battle were Dealbhna Ua Maine, H 3 17 (T. C. D.), 759.
Lochan Diolmhain, sl. Colman Rimhidh, anno 600 Fm.
Lochan na hImrime, a limit of the see of Daimhliag; 'from L. na hI. to
the sea,'.
Lochid Bridge, v. Ath Luchad.
Lochlann, f. of Niall (f. of Muircheartach, ok. Ire.
Lochloinn, al. Lochlainn, npl.; gpl. Lochlonn, dat. Lochloinn, the
people and territory of Scandinavia, in K. used loosely for Norway,
Denmark, etc.
Lochlonnaigh (al. Lochloinn, dpl. Lochlonnaibh, in a few passages),
npl.; ns. and gpl. Lochlonnach; the people of Lochloinn, or
Scandinavia, that is, generally in K., the Danes and the Norwegians;
the Dubhlochlonnaigh or 'Black Lochlonnaigh' are the Danes, and the
Fionnlochlonnaigh or 'Fair Lochlonnaigh 'are the Norwegians; but the
word Lochlonnaigh in K. is also used loosely for the Norse settlers in
the Hebrides, in Ireland, in Normandy, etc., 'Norsemen or Northmen,
Scandinavians.'
Lochmhagh, 'Lake Plain,' a plain in Connaught; cleared of wood in time
of Eithrial (k. lre); bt. of won by Irial Faidh (k. Ire ); another bt.
of, won by Tighearnmhas (k. Ire.), over the dss. of Eibhear; a third
bt. of, won by the Leinstermen over Ui Neill; it seems clear from the
context that the L. cleared of wood is the place where the first two
battles were fought, the place of the third bt. is probably on the
borders of Leinster and Meath.
Lochtna, f. of Lorcan (k. of Dal gCais).
Lodharn, two Lodharns, ss. of Muireadhach, s. of Eoghan,; ss. of Earc
(prop. ss. of Eochaidh Muinreamhar, s. of Earc).
Loer, al. Loor, r. Loire, in France; Niall Naoighiallach, sl. at, by
Eochaidh, s. of Eanna Cinnsealach, k. L.
Logha, s. of Eadaman, of the race of Ioth.
Logha Feidhlioch, s. of Eireamhon, of the race of Ioth.
Loichead, first name of bishop Iobhar of Beigeirinn; the death of St.
Iobhar is recorded in the Ann. of Clonmacnoise under year 504; in Au.
under years 499, 500, 503, in Fm. under year 500; Fm. says that he
lived 304 years; 'quies Ibuir episcopi' Au.; 'mors epscopi Ibair,'
ib.; 'S Ibhur espuc,' Fm. Hence the name in nom. case seems to be
Iobhar, g. Iobhair.
Loingseach, s. of Aonghus, k. Ire. eight years.
Loire, r. in France; v. Loer al. Loor.
Lombards, the, natives of Lombardy; v. Longobardi.
London, v. Lonndain.
Londonderry, v. Doire and Doire Cholum Chille.
Long, f. of a St. Brighid.
Long Laighneach, 'Leinster House,' an establishment kept by the k. of
Leinster at Tara.
Long Mhuimhneach, 'Munster House,' an establishment kept by the k. of
Munster at Tara.
Longargan, a leader of Dal gCais in their expedition to rescue
Ceallachan Caisil.
Longargan, s. of Donn Cuan, goes to bt. of Cluain Tarbh.
Longobardi, Lombards, a race of German barbarians, who invaded Italy
in the sixth century; came originally frcm Scythia.
Longphort, primarily a temporary stronghold, came to mean a camp.
Lonndain, London, Stow's Chronicle printed in, anno, 1614.
Loop Head, Co. Clare, V. Leim Chon gCulainn.
Loor, v. Loer.
Lorcach, v. Abhann Lorcaighe.
Lorcan, f. of Cearbhall (whose three sons pl. Gleann da Loch); seems
identical with Lorcan, s. of Faolan, as Cearbhall is royal heir of
Leinster and sl. anno 965.
Lorcan, f. of 'Tadhg (k. of Ui Cinnsealaigh).
Lorcan, k. of The Cineals, among the victors at Bealach Mughna.
Lorcan, s. of (Ceallach, k. L., def. Lochlonnaigh in bt. of Sciath
Neachtain, anno 846 Fm.
Lorcan, s. of Cinneide, goes to bt. of Cluain Tarbh.
Lorcan, s. of Dathan, of the race of Eibhear.
Lorcan, s. of Faolan, k. L., sl. by the men of Normandy, anno 941 Fm.
Lorcan, s. of Lachtna (al. Lochtna), k. of Thomond or Dal gCais,;
reigned a year and a half to his death, as k. M., in succession to
Cormac, s. of Cuileannan, according to O Dubhagain; f. of Cinneide; gf.
of Brian Boraimhe.
Lothar, one of the three Fionns or Finneamhnas, sons of Eochaidh
Feidhlioch (k. Ire.), sl. by his f. in bt. of Drom Criadh.
Lotharna, al. Latharna, the district of Larne in the bar. of Upper
Glenarm, Co. Antrim; the fort of Raith Bachaill built in, by Irial
Faidh (k. Ire.)
Lothra, Lorrha tl. and par. in the extreme north-west of bar. of
Ormond, Co. Tipp.; the par. is washed on its west side by Lough Derg
and the Shannon.
Lot Luaimneach, 'Lot the Nimble,' m. of Cical (said to have invaded
Ire. before Partholon).
Lough Allen, v. Loch nAillinne.
Lough Bach, Co. Rosc., v. Loch Bagha.
Lough Boderg, Co. Leitrim, v. Loch Bo Dearg.
Lough Boy, in Connaught, v. Loch Buadhaigh.
Lough Brickland, Co. Down, v. Loch Bricirne.
Lough Cooter, Co. Gal., v. Loch Cutra.
Lough Corrane, in Kerry, v. Loch Lughdhach.
Lough Corrib, v. Loch Oirbsean.
Lough Derg, v. Loch Deirgdheirc.
Lough Derravaragh, in Co. West., v. Loch Dairbhreach.
Lough Ennell, v. Loch Ainninn.
Lough Erne, v. Loch Eirne.
Lough Finvoy, Co. Leitrim, v. Loch Fionnmhaighe.
Lough Foyle, v. Loch Feabhail.
Lough Gara, in Connaught, v. Loch Deicheat.
Lough Garradice, v. Loch Fionnmhaighe.
Lough Graney, v. Loch Greine.
Lough Gur, v. Loch Gair.
Lough Hacket, Co. Gal., v. Loch Cime.
Lough Iron, v. Loch nIairn.
Lough Key, Co. Rosc., v. Loch Ce.
Lough Mary, Co. Tyr., v. Loch Laoghaire.
Lough Mask, in Connaught, v. Loch Measc.
Lough Neagh, v. Loch nEachach.
Loughrea, lake, v. Loch Riach.
Lough Reane, Co. Leit., v. Loch Rein.
Lough Ree, v. Lough Ribh.
Lough Sheelin, v. Loch Saighlionn.
Louth, town and county, v. Lughmhagh.
Lowhid Bridge, Co. Clare, v. Luchad and Bealach na Luchaide. Lowlands,
of Scotland, the, v. Galldacht.
Luachair, al. Luachair Deaghaidh (q.v.), St. Moling of, d. anno 696.
Luachair Deaghaidh, in Desmond; a limit of West Munster and Mid
Munster; L. D. is the range of mountains stretching from Killarney
eastwards to the neighbourhood of Millstreet, as well as the plain to
the north thereof, extending to Castle Island and to the counties of
Cork and Limerick.
Luachra, s. of Neimheadh; at bt. of Magh Tuireadh.
Luaighne Laidhchinn, an. of Cairbre Chinn Chait.
Luamh, s. of Neimheadh, at bt. of Magh Tuireadh.
Luan, baptismal name of St. Fionnbharr of Corcach.
Luan an Bhratha, the Monday of Judgment, the Last Day, respite until,
for the Leinstermen from Boraimhe Laighean, obtained by St. Moling
from Fionnachta (k. Ire.); this remission to the day of Judgment has
an echo in our folk-lore; in a dispute about compensation for a horse
which a farmer had lent to a neighbour and whose leg was broken in the
neighbour's work, a poet and a stranger who came the way were
appointed a court of arbitration. They decided to settle the matter in
four sentences;
The Poet -- The farmer must get compensation.
The Stranger -- Yes; but he must get time till Monday to pay it.
The Poet -- Very well. Which Monday do you mean?
The Stranger -- The Monday of Judgment.
The four sentences were thus finished and the case settled.
Luan Bealtaine, the Monday occurring in the festival time of
'Bealtaine,' which took place at the opening of May.
Luasad, one of three fishermen said to have come to Ire. before the
Deluge.
Luathagra, 'swift retribution,' whence the name Duach Laghrach.
Luchad, al. Bealach na Luchaide, at Lowhid bridge in tl. of Moanreagh,
par. of Kilkeedy, bar. of Inchiquin, Co. Clare; the ford where the
bridge is was called Ath Luchaid; Bealach na Luchaide was the name of
an old highway which passed at this point.
Luchta, f. of Tighearnach Teidhbheannach (who got the two provinces of
M. from Eochaidh Feidhlioch).
Luchtaine, a mechanic of the T. D. D.
Luchtaire, s. of Logha Feidhlioch, of the race of Ioth.
Lugh, s. of Cian, of the T. D. D.
Lugh, s. of Eithneann, sl. Brian Iuchar and Iucharbha, gods of the T.
D. D.
Lugh (al. Lughaidh) Lamhfhada, 'Lugh Longhand,' s. of Cian, k. Ire.
forty years; institutes the games of the fair of Taillte about
Lughnasa, or 1st day of August, in commemoration of Taillte his
foster-nurse.
Lughaidh, al. Mac Con, s. of Maicniadh, k. Ire., 30 years.
Lughaidh, five L.'s, sons of Daire Doimhtheach,; Lughaidh Laighdhe (k.
Ire.), one of these five according to the 'Coir Anmann'.
Lughaidh, f. of Corc (k. M.); styled 'go laimhdheirg,' 'of the red
hand,' poetically.
Lughaidh, grandfather (by mother) of Caolbhaidh, s. of Cronn Badhraoi.
Lughaidh, s. of Aonghus Fionn, an. of Muireadhach Muindearg (k. U.).
Lughaidh, s. of Daire, and grandfather of Mac Con; f. of Eithne (m. of
Conaire s. of Mogh Lamha).
Lughaidh, s. of Ioth.
Lughaidh, s. of Laoghaire, k. Ire. 20 years; d. in Achadh Fharcha from
lightning for disobedience to Patrick anno 503 Fm.
Lughaidh, s. of Oilill Olom, sl. in bt. of Magh Muchruime.
Lughaidh, s. of Rossa, of race of Ir.
Lughaidh Allathach, s. of Cairbre Cromcheann; v. Lughaidh
Eallaightheach.
Lughaidh Dalleigeas, sl. Fearghus, s. of Rogh.
Lughaidh Eallaightheach, a leader of the Earna and joint k. of
Munster; identical with L. Allathach, q.v.
Lughaidh Gaot, al. Lughaidh, s. of Oilill Flann Beag, k. M., exacted
the eiric of Eidirsceol from the Leinstermen; an. of Cormac, s. of
Cuileannan.
Lughaidh Iardhonn, 'L. the Dark-brown,' s. of Eanna Dearg, k. Ire.
nine years.
Lughaidh Laighdhe, s. of Eochaidh, k. Ire. seven years; said by some
to be one of the five Lughaidhs, ss. of Daire Doimhtheach; L. L.
referred to in the Coir Anmann prob. not k. Ire.; sl. by Aodh Ruadh, s.
of Badharn, anno 4469 Fm.
Lughaidh Laimhdhearg, 'L. Red Hand,' s. of Eochaidh Uaircheas, k. Ire.
seven years; sl. by Conaing Beigeaglach; anno 4368 Fm..
Lughaidh Lamha, one of the five best champions of Ire. in his time.
Lughaidh Lamhfhada, v. Lugh Lamhfhada.
Lughaidh Loithfhlonn, s. of Breasal Breac.
Lughaidh Luaighne, s. of Ionadmhar, k. Ire. five years;
sl. by Conall Clairingneach, anno 5016 Fm.
Lughaidh Meann, 'Lughaidh the Stutterer,' s. of Aonghus Tireach.
Lughaidh Riabh nDearg, 'Lughaidh the Redstreaked,' s. of .the three
Finneamhnas, k. Ire. twenty years or twenty-six years (according to
some).
Lughaidh from Liathdhruim, that is, Lughaidh from Tara, the reference
is to Lughaidh Lamhfhada, k. of Ire.
Lughair, poet to Oilill Mor.
Lughlachta, at Loch Lughdhach, i.e., at Lough Corrane, in bar. of
Iveragh, Co. Berry; seven btt. in one day won by Tighearnmhas over the
dss. of Eibhear.
Lughmhagh, Louth, an ancient town in par., bar. and co. of Louth, 51/2
miles south-west of Dundalk; Eochaidh O Tuathail, bp. of. d. anno 820
Fm., which speaks of him as an abbot.
Lughmhagh, county of, that is, Co. Louth.
Lughmhagh, Louth, a maritime bar. and par. in Co. Louth; bar. is
bounded on north by bar. of Upper Dundalk, on south by bar. of Ardee,
and on east by Irish sea; the Lochlonnaigh put some of their vessels
on Loch nEachach, and others in Lughmhagh and on Loch Ribh, and thence
they pl. Ard Macha; the reference is to the maritime verge of the bar.
of Lughmhagh.
Lughna Feirtre, sl. Eochaidh Gunnat (k. Ire.); Eochaidh Gunnat is sl.
by Lughaidh Meann, s. of Aonghus, an Ulsterman, anno 267 Fm.; this
king is not mentioned by Tighearnach.
Lughnasa, al. Lughnasadh, a name for the 1st day of August; named from
the commemoration of Taillte by Lugh Lamhfhada.
Lughroth, s. of Mogh Feibhis. sl. in bt. of Lochmhagh.
Luighne, a district corresponding to the see of Achonry (Achadh
Chuinnire); while the name is preserved in bar. of Leyney, Co. Sligo;
Luighne, s. of Eireamhon, jk. Ire. three years; sl. in bt. of Ard
Ladhrann, anno 3519 Fm.; a leader of the Milesian expedition.
Luighne, Luighnigh, the people of Laighne; v. Luighni.
Luighni, al,. Luighne, Luighnigh, the people of the district called
Luighne; the bar. of Leyney, Co. Sli., preserves the name and the
ancient district seems to have been co-extensive with the see of
Achonry (Achadh Chuinnire).
Luimneach, gen. Luimnigh; al. L. Mumhan; (a) the estuary of the
Shannon at Limerick, which is a natural boundary of some of the
principal divisions and subdivisions of the country; (b) the town of
Limerick which sprang into existence in the Danish period; (c) the see
of Limerick; .
Luimneach, Limerick, County of; Plain of the County of, v. Clar
Chontae Luimnigh.
Luimneach Laighean, 'Limerick of Leinster' in Ui Cinnsealaigh,; al.
Formaoil na bhFian, given to Fionn, s. of Cumhall, by the k. of
Leinster, ib.; now Limerick, a tl. having the ruins of a castle
(Esmonde's) and church, in par. of Kilkevan, 31/2 miles north-east of
Gorey, Co. Wex.; v. Formaoil na bhFian.
Luimneach Mumhan, 'Limerick of Munster,'  al. Luimneach, q.v.
Lupida, sister of St. Patrick, brought to Ire. as a captive.
Lupus, bp. of Troyes, sent to Britain to preach against Pelagianism.

M.
Maaree, Co. Gal., v. Meadhraidhe.
Mac Ailin, al. Mac Cailin, Mac Callum, Campbell, a family in Alba
sprung from Lughaidh, s. of Ioth.
Mac Aldelmel, Fitz Aldelmel, or Fitz Audelin; sent by Henry II. to
negotiate about submission with Raidhri O Conchubhair; one of five
Norman leaders of evil deeds.
Mac an Chleirigh Chuirr, 'son of the heron-cleric,' bp. of Ulaidh
(i.e., bp. of Down or Connor), at Council of Ceanannus.
Mac Aodhagain, 'Mac Egan,' v. Leabhar Ruadh Mic Aodhagain and Leabhar
Breac Mic Aodhagain.
Mac Bearnaird, Roibeard, Robert Fitz Bernard, left by Henry I. to
guard the town of Port Lairge.
Mac Beathaidh, s. of Muireadhach Claon, k. of Ciarraidhe Luachra, sl.
in bt. of Cluain Tarbh.
Mac Brady (or. Brody) v. Mac Bruaideadha.
Mac Brodys, v. Clann Bhruaideadha.
Mac Bruaideadha, Mac Brody, Maoilin Og, a poet of Dal gCais, a
contemporary of K.'s; d. in year 1602, Fm.; in Beatha Aodha Ruaidh,
where he is called Maoilin Og, s. of Maoilin, son of Conchubhar Mac B.,
it is related that Aodh Ruadh's party having taken his cattle he
obtained their restoration from Aodh Ruadh in consideration of a poem
which he composed in praise of that chieftain, v . Beatha Aodha Ruaidh.
Mac Cailin, v. Mac Ailin.
Mac Carrthaigh, Mac Carthy, Cormac, k. M., sl. by Toirrdhealbhach O
Briain.
Mac Carrthaigh, Mac Carthy, Diarmaid Mor, k. of Corcach, i.e., k. of
Desmond, gets northern half of Munster, i.e., Desmond, from
Toirrdhealbhach O Briain
Mac Carrthaigh, Mac Carthy, Donnchadh, gets southern half of Munster,
i.e., Desmond, from Toirrdhealbhach O Briain.
Mac Carrthaigh, Mac Carthy, Domhnall, k. of Desmond, goes to the house
of, i.e., proposes submission to, Conchubhar of Maonmhagh, k. C..
Mac Carrthaigh Mor, Mac Carthy More; Earl of Desmond contracts
matrimonial alliance with.
Mac Carrthaigh Riabhach, Mac Carthy Riabhach ('the Swarthy'); Earl of
Kildare contracts matrimonial alliance with.
Mac Carthy, v. Mac Carrthaigh.
Mac Carthys, the, v. Clann Charrthaigh.
Mac Carthy Mor, Florence, v. Finghin Mac Carrthaigh.
Mac Ceacht, al. Teathur, s. of Cearmad Milbheoil, k. Ire., by rotation
with his two brothers, thirty years.
Mac Cochlain, Murchadh, falsely said by Hanmer to be k. Ire. in year
1166. [Murchadh Mac Cochlain, lord of Dealbhna Earthra, d. in year
1199, Fm. II. 120].
Mac Coinchearca, k. of Osruighe, def. Dunghal, k. of Ui Cinnsealaigh,
in bt. of Bealach Gabhrain, anno 756 Fm.
Mac Con, k. Ire., v. Lughaidh, al. Mac Con.
Mac Cull, al. Eathur, son of Cearmad Milbheoil, k. Ire. in rotation
with his two brothers; sl. by Eibhear in bt. of Taillte, anno 3500 Fm.
Mac Curtins, the, v. Clann Chruitin.
Mac Donnells, the, v. Clann Domhnaill.
Mac Duach, another name for Mochua (St.)
Mac Duinnsleibhe, Ruaidhri, Rory Mac Dunlevy, k. of Ulster.
Mac Earca, i.e., Muircheartach Mac Earca, M. s. of Earc (who was his
mother), f. of Fearghus and Domhnall.
Mac Earc; v. 'Muircheartach, s. of Earc.
Mac Egan, v. Mac Aodhagain.
Mac Egans, the, v. Clann Aodhaghain.
Mac Eochadha, Keogh, Kehoe; the ollamh who inaugurated Mac Murchadha.
Mac Gearailt, Muiris, Maurice Fitzgerald.
Mac Gearailt, Uilliam, William Fitz Gerald, br. of Maurice Fitz Gerald,
and f. of Raymond le Gros.
Mac Gilbeirt Risteard, Richard Fitzgilbert, s. of Earl of Stranguell,
and called earl of Stranguell passim in K., but commonly known as
Strongbow; d. at Ath Cliath anno 1177, leaving no male heir.
Mac Giolla Padraig, Mac Gillapatrick, Fitz Patrick, Tadhg, f. of
Dearbhforgaill (w. of Toirrdhealbhach O Briain).
Mac Giolla Padraig, Mac Gillapatrick, Fitz Patrick; Dunghal, s.
of Donnchadh, sl. by Maoilseachlainn (k. Ire.).
Mac Giolla Padraig, Donnchadh, k. of Osruighe.
Mac Giolla Padraig, Mac Gillapatrick.
Mac Gorman, v. Mag Cormain.
Mac Greine, al. Ceathur, s. of Cearmad Milbheoil, k. Ire. thirty years
by rotation with his two brothers; sl. by Aimhirgin, in bt. of Taillte,
anno 3500 Fm.
Mac Liag, high ollamh of Ire.
Mac Liag, Giolla, primate of Ire. at Council of Ceanannus.
Mac Mathghamhna, Mac Mahon, of Oirghialla and Thomond.
Mac Mathghamhna, Mac Mahon, of Ulster; derived from Fitz Urse
according to Spenser.
Mac Murchadha, Mac Murrough; sprung from Breasal Breac, s. of
Fiachaidh Aiceadha.
Mac Murchadha, Mac Murrough, Diarmaid, k. L.
Mac na Mara, Macnamara, the ollamh who inaugurated O Briain at Magh
Adhar.
Mac na Mara, v. Siol Aodha.
Macnamara (Mac Namara, Mac Na Mara), v. Mac na Mara.
Mac Namaras, the, v. Clann Mic na Mara and Clann Mhic Conmara.
Mac Neise, first name of St. Caomhan (a disciple of Patrick).
Mac Ronain, Mac Ronan, bp. of Ciarraidhe, at Council of Ceanannus.
Mac Ronan, v. Mac Ronain.
Mac Sheehys, the, v. Clann tSithigh.
Mac Stiabhna, Roibeard, Robert Fitz Stephen, a leader in the Norman
Invasion, released from prison in order to assist Mac Murchadha; one
of the five Norman leaders of evil deeds.
Mac Suibhne, Mac Sweeny, said by Spenser to be of English origin.
Mac Sweenys, the, v. Clann tSuibhne.
Mac Tail, St. of Cill Chuilinn, d. of plague, anno 548 Fm.
Macha, a goddess of the T. D. D..
Macha, that is, Ard Macha, Armagh; Irial Faidh, in a poem is called k.
of Sliabh Mis and of Macha.
Macha, a strong man of Partholon's following.
Macha, w. of Neimheadh, first dead person in Ire. after Neimheadh's
arrival, Ard Macha said to be named from; d. anno 2850 Fm.
Macha Mhongruadh, 'Macha of the reddish hair,' da. of Aodh Ruadh,
sovereign of Ire. seven years; sl. by Reachtaigh Righdhearg, anno 4546
Fm.
Macniadh, v. Maicniadh:
Macrobius, Ambrosius Theodosius (395-423) grammarian and philosopher.
Madagan, a noble sl. in bt. of Bealach Mughna.
Madagan, f. of Ardghal (k. U.)
Mada Muirisc, a Connaughtwoman, m. of Oilill Mor.
Madan Muinreamhar, 'Madan Thickneck,' a Fomorian chief.
Madhmhor, k. of Spain and f. of Taillte; v. Maghmhor.
Mag Cormain, Mac Gorman, al. O Gorman, marshal of hosts to O Briain.
Magh, a plain, generally a large tract which may include considerable
elevations.
Magha, f. of Ceat.
Magh Adhar (al. M. Adhair), Moyare Park two miles north-east of Quin
in the tll. of Toonagh and Corbally, in Co. Clare. There is a
remarkable mound at M. A., it is over 100 feet in length and some 80
feet in width and 20 feet high.
Magh hAgha, a plain including Teltown, a par. in bar. of Upper Kells,
Co. Meath.
Magh nAghar Mic Ughmhoir, the Plain of Aghar, s. of Ughmhor (a Fear
Bolg poet), in the territory of Meadhbh and Oilill v. Bb. 16 b.; in
Connaught, Mac Firbis, 65.
Magh Aidhne, a plain comprised in the see of Killmacduagh, Co. Galway.
Magh nAilbhe, V. Magh Ailbhe.
Magh Ailbhe, al. Magh nAilbhe, a plain in the south of Co. Kildare,
extending into Co. Carlow, or from r. Barrow and Sliabh Mairge to the
Wicklow Mts., comprising the north of bar. of Idrone, Co. Carlow and
barr. of Kilkee and Moone, Co. Kild.
Magh nAirbh, a plain in bar. of Crannagh, Co. Kil.; it includes
Tubridbrittain; Flaithbheartach, ab. of Inis Cathaigh, was conducted
as far as M. nA. by the Leinster clergy on his way to Munster
(apparently from Kildare).
Magh nAirbhrioch, in Fotharta Airbhrioch, in Leinster.
Magh, an, 'the Plain,' May Hill; in the eastern part of the Saunderson
demesne, Co. Cavan; there is a hill though the surrounding country is
level, hence the name May Hill (Lloyd G. 3. No. 126°, p. 60); a limit
of Meath.
Magh an Chosnamhaigh, 'Plain of the Defender '(D. iv. 2 has Magh an
Chosnamha), in Killevy (Cill tSleibhe), a par. in Co. Armagh, 3 miles
west of Newry; probably Meigh, bar. verging on Slievegullion; a limit
of the prov. of Meath.
Magh Aoi, al. Magh nAoi, al. Machaire Chonnacht, colloquially 'the
Maghery,' the plain westward from Cloonfree Bridge near Strokestown to
Castlereagh Bridge and southward to a hill two and a half miles north
of Roscommon town, northwards as far as Lismacoil in par. of
Kilmacumsky eastwards to Falsk in par. of Killuckin, Fm. II. 87, 88;
dwelling fortress (dunphort) of Meadhbh and Oilill was in it.
Magh Archaill, in Ciarraidhe Luachra, name not. now known.
Magh nAsail, in Ui Niallain.
Magh mBealaigh, 'the Plain of Bealach' in Ui Tuirtre.
Magh Beannchair, the district in which is the town of Bangor, Co. Down.
Magh Bile, Movilla, 'Plain of the Tree,' tl. a mile north-east of
Newtownards, Co. Down; St. Finnen was of; there is also a M. B.,
Moville, in bar. of Inishowen, Co. Doneg., in which according to
Colgan there was an ancient monastery, but St. Finnen's name is not,
now at least, associated with it.
Magh Breagh, Lat. Bregia, the plain that includes the eastern portion
of Co. Meath and the northern portion of Co. Dublin, al. Breagha;
named from Breagha, s. of Breoghan; v. Breagha and Breaghmhagh.
Magh mBreasa, in Leinster; cleared of woods by Neimheadh.
Magh Ceara, in bar. of Carra, co. Mayo; cleared of woods by Neimheadh.
Magh gCeidne, a plain between rivers Drowes (Drobhaois) and Earne
(Eirne), I. 180; in an Inquisition 13 Jac. I., quoted in Fm. II. 474,
it is called Moygh al. Moygene, and is placed in counties of Donegal,
Leitrim, and Sligo "vel eorum altero"; it seems however, to be, at
least mainly, in bar. of Carbery, Co. Sligo, and maritime; derived
from 'Ceadna the same,' (this derivation is of course, purely
fanciful).
Magh Chloinne Ceallaigh, 'the Plain of the Children of Ceallach (the O
Kellys), al. Magh Druchtain; it has been described as the most fertile
district in Leix; according to an old map of Leix and Offaly it
extended from Ballymaddock southward to the hills of Slewmargie (Fm.
II., 733).
Magh Cnoghbha, 'the Plain of Cnoghbha,' a limit of the province of
Meath; in MS. D. iv. 2, R.I.A., in a little tract on the limits of
Meath (published by Walsh in Archivium Hibernicum I.), which K.'s
description closely resembles, for Magh Cnoghbha, the name Mucshnamh
is given, which may be identified with Muckno, which is a lake and
parish near Castleblaney, Co. Mon.; Muckno however, seems more easily
derived phonetically from Magh Cnoghbha than from Mucshnamh.
Magh Cobha, phonetically Maicoue (anno 1252, Sweetman's Calendar of
Irish State Papers, Dec. 16th), in Ui Eachach, i.e., in barr. of Upper
and Lower Iveagh, Co. Down; Donaghmore (Domhnach Mor Maighe Cobha),
midway between Newry and Loughbrickland), is in M.C.; cleared of wood
in time of Irial Faidh.
Magh Comair, 'the Plain of Confluence,' in Ui Neill; prob. plain round
Dubhchomair where Boyne and Blackwater meet at Navan; cleared of woods
in time of Irial Faidh,; there is also a M. C., Muckamore, a grange 11/4
miles to the south-east of Antrim town.
Magh Corainn (Mag. Corann, Fm.), in bar. of Corran, Co. Sligo.
Magh Cro, al. Magh Cru, in Brefney, in Connaught, in the region of
Lough Con.
Magh Croich, al. Magh Cruaich, Magh Nuadhat def. Conn Ceadchathach in
bt. of; this is one of ten btt. in which Mogh Nuadhat was victorious
the last on the list coming after bt. of Ath Luain, hence its site was
prob. in Connaught, west of Athlone.
Magh Cru; v. Magh Cró.
Magh Cruachan, al. Magh Cruachna, the plain in which is Rathcroghan,
Co. Rosc.; v. Cruachain.
Magh Cuile Caol, 'The narrow Plain of the Angle,' in Boghaine, of
which a part was bar. of Bannagh, west coast of Co. Donegal; cleared
of woods in time of Aonghus Olmucaidh.
Magh Cuile Feadha, 'Plain of the Wood Angle,' in Fotharta Airbhrioch
in Leinster, and so also D. iv. 3 Stowe R.I.A. 20 a; Lec. and Bb. give
it as in Fotharta; while Fm. (text) says it is in Fearnmhagh, bar. of
Farney, Co. Monagh., in which there is Loughfea; cleared of woods in
reign of Irial Faidh.
Magh Cuile Toladh, in bar. of Kilmaine, Co. Mayo, cleared of woods by
Neimheadh.
Magh Cuilinn, in bar. of Ardes, Co. Down, v. Three Frag. of Annals,
108 (text).
Magh Cuma, in Ui Neill, on the borders of Brefny; cleared of woods in
reign of Irial Faidh.
Magh da Chaomhog, seems in Meath.
Magh da Ghabhal, 'plain of the two forked rivers,' al. M. da Ghabhar,
in Oriel (Oirghialla), cleared of woods by Eochaidh Faobharghlas.
Magh nEalta, 'the Plain of the Flocks,' plain that extends from Howth
to Tallaght and includes Clontarf (Cluain Tarbh), al. Seanmhagh nEalta
Eadair, 'the old plain of the flocks of Eadar'; never a forest.
Magh nEinsciath, in Connaught.
Magh Einsciath, in Leinster, cleared of woods in time of Aonghus
Olmucaidh.
Magh Fail, a poetical name for Ire. (cf. Inis Fail).
Magh Fea, in bar. of Forth, Co. Carlow; al. M. Feadha, named from
Feadha, s. of Tortan
Magh Feadha, v. Magh Fea.
Magh Fearnmhaighe, al. Fearmhagh, bar. of Farney, Co. Mon., cleared of
woods in the reign of Irial Faidh.
Magh Feimhean, al. Deise Thuaisceirt or North Decies; co-extensive
with Trian Chluana Meala (Clonmel third, or bar. of Iffa and Offa
East) and Trian Meadhonach (or bar. of Middlethird, Co. Tipp.); Iffa
and Offa East includes the principal parts of Clonmel and Carrick-on-
Suir, and Middlethird bar. includes Cashel and Fethard.
Magh Foithin, in the west according to K.; Bb. 23 b, however, and
other documents place it in Airthearaibh, 'in the east;' cleared of
woods in time of Irial Faidh, ib.
Magh Fubhna, 'Plain of the r. Fubhna,' the plain which contains Oona
Water, bar. of Middle Dungannon, Co. Tyrone; in Oirghialla (Oriel);
cleared of woods by Eochaidh Faobharghlas.
Magh Fuinnsighe, the plain which Loch Feabhail, Lough Foyle,
Co. Derry, submerged in reign of Tighearnmhas.
Magh Geanainn, al. M. nGarainn, name of plain submerged by Loch Eirne,
Lough Earne, in time of Fiachaidh Labhruinne.
Magh Geirrghinn, v. Eoghanacht Mhaighe Geirrghin.
Magh Geisille, in bar. of Geashill, King's Co., in Ui Failghe; cleared
of woods in time of Irial Faidh.
Magh Glinne Dearcon, al. M. G. da Chon, in Cineal Conaill, cleared of
woods in time of Aonghus Olmucaidh.
Magh Inis, in bar. of .Lecale, Co. Down.
Magh nInis, in Ulster, cleared of woods in reign of Irial Faidh; v.
Magh Inis.
Magh nIonair, in Oriel (Oirghialla) perh. identical with Magh Enir
which seems near Armagh town (v. Onom.); cleared of woods by Eochaidh
Faobharghlas.
Magh Iotha, v. Breantracht Mhaighe Iotha.
Magh Iotha, 'Ioth's Plain.' southern half of bar. of Raphoe, Co.
DoneGal.
Magh Laighean, al. Laigheanmhagh, the Plain of Leinster; Clane,
Oughterard, Newcastlelyons are in it; seems included in or co-
extensive with Magh Lithfe.
Magh Laighne, in Connaught, cleared of woods by Eochaidh Faobharghlas.
Magh Leamhna, in Oriel (Oirghialla); al. Closach (Colgan); Augher and
Ballygawley are in it. Clogher town on its western boundary; Eirragal
Keerogue on its northern boundary; and the Blackwater flows through it,
Fm. L 46, cleared of woods by Eochaidh Faobharghlas.
Magh Leamhna, Lennox, in Scotland, the Mormhaor of Leamhain or Duke of
Lennox named from it
Magh Leana, Moylen, in Fercall, King's Co., it contains Durrow.
Magh Leargna, the plain which Lough Measc burst over in Connaught.
Magh Line, called Maulyne, (Calendar of Sweetman and Handcock), the
name is preserved in the deanery of Moylinny, M. of Rathbeg and
Rathmore in bar. of Upper Antrim are in it; it is roughly co-extensive
with bar. of Upper Antrim, Co. Antrim.
Magh Lioghat, bar. of Upper Toome, Co. Antrim; in Ui Tuirtre; cleared
of woods in time of Eithrial.
Magh Lithfe, al. M. Life, M. Liphi, etc., the Plain of the Liffey in
counties of Kildare and Dublin; v. Magh Laighean; loosely equivalent
to the Co. of Ath Cliath or Dublin; one of the three plains (Maighe)
of Ire., the other two being Magh Line and Magh Midhe, Bb. 42 a.
Magh Luachra Deaghaidh, 'the Plain of luachair Deaghaidh,' a level
tract in Luachair Deaghaidh (q.v.); cleared of woods in time of
Aonghus Olmucaidh.
Magh Luadhat, Maynooth, Co. Kildare, where there was a residence
of the kings of L.
Magh Lughaidh, in Ui Tuirtre, cleared of woods by Neimheadh.
Magh Luinge, al. Magh Lunga, in Ciannachta Ghlinne Geimhean; cleared
of woods in reign of Irial Faidh.
Magh Luirg, al. Magh Loirc, Moylurg or the "Plains of Boyle," to the
south of r. Boyle, bar. of Boyle, Co. Ros.; cleared of woods by
Neimheadh or Eochaidh Faobharghlas.
Magh Macha, The Moy, a district near Armagh town (the par. of Moy lies
on both sides of the Blackwater and includes town of Moy in Co.
Tyrone); cleared of woods by Neimheadh.
Magh Maoin, al. Maonmhagh, named from Maon, s. of Ughmhor; the plain
in which Loughrea lake and town, Co. Galway, stand, and which extends
north of the town to a considerable distance; "the country north of
the town (of Loughrea) presents a desolate and cheerless aspect. It
appears like a vast plain blending with the distant sky, and the
plantations connected with the different seats, though of considerable
extent, appear as mere specks," Frazer, quoted in P. G.
Maghmhor, al. Madhmor, k. of Spain, f. of Taillte, w. of Eochaidh, s.
of Earc; v. Madhmhor.
Magh Midhe, in Ciannachta; cleared of woods in reign of Irial Faidh;
the Leabhar Gabhala (23, K. 32, R.I.A.), 84, places it in Ui Neill.
Magh Mor, 'the Great Plain,' the plain including Loughs Ennell and
Derravaragh in the neighbourhood of Mullingar, Co. Westm.
Magh Muaidhe, the plain in which the r. Moy enters Killalla Bay,
between barr. of Tirawley, Co. Mayo and Gallen, Co. Mayo.
Magh Muirtheimhne, a plain in Co. Louth extending from r. Boyne to
Cuailgne mountains at Carlingford; it includes Dundalk, Louth (town),
Drumiskin Faughard and Monasterboice; named from Muirtheimhne, s. of
Breoghan.
Magh Muirtheimhne; Brisleach Mhaighe Muirtheimhne, an Irish heroic
tale in which the death of Cuchulainn is described; copies of this
tale are to be found in the R.I.A. MSS. (among others), 23 G 10, 23 K.
7, 23 M. 47; the tale has been edited (from a modern MS.) by Hogan and
Lloyd in Gaelic Journal, XI., and XVI.
Magh Mucruimhe, a plain extending westward from Athenry, Co. Gal.,
cleared of woods in time of Aonghus Olmucaidh; al. Muchruimhe.
Magh na bFianbhoth, 'the Plain of the Tabernacles,' Patrick born at
Nemptor in.
Magh Neara, in Connaught, cleared of woods by Neimheadh.
Magh Neiliu (probably for M. nEille), probably Moyalley, par. of
Kilmanaghan, King's Co.; cleared of woods in reign of Irial
Faidh.
Maghnus, leader of the Lochlonnaigh, br. to Sitric; drowned at Dun
Dealgan.
Maghnus, s. of Amhlaoibh, s. of Aralt, k. of the Isles; married da. of
Muircheartach O Briain according to K. [It was to Sichraidh, s. of
Maghnus, she was married in year 1102, Fm.; sl. anno 1103, Fm.]
Magh Ochtair, a plain in bar. of Ikeathy and Oughterany in north of Co.
Kildare (Cluain Conaire, Cloncurry is in same bar.); cleared of woods
in time of Eithria.
Magh Rath, Moyra, par. and tl. in bar. of Lower Iveagh, Co. Down
cleared of woods in time of Eithrial; bt. of between Conghal Claon and
Domhnall, s. of Aodh, k. Ire., anno 634 Fm.
Magh Rath, 'Cath Maighe Rath,' an Irish historical Tale; this tale has
been edited by O'D. for the Irish Archæological Society, anno 1842.
Magh Reichead, Morett, near Great Heath of Maryborough, Queen's Co.;
cleared of woods in time of Irial Faidh.
Magh Riada, al. Laoighis Riada, a plain in Leix; name is preserved in
Moyrayth, in deanery of Ofaly, see of Kildare, Sweetman and Handcock's
Calendar, p. 248, and perhaps in modern Morett, near Maryborough,
Queen's Co.; cleared of woods in time of Irial Faidh.
Magh Sainbh, included in the part of Connaught given by Eochaidh
Feidhlioch to Tinne, s. of Connra; this part contained Cruachain
(Rathcroghan, Co. Ros.), seems to east of Rathcroghan; identified with
Magh Ai (Magh nAoi, i.e., Machaire Chonnacht) in Ybl., 649, and
elsewhere; v. Magh nAoi.
Magh Salsburie, Salisbury Plain in Wiltshire, north of Salisbury town.
Magh Sanais, in Connaught, cleared of woods in reign of Irial Faidh.
Magh Seanair, the Plain of Senaar (Seanair, in Trans.), mentioned in
Genesis x. 10, xi. 2, etc., it corresponded with the greater part of
Babylonia.
Magh Seiliu, in Ui Neill; the plain of r. Seiliu or Blackwater which,
rising in Cavan, flows through a flat country and unites with the
Boyne at Navan; cleared of woods in reign of Irial Faidh.
Magh Seimhne, Rinn Seimhne is a name of the peninsula of Island Magee,
in bar. of Lower Belfast, in Co. of Antrim; cleared of woods in time
of Neimheadh.
Magh Seiriodh, plain lying round Dun Chuile Sibrinne, ancient name of
Ceanannus or Kells, Co. Meath, cleared of woods by Neimheadh.
Magh Sleacht, the plain in which is Ballymagauran in bar. of Tullyhaw
(Tulach nEachach), Co. Cav. (v. Fm. IV. 1003).
Magh Smearthoin (poet. for M. Smearthuin), the plain in which is
Geashill, King's Co.
Magh Smeathrach, in Ui Failghe; cleared of woods by Eochaidh
Faobharghlas.
Magh Sola, in Leinster, Loch Muinreamhair burst over, in time of
Neimheadh.
Magh Sreing, the plain over which Loch Cinne (q. v.) burst.
Magh Sulchair, the plain over which Loch Ce (q.v.) burst in reign of
Tighearnmhas.
Magh Teacht, in Ui Mac Uais (q.v.); cleared of woods in reign of Irial
Faidh.
Magh Tochair, in Innishowen, at foot of Slieve Sneacht; it contained
the church called Domhnach Mor Muighe Tochair, situated near
Carndonagh; in Tir Eoghain (q.v.); cleared of woods by Neimheadh.
Magh Tuireadh Theas, Moytirra South, al. M. T. Conga, 'M. T. of Cong,'
in par. of Cong, bar. of Kilmaine, Co. Mayo. The site of the bt. won
by T. D. D. over the Fir Bolg (Fm. I. 16) is to the right of the road
as one goes from Cong to the village of the Neal.
Magh Tuireadh Thuaidh, 'Northern N. T.', al. M. T. na bhFomorach, 'M.
T. of the Fomorians,' identified with the tll. Moytirra East and
Moytirra West, bar. of Tirerril, Co. Sligo; v. Fm. I. 18 sq. for
interesting traditions concerning the Fomorians which were preserved
in Tory Island in O'D.'s time (anno 1835); bt. of, thirty years after
bt. of Moytirra South, won by T. D. D. over the Fomorians.
Maghain, w. of Conchubhar, 's. of Neasa; intrigue of with Aodh, s. of
Ainneann, I. 210.
Maginus, Giovanni Antonio Magini, Italian astronomer (1558-1610),
quoted.
Mag Mhathghamhna, Mac Mahon, sprung from Colla da Chrioch.
Magogai, dss. of Magog, a name given by the Greeks to the Scythians,
according to Josephus.
Magonius, name given by Germanus to Patrick.
Magraths, the, v. Clann Chraith.
Mag Uidhir, Maguire, McGuire, sprung from Colla Da Chrioch.
Maguire, McGuire, v. Mag Uidhir.
Maicniadh, s. of Lughaidh, and f. of Mac Con (k. Ire.), of the race of
Lughaidh, s. of Ioth.
Maine, the seven  -- s., seven sons Meadhbh bore to Oilill.
Maine, f. of Corbach (m. of Diarmaid, k. Ire.).
Maine, s. of Conchubhar, s. of Neasa.
Maine, s. of Corc, s. of Lughaidh, held as hostage by Niall, s. of
Eochaidh.
Maine, s. of Forga, of the race of Eireamhon.
Maine, s. of Niall Naoighiallach and Rioghnach; d. anno 440, Fm.
Maine Leamhna, s. of Corc, s. of Lughaidh; nobles of the house of
Lenox sprung from; an. of Kings James I. and Charles I. of England.
Mainistear Fear Muighe, Fermoy Abbey, at Fermoy, Co. Cork, built anno
1170; the ordinary Irish name for the town of Fermoy now is Mainistear
Fear Muighe and An Mhainistear (for brevity).
Mainistear na Maighe, the Abbey of the Maighe, at Adare, built anno
1151.
Maior, Ioannes, John Major or Mair (1470-1550), a Scottish historical
writer, author, among other works, of "Historia Majoris Britanniae tam
Angliae quam Scotiae," which appeared in 1521 in Paris; states that
the Gaels of Alba sprang from those of Ire.
Mairtine, s of Sithcheann, of the race of Ioth.
Maitsin, s. of Logha, of the race of Lughaidh, s. of Ioth.
Mal, s. of Lughaidh, s. of Ioth.
Mal, s. of Rochruidhe, of race of Ir, k. Ire. four years; sl. by
Feidhlimidh Reachtmhar, anno 110 Fm.
Malachias, Malachy, St.; bp. of Dun (Down).
Malachy, St., v. Malachias, and Maolmaodhog.
Malachy, k. Ire., v. Maoilseachlainn.
Malaleel, s. of Cainan.
Malcus, consecrated bishop at Port Lairge by Anselmus, abp. of
Canterbury.
Man, Isle of, v. Manainn.
Mana, over the sea, but it is not clear whether Isle of Man or a place
in Scotland.
Manainn, g. Manann, older nom. Mana, the Isle of Man; sea of, i.e. the
Irish Sea.
Manannan, s. of Allod, of the T. D. D.
Manannan, s. of Lir; v. Oirbsean
Manntan, a warrior of the children of Neimheadh.
Manntan, leader in the Milesian expedition to Ire.; sl. by Eireamhon
in bt. of Breoghan, anno 3506 Fm.
Manntan, a leader who came to Spain with Bratha.
Manxmen, the, v. Fir Falgha.
Maodhog, of Fearna (Ferns, Co. Wexf.), St.; Fearna Mhor of, v. Fearna
Mhor Maodhog.
Maoilbrighde, s. of Mothlachan.
Maoilchearn, an Mh., the r. Mulkern, which rises in the Keeper Mts.,
and flows into the Shannon at Castle Troy midway between Limerick and
Castleconnell; a limit of see of Luimneach.
Maoilciarain, f. of Naomhan (chief artificer of Ire.)
Maoilfinnein, bp. of Ceanannus, d. anno 967 Fm.
Maoilfithrigh, s. of Aodh Uairiodhnach, and f. of Maolduin.
Maoilgheann, a druid.
Maoiliosa O Ainmire, abp. of Cashel, name was affixed to the limits of
the sees sanctioned by Council of Raith Breasail.
Maoilmithidh, s. of Criachan (a Leinster chief).
Maoilmithidh, s. of Flannagan, and f. of Conghalach; k. of Breagha; sl.
at Ath Cliath, anno 917 Fm.
Maoilriain, gf. of Aimhirgin (file of Diarmaid, s. of Cearbhall).
Maoilseachlainn, s. of Domhnall, k. Ire. twenty-three years; great gs.
of Maoilseachlainn, s. of Maolruanuidh; d. at Cro-inis in Loch Ainninn,
anno 1022 Fm.; Maoilseachlainn is anglicised Malachy.
Maoilseachlainn, s. of Maolruanuidh, k. Ire. 16 years; d. anno 860 Fm..
Maoilseachlainn Beag, 'M. the Little,' k. of Meath.
Maoin, da. of Conn Ceadchathach.
Maoise, Moses; contemporary of Gaedheal Glas; cured Gaedheal Glas of a
serpent wound.
Maoise, Rabbi, Rabbi Moses, computed the time between Adam and Christ
as 4058 years.
Maol, the great Maol, sl. Eochaidh Aireamh, k. Ire; Eochaidh Aireamh
was sl. by Siodhmall (perh. for Siodh maol), an. 5084 Fm.; v. H. F. 27.
Maolbreasail, s. of Aodh Shaine (k. Ire.).
Maolcallann, k. of Forthuatha, among the victors of Bealach Mughna.
Maolcanaigh, sl. Aodh Oirndighe in bt. of Da Fearta,anno 817 Fm.
Maolchu, f. of Gruige (k. of the Cruithnigh).
Maolcluiche, f. of Sidh.
Maolcobha, f. of Ceallach (k. of Cineal Conaill); identical with
Maolc., k. Ire.
Maolcobha, s. of Aodh, s. of Ainmire, k. Ire. four years; sl. by
Suibhne Meann in bt. of Bealgadain, anno 610 Fm.
Maolcobha (s. of Fiachna, s. of Deman, Fm. anno 646)
Maolcolum, s. of Domhnall, k. of Alba.
Maolcraoibhe O Duibhshionnaigh (the son of Duibhshionnaigh, i.e.,
Maelcraoibhe, Au. anno 919), sl. at Ath Cliath by the Lochlonnaigh.
Maoldomhnaigh, f. of Donnchadh (chief of the Dealbhna).
Maolduin, f. of Innreachtach.
Maolduin, s. of Aodh Beanainn, k. of West Munster.
Maolduin, s. of Aodh Ollan, k. of the Fochla (q.v.); victorious in bt.
of Corann, anno 783 Fm.
Maolduin, s. of Maoilfithrigh, burns k. of Cruithnigh and k. or
Ciannachta Ghlinne Geimhean in Dun Ceitheirn, anno 679 Fm.; f. of
Fearghal (k. Ire.).
Maolduin, s. of Muirgheas, s. of Tomaltach (Fm. 837); sl. in bt.
against the Lochlonnaigh.
Maolguala, s. of Donnghal, k. M., makes peace with Leath Cuinn, anno
888 Fm.; stoned to death by the people of Normandy.
Maolmaodhog, al. Malachias, or Malachy, St., abp. of Ire. and of Alba,
d. anno 1135; Fm. gives date 1148, which is that given in his life by
St. Bernard; he was bp. of Down and abp. of Armagh. As to the length
of time he held the primacy, v. Fm. I. 1084.
Maolmeadha, s. of Baodan, chief of Cineal Fearmhaic, goes to bt. of
Cluain Tarbh.
Maol Mor, sl. Tuathal Maol Garbh (k. Ire.).
Maolmordha, s. of Muireigen, k. of Iarthar Lithfe (q.v.); at bt. of
Ceann Fuaid.
Maolmordha, s. of Murchadh, k. L.; quarrel with Murchadh, s. of Brian
Boraimhe; returns to Leinster in a rage; strikes Cogaran, page to
Brian; procures a force of 12,000 men from k. of Lochloinn to fight
Brian at Cluain Tarbh.
Maolmuaidh, noble sl. at Bealach Mughna.
Maolmuaidh, s. of Bran, k. of Ui Eachach, def. by Brian Boraimhe at
Bealach Leachta,  anno 976 recte 978 Fm.
Maolmuire, da. of Cionaoth (k. of Alba) and w. of Aodh Finnliath (k.
Ire.)
Maolmuire, f. of Donnagan (k. of Oirghialla.)
Maol na mBo, f. of Diarmaid (k. L.).
Maolodhar, s. of Aodh Slaine.
Maolruanuidh, s. of Ardghal, k. of Ulster, d. anno 1005 Fm. which
gives Ardghar for Ardghal.
Maolruanuidh, s. of Cinneide, goes to Cluain Tarbh.
Maolruanuidh, s. of Donnchadh and f. of Maollseachlainn (k. Ire.).
Maolruanuidh na Paidre O Eidhin, 'M. of the Prayer, or Pater,
O'Heyne,' k. of Eidhne (Eidhin in Trans.), sl. at Cluain Tarbh.
Maolruanuidh O Maoldoraidh, k. of Cineal Conaill., taken a prisoner to
Ceann Choradh by Brian Boraimhe.
Maolsuthain, poet; the poet here referred to is probably Maolsuthain
Ua Cearbhaill who flourished in the eleventh century.
Maon, al. Labhraidh Loingseach; v. Labhraidh Loingseach.
Maon, s. of Aonghus Olmucaidh (k. Ire.).
Maon, s. of Ughmhor, from whom Magh Maoin (al. Maonmhagh) is named.
Maonach, f. of Murchadh (k. of West Connaught).
Maonach, s. of Finghin, k. M., d. anno 660 Fm.
Maonach, s. of Siadhal, ab. of Disirt Diarmada; called
Comhorba of Comhghall.
Maonmhagh, al. Magh Maoin, Druim Beitheach in; Conchubhar of, king of
Connaught; v. Magh Maoin.
Maormhor Marr (recte Mairr), High Steward of Mar in Scotland, al.
Muireadhach Mor of Alba, sl. at Cluain Tarbh.
Maothail, Mohill, a small town (in par. and bar. of same name),
in Co. Leitrim; limit of prov. of Meath
Mare Euxinum, the Black Sea.
Marianus Scotus (1028-1082 or 1083), chronicler, author of
'Chronicon,' a universal history to A.D. 1082, and first printed at
Basel in 1559; quoted with reference to the name Scotia as applied to
Ire.
Marius, s. of Arviragus, k. of Britain in year 73.
Marr, Mar in Scotland.
Marsh, or Marisco, Myler; v. Moireis, Myler.
Marsh, or Marisco, Geoffrey; v. Moireis, Seathfruidh.
Marshal, William; v. Maruscal, Uilliam.
Martin, bp. of Tours (c. 317-- c. 397), St. Patrick's mother a sister
of.
Martyrologium Romanum, the Roman Martyrology, the edition of 1584
which vas approved by Gregory XII., and revised by Baronius in 1586,
was the work in general use in K.'s time. There was a fresh edition in
1630.
Maruseal, Uilliam. William Marshal, Earl of Pembroke.
Mary, v. Muire.
Masruidhe Mhuighe Sleacht, in Breifny of Connaught, i.e., in Co.
Leitrim, a great bardic school.
Mathghamhain, s. of Cinneide and br. of Brian Boraimhe, k. M.;
treacherously sl. by the party of Maolmuaidh, son of Bran; Donnabhan,
s. of Cathal, lord of Ui Fidhgheinte it was who delivered Mathghamhain
up to Maolmuaidh in the year 976 (Fm. 974).
Mathghamhain, S. of Dubhghall, s. of Amhlaoibh, sl. by Cathal, s. of
Domhnall, anno 1012 Fm.
Mathghamhain, s. of Toirrdhealbhach, an. of Brian Boraimhe.
Mathghamhain O Riagain, k. of Breagha.
Maynooth, Co. Kild., v. Magh Luadhat.
Maximus, Maximus II., Roman Emperor.
Meadhbh, da. of Eochaidh Feidhlioch; w. of Tinne, s. of Connraidh, k.
C.; sovereign of Connaught for 10 years after Tinne's death; marries
Oilill Mor.; the seven Maines, ss. of Oilill and Meadhbh; buried in
Cruachain; al. Meadhbh Chruachan.
Meadhbh, da. of Innreachtach (k. C.) and m. of Niall Caille (k. Ire.)
Meadhbh Leithdhearg, w. of Art Aoinfhear; Raith Meadhbha named from,
ib.
Meadhon Mumhan, Mid Munster.
Meadhraidhe, Maaree, a peninsula co-extensive with the par. of
Ballynacourty jutting into Galway Bay five miles south of town of
Galway; a limit of various ancient divisions of Ire.; v. Ath Cliath
Meadhraidhe.
Meanman, s. of Eisidh, leads Clann Choilein to Cluain Tarbh.
Meann, a 'rioghdhamh.'
Mearan, a strong man of the followers of Partholan.
Meath, v. Midhe.
Mediterranean Sea, v. Muir Larthalmhan.
Meelick, Co. Gal., v. Milioc Ui Mhadagain.
Meidhe, a slave who came with the sons of Milidh.
Meidhe, 'neck,' of each province joined to Meath.
Meilge Molbhthach, s. of Cobhthach Caol mBreagh, k. Ire. seven years;
sl. by Mogh Corb, anno 4694 Fm.
Meisceadhra, a Leinster champion, sl. by Conall Cearnach.
Meisin Corb, of the race of Labhraidh Loingseach, an. of St.
Caoimhghin of Gleann da Loch.
Mellifont, Abbey of in Co. Louth, built by Domhnall O Cearbhaill, k.
of Oirghialla, anno 1142.
Merlin, the Welsh bard and enchanter, of Arthurian legend; brought
stones from Sliabh gClaire in Ire. to build Stone Henge as a monument
to 480 British nobles who were sl. by the Saxons.
Mianach, f. of a St. Brighid.
Mianach, s. of Lughaidh, s. of Aonghus Fionn.
Middlethird, bar. of, Co. Tipp.; v. Trian Meadhonach.
Midhe, a noble female saint of the race of Fiachaidh Suighdhe.
Midhe, a slave who came with the ss. of Milidh to Ire.
Midhe, Meath, roughly the country between the Shannon and the sea
between Dublin and Drogheda. The exact boundaries of the ancient
province, though given in elaborate detail in K., are now rather
difficult to fix in some particulars. K.'s account closely corresponds
to a tract in MS. D. IV. 2, R.I.A., of which another version is given
in Rawlinson B. 512. This tract has been edited by Fr. P. Walsh in
Archivium Hibernicum, 1912. It may be that D. IV. 2 contains this
tract in its original form. It certainly is clearer than K. in some
boundary items. It is, moreover, highly probable that this very MS. D.
IV. 2 was used by K., for besides the present tract, the story of the
crosans is verbally identical in K. (v. archaic version of the prose
part), and in D. IV. 2; Lloyd, G. J.. Nos. 126, 139, makes an
excellent effort to fix the boundaries of Meath from the K. text.
Midhe, s. of Bratha, s. of Deaghfhatha, province of Midhe (Meath)
named from.
Midhir, s. of the Daghdha; he is celebrated in Irish stories as Midhir
of Bri Leith (a hill near Ardagh in Co. Longford); v. O'D.. Hy Fiach,
29.
Mileadhach, on the brink of the Bearbha (Barrow) at Cumar na dtri
nUisce, i.e., where the Suir, Nore and Barrow meet near Waterford; a
limit of the sees of Lis Mor and Cill Chainnigh; a limit of the see of
Fearna
Milidh (Mileadh indec. in I.; Milidh, nom., Mileadh, g. in II.); al.
Milidh Easpainne (Milidh of Spain), al. Golamh, Galamh; s. of Bile, s.
of Breoghan.
Milioc Ui Mhadagain, 'Meelick Ui Madden,' now Meelick, on the Shannon,
21/2 miles south-east of Eyrecourt, in bar. of Longford and Co. of Gal.
Moanmore, Co. Tipp., v. Moin Mhor.
Mobhi, al. Bearchan of the Prophecy, d. anno 544 Fm.
Mochuda, al. Carrthach, St.; of race of Ciar, s. of Fearghus; now
usually called St. Carthage of Lismore.
Mochua, St , brother of Guaire Aidhne; a contemporary of Columcille;
al. Mac Duach, story of his pet animals.
Mochua, St., of race of Oilill, s. of Cathaoir Mor, of
Teach Mochua in Laoighis (Timahoe in Queen's Co.).
Moctaeus, Mochta, disciple of Patrick, d. anno 534 Fm.
Modhairn, al. Modharnaigh (both nom. plur., 1st, al. nom. and
dat. sing. fern.); bar of Cremourne, Co. Mon.; territory in Ulster
wrested from the Ultonians by the Collas.
Modhna, f. of Eibhear Mor (k. of Castile)
Modhornaigh, al. Modharnaigh, tribe sprung from the Collas (prop. from
Colla Meann); v. Modhairn.
Mo Feibhis, al. Mogh F., s. of Eochaidh Faobharghlas.
Mogh Airt, s. of Criomhthann Coscrach.
Mogh Corb, f. of Cu Corb (k. L.).
Mogh Corb, s. of Cobhthach Caomh, k. Ire. seven years.
Mogh Corb, s. of Conchubhar Abhradhruadh (k. Ire.)
Mogh Corb, s. of Cormac Cas; an. of Brian Boraimhe.
Mogh Corb, s. of Oilill Olom, sl. in bt. of Magh Muchruimhe, anno 195
Fm.
Mogh Lamha, s. of Lughaidh Allathach, and f. of Conaire (k. Ire.).
Mogh Nuadhat, 'the slave of Nuadha,' al. Eoghan Mor (q,v.), s. of
Feidhlimidh Reachtmhar and brother of Conn Ceadchathach; v. Coir
Anmann.
Moghorn, r. Mourne, in bar. of Strabane, Co. Tyrone.
Mogh Ruith, a druid of Ciarraidhe Luachra, helped by magic the k. of M.
to defeat Cormac, s. of Art.
Moicheallog, St , of Cill Moicheallog (Kilmallock, Co. Limerick), of
the race of Conaire, s. of Eidirsceol.
Moichtighearn, II. 190; v. Ceannfaolaidh; C. Ua Moichtighearn, lord of
Cashel, d. after long illness, Fm. anno 870, Au. anno 871.
Moin Doire, in Alba; bt. of, in which Clanna Neill of the North def.
the Cruithnigh; this bt. is given as in Moin Doire Lothair in Au.
(anno 562) and Fm. (anno 557); in Adamnan's Life of Colomba it is Moin
Mor, which Reeves identifies as Moneymore tl. in par. of Derrylorn, Co.
Derry, as both names seem to echo the word; this identification,
however, is doubtful; v. Fm. I. 198.
Moin Eile, a moor beside Grian Airbh, i.e., Greene Hill, bar. of
Cranagh, Co. Kilk.
Moingfhionn, 'Fairlocks,' da. of Fearadhach Fionn (k. of Alba), and w.
of Corc.
Moingfhionn, 'Fairlocks,' da. of Fiodhach, and w. of Eochaidh
Muighmheadhoin; poisons Criomhthann (k. Ire.); d. of poison.
Moin Mhor, 'Great Bog,' prob. Moanmore, par. of Emly, bar. of
Clanwilliam, Co. Tip.; Munstermen under Toirrdhealbhach O Briain def.
by Dal gCais in bt. of, anno 1151 Fm.
Moireis, Myler, Myler Marsh or Marisco.
Moireis, Seathfruidh, Geoffrey Marsh or Marisco.
Moiriath, da. of Scoiriath (k. of Corca Duibhne, al. Feara More).
Moirmhinn, f. of Rudhruighe (k. of Britain).
Moirrioghan, Morrigan, goddess of the T. D. D..
Molaga, Black Book of Molaga, one of the chief books of the Seanchus
of Ire.; quoted as an authority for the judgment of Diarmaid (k. Ire.)
against Columcille; now unknown.
Molaise, St , imposed penance of exile on Columcille. It is uncertain
whether this Molaise is of Inis Muireadhaigh, Inishmurry or of
Daimhinis, Devenish; the feast of the Inis Muireadhaigh saint occurs
on August 12th, while that of Molaise of Daimhinis occurs on September
12th; Molaise is Latinised Lasreanus; the saint of Daimhinis d. anno
571 Au; he was s. of Nadfraoch.
Molaise, St., of Leithghlinn, of race of Conall Gulban.
Moling, al. Moling Luachra, St., al. Dairchill d. anno 696 Fm., anno
697 Au.
Moling, Yellow Book of, one of the chief books of the Seanchus of Ire;
now unknown.
Mollaidh, s. of Eoghain, s. of Durrthacht.
Molua, s. of Sineall, St.; Molua lived and blessed at Cluain Fearta
Molua, Clonfertmulloe, al. Kyle, in bar. of Upper Ossory; Molua is
also named Lughaidh Mac hUi Oiche, in Fm. which records his death anno
605 (anno 608 Au).
Moman, f. of a St. Brighid.
Monach, a chief of the Athachthuaith.
Moncha, w. of Eoghan Mor (s. of Oilill Olom), and m. of Fiachaidh
Muilleathan.
Mondaca, beside the river-mouth of Verindo in Biscay, sons of Milidh
said by some to have come to Ire. From there.
Monmouth, Geoffrey of, v. Monomotensis.
Monomotensis, Geoffrey of Monmouth (c. 1100-1154) author of 'Historia
Regum Britanniae'.
Montgomery, Scottish family name.
Monuidhir, sl. Tinne, s. of Connraidh, at Tara.
Moors, the, v. Muraigh.
Mor, da. of Aodh, s. of Eochaidh, and w. of Sitric, in love with
Ceallachan Caisil; informed Ceallachan of a plot against him.
Mor, da. of Donnchadh (s. of Ceallach), queen of Ire., d. anno 985 Fm.
Mor, da. of Giolla Brighde O Maolmuaidh and m. of Toirrdhealbhach O
Briain.
Morann, s. of Maon, a just judge who possessed the 'Collar of
Morann,'; the second person who believed before Patrick's coming; a
Pagan author of the Seanchus.
Morann Mhanannach, da. of Ir, son of Uisneach, and m. of Curaoi, s. of
Daire.
Morbha, a slave who came with the sons of Milidh to Ire.
Morc, s. of Deileadh, a Fear Bolg, lived in Toirinis.
Morett, Queen's Co., v. Magh Reichead.
Morgallion, bar. of, Co. Meath, v. Gaileanga.
Morias, a T. D. D. sage, I. 204, 210.
Morison, Fines, Fynes Moryson (1566-1630), traveller, author of "An
Itinerary " in three parts, the first part of which describes his
travels in Scotland, Ireland and the Continent of Europe, the 2nd part
deals with the rising of O'Neill against Elizabeth; writes jeeringly
on Ire.; not to be regarded as a true historian.
Morna, f. of Garaidh (from whom Gleann Garaidh is named)
Moses, v. Maoise.
Mothla, s. of Domhnall, k. of Deise Mumhan, sl. at Cluain Tarbh
Mothlachan, f. of Maoilbrighde (slayer of Raghallach, k. C.
Mourne Mountains, v. Beanna Boirche.
Mourne, r., v. Moghorn.
Movilla, Co. Down, v. Magh Bile.
Mowbri, Scottish family name.
Moy, r., v. Muaidh.
Moy, the, district near Armagh, v. Magh Macha.
Moygoish, bar. of, Co. West., v. Ui Mac Uais Breagh.
Moylen, King's Co., v. Magh Leana.
Moylinny, deanery of, Co. Antrim, v. Magh Line.
Moylurg, Co. Ros., v. Magh Luirg.
Moyra, Co. Down, v. Magh Rath.
Moytura, v. Magh Tuireadh.
Muaidh, r. Moy, in the counties of Sligo and Mayo on which is the town
of Ballina; it flows into Killalla Bay.
Muckno, par. near Castleblayney, Co. Mon. v. Magh Cnoghbha.
Muchromha, bt. of, v. Magh Mucruimhe.
Mughrainn, da. of Cucharainn, m. of Aodh Slaine.
Mughron, s. of Cinneide, k. of the Three Comanns, sl. at bt. of Ceann
Fuaid,anno 915 Fm.
Mughroth, sl. in bt. of Loch Lein (in which Conmhaol def. dss. of
Eibhear).
Muicinis, eighth name of Ire.
Muicneachan, strong man of Partholon's party.
Muimhne, s. of Eireamhon. jk. Ire. three years; a leader in the
Milesian expedition to Ire.; d. in Magh Cruachan, anno 3519 Fm.
Muimhnigh, npl.; ns. and gpl., Muimhneach; Munstermen.
Muineamhon, s. of Cas Clothach, k. Ire. five years; d. of plague at
Magh Aidhne, anno 3872 Fm.
Muine Brogain, 'Brogan's Brake' in Bregia (O'Clery's Leabhar Gabhala,
217); Lochlonnaigh fight Conghalach (k. Ire ) in bt. of, anno 948 Fm.
Muinntear Bhrislein, the O Breslins, brehons for Ulster.
Muinntear Dhalaigh, the O'Dalys, ollamhs in poetry to Mac Carrthaigh
(Mac Carthy).
Muinntear Dhuibhidhir, the O Dwyers of the race of Cairbre
Cluitheachar.
Muinntear Dhuinnin, O'Duinnins, anglice O'Dinneen or Dinneen, ollamhs
in seanchas to Mac Carrthaigh (Mac Carthy)
Muinntear Flannchuidhe, the Clancys, brehons to O Briain.
Muinntear Riain, the O Ryans.
Muinntear Ruairc, the O Rourkes, marshals of the host to Mac
Carrthaigh (Mac Carthy).
Muir Chaisp, the Caspian Sea.
Muircheartach, s. of Murchadh, k. L.
Muircheartach, s. of Niall Glundubh.
Muircheartach, s. of Niall, s. of Lochlann, ok. Ire. eighteen years;
Council of Ceanannus held in the seventh year of reign of (anno 1152);
sl. by the men of Fearnmhagh and by O Briuin; he is also called Ua
Lochlainn and Muircheartach Ua Lochloinn; v. Fm. sub annis 1139, 1154,
1164.
Muircheartach, s. of Toirrdhealbhach O Briain, ok. Ire. twenty years.
Muircheartach Mac an Arnalaidh, 'M., s. of Arnal.'
Muircheartach Mor Mac Earca (al. M., s. of Earc; Earc, g. Earca, da.
of Lodharn, k. of Alba, was m. of Muircheartach), s. of Muireadhach, s.
of Eoghan, s. of Niall Naoighiallach, k. Ire. twenty-four years; a
contemporary of King Arthur; may be the Gillamar (k. Ire.) of certain
English authors.
Muircheartach O Conghalaigh (O' Connolly), pl. Domhnach Padraig, anno
994 Fm., 995 Au.
Muire, Mary, Abbey of, in Dublin founded by Maoilseachlainn, anno 1039.
Muire, Mary, church of, in Limerick, principal church of see of
Luimneach.
Muire, da. of Cionaoth (k. of Alba), and m. of Conghalach (k. Ire.)
Muireadhach, al. Colla fo Chri, s. of Eochaidh Doimhlean.
Muireadhach, race of, of Connaught.
Muireadhach, f. of Faolan (k. L.)
Muireadhach, f. of Flaithbheartach (chief of the Fochla)
Muireadhach, f. of Innreachtach (k. C.)
Muireadhach, f. of Oilill (k. L.)
Muireadhach, s. of Aonghus, gf. of Brandubh (k. L.).
Muireadhach, s. of Bran, gets half Munster from Aodh Oirndighe (k.
Ire.).
Muireadhach, s. of Carrthann, an. of St. Maodhog of Fearna.
Muireadhach, s. of Eochaidh, k. U.
Muireadhach, s. of Eoghan, s. of Niall Naoighiallach, k. U.
Muireadhach, s. of Fiachaidh Fionnamhnas, of the race of Ir.
Muireadhach, s. of Ruaraidh, gets half Leinster from Aodh Oirndighe (k.
Ire.)
Muireadhach Bolgrach, s. of Simeon Breac, k. Ire. four years; sl. by
Eanna Dearg, anno 4307 Fm. which gives him only a month of
sovereignty.)
Muireadhach Claon, 'M. the Perverse,' f. of Mac Beathaidh (k. of
Ciarraidhe .Luachra.)
Muireadhach Mal, 'M. the Chief,' s. of Eoghan Sreibh.
Muireadhach Mor, al. Mormhaor Marr (prop. Mairr), i.e.. great steward
of Mar, of Alba. sl. in bt. of Cluain Tarbh.
Muireadhach Muilleathan, 'M. Flathead,' k. C., d., anno 700 Fm., which
calls him M. of Magh Aoi)
Muireadhach Muindearg, 'M. Redneck,' k. U. twelve years, d. anno 479
Fm.
Muireadhach Tireach, 'M. the Landed,' s. of Fiachaidh Sraibhthine, k.
Ire. thirty-three years; sl. by Caolbhaidh, s. of Cronn Badhraoi, anno
356 Fm.
Muireann, banchomhorba of St. Brighid, i.e., abbess of the Convent of
Kildare.
Muireann, da. of Ceallach, and m. of Flaithbheartach (k. Ire.)
Muireann, da. of Fiachaidh (k. of Cineal Eoghain) and w. of
Muireadhach Tireach.
Muireann, w. of Raghallach (k. C.)
Muireigen, f. of Cearrbhall (k. L.)
Muireigen, f. of Domhnall.
Muireigen, f. of Maolmordha (k. of Iarthar Lithfe).
Muirgheas, f. of Maolduin (sl. anno 837 Fm.)
Muiris Mac Gearailt, v. Mac Gearailt, Muiris.
Muir Larthalmhan, Mediterranean Sea, the r. Tanais (Don) flows into,
according to K. [The Don flowing into the Sea of Azov does not flow
into the Mediterranean Sea, as the term is now understood, but can be
reached from that sea by water.] K., who is antiquated in his
geography, even for the seventeenth century, makes the Mediterranean
Sea much longer than we understand the term; K.'s Torrian Sea may be
said to correspond practically to the modern Mediterranean.
Muirn Mhunchaomh, 'M. Fairneck,' da. of Tadhg, s. of Nuadha, and m. of
Fionn, s. of Cumhall.
Muir Phontic, the Euxine or Black Sea.
Muir Ruaidh, an Mh. R., the Red Sea.
Muirtheimhne, s. of Breoghan, comes to Ire. with sons of Milidh,
Muirtheimhne, v. Magh Muirtheimhne; bt. of Fothart (Faughart
near Dundalk) in.
Muir Thracia, the Thracian Sea, the sea bordering on Thrace.
Muir Torrian, the Torrian Sea, i.e., the Tyrhenian Sea, al. called
Mare Inferum; it is that part of the Mediterranean off the coast of
Etruria and stands looselv in K. for the Mediterranean.
Mulkern, r., v. Maoilchearn.
Mullach Inneona, 'Mount Anvil,' in Magh Feimhear tl. of Mullaghnoney,
near Clonmel, Co. Tipp.;K.'s derivation of the name is highly
improbable.
Mullach Maistean, Mullaghmast, a hill in Co. Kild. 5 miles northeast
of Athy; Cu Chorb drives the Munstermen from to the Barrow; the Dal
gCais and the race of Fiachaidh Muilleathan separate at, returning
from Cluain Tarbh.
Mullaghmast, Co. Kild., v. Mullach Maistean.
Mullaghnoney, Co. Tipp., v. Mullach Inneona.
Mumha, g. Mumhan, d. Mumhain, Munster, divided into two provinces,
both being counted in the five provinces of Ire., namely, prov. of
Eochaidh Abhradhruadh and prov. of Curaoi, s. of Daire; also divided
into five Munsters, Tuadhmhumha, North Munster or Thomond; Urmhumha,
East Munster or Ormond; Meadhon Mumhan, or Middle Munster.
Mungairid, Mungret Abbey, 3 miles south-west of city of Limerick.
Mungret, Co. Limer., v. Mungairid.
Munna, al. for Fionntan, St.; he was ab. of Teach Munna (Taghmon, Co.
Wexford).
Munster, v. Mumha.
Munster, West. v. Iarmhumha.
Munstermen, v. Muimhnigh.
Muraigh, the Moors.
Murasc, buried in Cruachain; she was da. of Ughaine Mor, k. Ire,; al.
Muireasc.
Murbholg, in Dal Riada or the Ruta, Murloch Bay, midway between Tor
Point and Fair Head, Co. Antrim; bt. of between the Picts and Dal
Riada, anno 725 Fm.
Murchadh, f. of Bran Beag (half-k. of Leinster).
Murchadh, f. of Maolmordha (k. L.); f. of Gormflaith (w. of Brian
Boraimhe)
Murchadh, f. of Muircheartach (k. L.)
Murchadh, f. of Tadhg O Ceallaigh (k. of Ui Maine).
Murchadh, s. of Aodh, k. C., d. anno 839 Fm.
Murchadh, s. of Bran, k. L., def. Fearghal (k. Ire.) in bt. of Almhuin.
Murchadh, s. of Brian Boraimhe; sl. in the bt. of Cluain Tarbh.
Murchadh, s. of Cochlann (Mac Cochlainn) said by Hanmer to have been
king of Ire. anno 1166.
Murchadh, s. of Diarmaid. s. of Airmideach Caoch, of the race of
Eireamhon.
Murchadh, s. of Flann, k. L.
Murchadh, s. of Flann, s. of Maolseachlainn; k. of Meath and f. of
Dearbhforgaill (w. of Tighearnan O Ruairc)
Murchadh, s. of Maonach, and gf. of Beibhionn (m. of Brian Boraimhe).
Murias, a city of Lochloinn (al. Norway), occupied by the T. D. D.
Murloch Bay, Co. Antr., v. Murbholg and Port Murbhoilg.
Murthola (al. Murthola Breana, al. Loch Cuain), Strangford Lough.
Muscraidhe, a tribe sprung from Conaire, s. of Mogh Lamha (k. Ire.);
sprung and named from Cairbre Musc, s. of Conaire; territories of
included barr. of East and West Muskerry, Co. Cork, Upper and Lower
Ormond and Clanwilliam, Co. Tipp.
Muscraidhe, barr. of East and West Muskerry, Co. Cork; r. Laoi. (Lee)
flows through.
Muscraidhe Mic Diarmada, bar. of West Muskerry, Co. Cork, under the
protection of St. Gobnuid.
Muscraidhe Tire, a name for the two Ormonds (Upper and Lower Ormond).
Muskerry, Co. Cork, v. Muscraidhe.
Muskerry West, bar. of, v. Muscraidhe Mic Diarmada.
Myler Moireis, v. Moireis, Myler.
Myra Park, Co. Clare, v. Magh Adhar and Adhar.

N.
Naas, Co. Kild., v. Nas and Nas Laighean.
Nadfraoch, f. of Aonghus (k. M.); v. Natfraoch.
Nahsson, Rabbi, prob. Nahshon Ben Zadok, head of the academy of Aura
from 874 to 882. His study of the Jewish Calender is contained in
Iggul (Cycle) di R.. Nahshon, printed anno 1521; computes the time
between Adam and Christ as 3740 years.
Namha, s. of Eochaidh Garbh, of the T. D. D., I. 218.
Naoi, Noah or Noe; v. Noe.
Naoi, f. of Dioma (k. L.)
Naoimhfhios, 'sacred knowledge,' a name given to the 'Seanchus Mor' on
account of the sacred learning of its nine authors.
Naoimhsheanchus, 'hagiology,' of Irish saints.
Naoise, s. of Uisneach, Deirdre enamoured of.
Nar, 'ashamed,' a soubriquet of Criomhthann Nia Nar (k. Ire.)
Nar, s. of Breoghan, I. 40; comes to Ire. with the sons of Milidh.
Nar, s. of Eochaidh Feidhlioch, and one of the three Finneamhnas.
Nar Thuathchuach, da. of Loch, s. of Daire, and m. of Fearadhach Fionn
Feachtnach (k. Ire.)
Nas, Naas, Co. Kild., where the kk. of Leinster resided down to the
tenth century; v. Nas Laighean.
Nasadh, 'commemoration,' of Taillte at Fair of Taillte; v. Lughnasa.
Nasc Niadh, 'champion's chain'; k. of Tara under geasa to wear; Nia
Naisc, 'champion of the chain,' corresponds to 'Miles Torquatus'
(q.v.)
Nas Laighean, Naas in Leinster, Naas, Co. Kildare, a limit of the sees
of Cill Dara and Gleann da Loch.
Natfraoch, al. Nadfraoch, s. of Corc, and f. of Aonghus (k. M.)
Nathi, s. of Criomhthann, s. of Eanna Cinnsealach, an. of Muinntear
Riain (the O Ryans.)
Nathi, s. of Garrchon, lord of Lower Leinster round Innbhear Deaghaidh
(q.v.)
Nauclerus, Ioannes, author of a work entitled "Chronica succinctim
comprehendentia res memorabiles saeculorum omnium ac gentium ab initio
mundi usque ad annum Christi nati 1500, etc.," published at Cologne in
1544; a later edition brought the chronicle down to 1564.
Navan Fort, near Armagh; v. Eamhain Mhacha.
Neachtain, one of the Cruithnigh who fought at Ard Leamhnachta.
Neachtain, f. of Eanna (who sl. Aonghus Olmucaidh).
Neachtain, k. of Alba, expels a community of monks, sending them
across Druim Breatan (i.e., the mountain chain dividing
Perthshire and Argyll, and terminating in the Grampians); v. Druim
Breatan.
Neachtain, s. of Namha, of the T. D. D.
Neama, f. of Iar.
Neamhruadh, Nimrod.
Neanul, Neanual, eldest s. of Feinius Farsaidh, ruler of Scythia.
Neanul, s. of Eibric Glas, s. of Eibhear Gluinfhionn.
Neaptuin, Neptune, the god of the sea.
Neara, s. of Fionncholl, a pagan author of the Seanchus Mor.
Neasa, da. of Eochaidh Salbhuidhe of Connaught, and m. of Conchubhar
Mac Neasa; also v. references under Conchubhar, s. of Neasa. In Ll.
106 the form is Ness.
Neasan, St., 'the leper,' Patron of Mungairid (Mungret), d. nno 551
Fm., 561 Ann. Clonmac.; the church of Mungairid called Cathair
Dheochain Neasain, the seat or city of Neasan the Deacon.
Ned, s. of Iondaoi, of the T. D. D., v. Oileach Neid.
Neidhe, s. of Adhna, a pagan author of the Seanchus Mor.
Neimheadh, al. Neimhidh, s. of Agnoman, s. of Pamp., comes to Ire; v.
Clann Neimheadh.
Neimhidh (al. Neimheadh), s. of Sraibhgheann.
Neimhtheann, Mount Nephin, par. of Addergoole, bar. of Tirawley, Co.
Mayo. a limit of see of Conga.
Nel, f. of Ciocal (a supposed invader of Ire. before Partholon).
Nemptor, Patrick born in.
Nemroth, Nimrod, building of tower of interfered with by the Confusion
of Tongues; v. Neamhruadh.
Nennius (fl. 796), a Welsh writer, author of 'Historia Britonum,'
History of the Britons'; quoted on Partholon from Saltair of Cashel;
quoted from Camden on the Scythian invasion of Ire; quoted from Speed
on the oppression of the Britons by the Picts and Scots; quoted on
Patrick's work.
Neomann, f. of Reafloir.
Nephin, Mount, Co. Mayo, v. Neimhtheann.
Neptalem, Nephtalem, battle-emblem of tribe of.
Newburgh, Newbury, William of, v. Nubrigensis.
New Ross, Co. Wex., v. Ros Mic Triuin.
Newry, Co. Down, v. Iobhar Cinn Tragha.
Nia Corb, s. of Cu Chorb, and an. of Cathaoir Mor.
Nia Naisc, 'champion of the chain,' a champion wearing a chain
round his neck, corresponds to 'Miles Torquatus.'
Nia Seaghamain, s. of Adhamair Foltchaoin, k. Ire. seven years; sl. by
Eanna Aighneach, anno 4887 Fm.
Niall, f. of Fiachaidh (k. of South Eile)
Niall, f. of Muircheartach (captured by Lochlonnaigh at Oileach Neid.)
Niall, f. of Muircheartach (ok. Ire.)
Niall, s. of Cearnach Sotal.
Niall, s. of Giollan, lived 30 years without food or drink; d. anno
854 Fm. which also records his death anno 858; in the latter passage
it states that he suffered an oppressive sickness for 24 years. In Au.
anno 860 he suffers paralysis for 24 years, and has "many visions true
and false "
Niall Caille, s. of Aodh Oirndighe, k. Ire. fifteen years.
Niall Frasach, s. of Fearghal, k. Ire. four years; d. in I Columcille;
he resigned his throne anno 765, and d. eight years afterwards, Fm.
Niall Glundubh, 'Niall Blackknee,' s. of Aodh Finnliath, k. Ire.,
three years; sl. in bt. of Ath Cliath by the Lochlonnaigh, anno 917 Fm.
Niall Naoighiallach, 'Niall of the nine hostages,' s. of Eochaidh
Muighmheadhoin, k. Ire. 27 years; sl. by Eochaidh (k. L.) at river
Loire, anno 405 Fm.
Niall Ua Cuinn, sl at Cluain Tarbh, II. 274.
Nil, r. Nile.
Nin, al. Nion, s. of Bel, comes to Ire. after the Deluge; v. Nion, s.
of Bel.
Ninnidh, f. of Baodan (k. Ire.)
Ninnidh, s. of Eochaidh, an. of St. Fionnbharr.
Nion, s. of Bel, s. of Nimrod, monarch of the world in time of Feinius.
Nionnsionnaigh, the Nugents, a family who came to Ire. at the
beginning of the Norman Invasion.
Nionuall, f. of Sabhall.
Niul, s. of Feinius Farsaidh; second or tanist s. of F. F.
Noe, s. of Lamech; v. Naoi.
Nohoval, v. Uachongmhail.
Nore, r., v. Feoir.
Normandie, Normandy, a province of old France bordering on the English
Channel, and opposite to England; at the beginning of the fifth
century it corresponded to Provincia Lugdunensis Secunda of Roman
Geography. It was then occupied by Gaulish tribes, the chief town
being Civitas Rotomagensium or Rouen; in 911 the Normans or Northmen
after many hostile incursions, settled down in this territory and gave
it the name of Normandy. In 1066, William, Duke of Normandy, was
crowned k. of England. From 1106 to 1204 Normandy was in unbroken
union with England. The old duchy corresponds roughly to the
departments of Seine Inferieure, Eure, Calvados, Mance, and Orne. In
K.'s text lucht na Normandie and similar expressions mean the Northmen,
Norsemen, Scandanavians or Lochlonnaigh in general; while when
treating of the invasion of Ire. under Henry I. he uses Normandie in
its strict sense, that duchy being then united to the English crown;
the clergy of the Irish ports, he tells us in two passages, who were
themselves a remnant of the Lochlonnaigh, chose to be under the
archbishop of Canterbury, as England was then ruled by the descendants
of the dukes of Normandy in which their own race had settled a couple
of centuries previously.
Normani, Northmen, Norsemen, etc., the Lochlonnaigh so named.
Northmen, v. Normani and Lochlonnaigh.
Northumbri, the Northumbrians.
Noruegia, Norway, al. Crioch Lochlonn, Fionnlochlonnaigh.
Norwegians, Danes, etc., v. Lochlonnaigh, Fionnlochlonnaigh and
Dubhlochlonnaigh.
Nuadha, Dealbhna of; v. Dealbhna.
Nuadha, s. of Neanual, s. of Eibric.
Nuadha Airgeadlamh, 'Nuadha Silverhand,' s. of Euchtach, k. Ire.
thirty years; k. or chief of the T. D. D., in reign of Eochaidh, s. of
Earc.
Nuadha Airgtheach, 'Nuadha the Plunderer,' s. of Luchtaire, of race of
Ioth.
Nuadha Deaglaimh, 'Nuadha Goodhand,' s. of Eochaidh Faobharghlas.
Nuadha Fionn Fail, s. of Giallchaidh, k. Ire. twenty or sixty years;
sl. by Breisrigh, s. of Art Imleach, anno 4238 Fm.
Nuadha Fallon, s. of Ealloit.
Nua-Ghaill, np., 'the modern Galls or foreigners,' a term applied by K.
to the modern (in K.'s time) English, especially to those writers who
treated of Ireland or the Irish; the list includes Cambrensis, Spenser,
Stanihurst, Hanmer, Camden, Barclay, Moryson, Davies, Campion. Of
these Cambrensis is, of course, not modern: the greater portion of the
Dionbhrollach is devoted to the work of refuting them; and there are
occasional thrusts at them in the body of the history; he speaks of
himself as a ds.of the Sean-Ghaill, or 'old Galls or foreigners.'.
Nuadha Neacht, k. L., an. of Fionn, s. of Cumhall; he was called
Neacht from nix snow, or from nox night according to 'Coir Anmann.'
Nuadha Neacht, s. of Seadna Siothbhac, k. Ire. half a year; s1. by
Conaire, s. of Eidirsceol, anno 5090 Fm.
Nuadh-Rabbidhe, na, the new Rabbis, give 3760 years as the time
between Adam and Christ.
Nubrigensis, William of Newburgh (1136-1198), an Augustinian Canon of
Newburgh in Yorkshire and author of, 'Historia Rerum Anglicarum'
edited by Howlett in the Rolls Series; quoted as saying 'Ireland never
lay under foreign domination.'.
Nugents, the, v. Nionnsionnaigh.

O.
O hAgain, O Hagan, one of the inaugurators of O Neill.
O Ainmire, Maoiliosa, abp. of Cashel; at Council of Raith Breasail; (a
bp. of Port Lairge of the same name d. after his eighty-eighth year,
anno 1135; as the Council of Raith Breasail took place anno 1110, the
two bps. are possibly identical).
O hAnnluain, O Hanlon, sprung from Colla da Chrioch.
O hArdmhaoil, Giolla an Choimdheadh, vicar to the bp. of Imleach at
Council of Ceanannus.
O Baire of Ara in Rinn Muinntire Baire, that is in the parish of
Kilcroghane, in Carbery, Co. Cork.
O Banain, O Banan, Maolpadraig, bp. of Dal nAruidhe, at Council of
Ceanannus; d. anno 1174 Fm.
O Banan, v. O. Banain.
O Brain, O Byrne, inaugurated on Dun Caillighe Beirre.
O Breslins, the, v. Muinntear Bhrislein.
O Briain, O Brien, chief of Thomond, inaugurated at Magh Adhar.
O Briain (O Brien) Conchubhar, gets northern half of Munster.
O Briain, O Brien, Domhnall, k. of Luimneach, i.e., k. of Thomond.
O Briain, O Brien, Domhnall, s. of Tadhg; rules the Isles tyrannically
for three years and is deposed.
O Briain, O Brien, Muircheartach, s. of Toirrdhealbhach, ok. Ire.
twenty years.
O Briain, O Brien, Tadhg, is given half of Munster (i.e., Thomond) by
Toirrdhealbhach O Conchubhair (ok. Ire.), II. 312.
O Briain, Toirrdhealbhach, Torlogh O Brien, k. M.
O Briain, Toirrdhealbhach, Torlogh O Brien, s. of Tadhg, s. of Brian
Boraimhe; ok. Ire. twelve years.
O Bric, O Brick, Brick, occupied Deise Thuaisceirt.
O Brien, v. O Briain and Ua Briain.
O Briens of Aherlow, the, v. Clann Bhriain Eatharlach.
O Broin, al. O Brain, O Byrne, sprung from Fiachaidh Aiceadha, s. of
Cathaoir Mor.
O Byrne, v. O Brain and O Broin.
O Byrnes, the, v. Siol mBrain and Branaigh.
O Caolluidhe (O Kealy), Donghal, bp. of Leithghlinn, at Council of
Ceanannus.
O Carroll, v. O Cearbhaill, and Ua Cearbhaill.
O Carrolls, the, v. Siol Cearbhaill.
O Casey, v. O Cathasaigh.
O Cathain, .O Kane, one of the inaugurators of O Neill.
O Cathasaigh, O Casey, sprung from Cian, third son of Oilill Olom.
O Cearbhaill, O Carroll, sprung from Cian, third son of Oilill Olom.
O Cearbhaill, O Carroll, Domhnall, k. of Oirghialla, built abbey of
Mellifont.
Ocha, near Tara, in Co. Meath, bt. of, in which Oilill Molt (k. Ire.)
was sl., anno 478 Fm., anno 482 or 483.
O Cionga, Fionn, v. Fionn O Cionga.
O Cobhthaigh, O Coffey, Muireadhach, bp. of Cineal Eoghain, at Council
of Ceanannus.
O Cobhthaigh, O Coffey, sprung from Lughaidh, s. of Ioth.
O Conairce, O Conarchy, Giolla Criost, Gilchrist (Latinised
Christianus) O Conairce, bp. of Lios Mor, papal legate and head of the
Irish monks at Council of Ceanannus; O Conaire in Trans.
O Conchubhair, Cathal, v. Cathal O Conchubhair.
O Conchubhair, Cian, v. Cian O Conchubhair.
O Conchubhair, Ciannachta, O Connor of Ciannachta (Ghlinne Geimhean),
sprung from Cian, third son of Oilill Olom; (or/also sprung from
Cormac Gaileang.)
O Conchubhair Ciarraidhe, O Connor Kerry, sprung from Ciar, s. of
Fearghus.
O Conchubhair Failghe, O Connor Faly; sprung from Labhraidh
Loingseach; (or/also sprung from Rossa Failgheach, s. of Cathaoir
Mor.)
O Conchubhair, Ruaidhri, Rory or Roderick O Connor, s. of
Toirrdhealbhach O C., ok. Ire. (last king of I.)
O Conchubhair, Toirrdhealbhach, Torlogh O'Connor, s. of Ruaidhri, ok.
Ire. twenty years, d. anno 1156 Fm.; called Mor or Great.
O Connachtaigh, O'Connaughty, Tuathal, bp. of Ui Briuin (corresponds
to present see of Kilmore), at Council of Ceanannus; d. anno 1179, Fm.
O Connachtain, Maoiliosa, bp. of East Connaught, i.e., bp. of Siol
Muireadhaigh or Elphin, at Council of Ceanannus; d., 1174, Fm.
O Connaughty, v. O Connachtaigh.
O Connolly, Muircheartach, v. Muircheartach O Conghalaigh.
O Connor, v. O Conchubhair.
O Connors, of Connaught, the, v. Siol Conchubhair.
O Connor Faly, v. O Conchubhair Failghe.
O Connor Kerry, v. O Conchubhair Ciarraidhe.
O Corain, Giolla an Choimhde, a poet of the twelfth century.
O Cuirnin, of Alba, sprung from Lughaidh, s. of Ioth.
O Dalys, the, v. Muinntear Dhalaigh.
Oday, Deanery of, Co. Wes., v. Ui Dheaghaidh.
O Dempsey, v. O Diomasaigh.
O Deoradhain, O Doran, brehon to Mac Murchadha.
Odhbha, this was a name of a district near Navan in Meath in which O
hAodha (or Hughes) ruled, T.P.; it is said also to have been the name
of a mound near Navan still called An Odhbha; bt. of between Aonghus,
s. of Colman, and Conall, s. of Aodh. Slaine.
Odhbha, one of the seven principal women who came to Ire. with the
sons of Milidh.
Odhran, Tuath Odhrain, Oranstown, par. and bar. of Dunboyne, Co.
Meath; a district near Tara given by Cormac. s. of Art, to Buicead (f.
of Eithne.0.
Odhran, St., of Leathrach, d. anno 548 Fm.
Odhran, s. of Cinneide, k. of Laoighis, among the victors at Bealach
Mughna.
O Diomasaigh, O Dempsey, one of the principal Leinster families;
sprung from Rossa Failgheach.
O Domhnaill, O Donnell, inaugurated (as prince of Tyrconnell), at Cill
Mic Creannain.
O Donnchadha Mor, O Donoghue More or the Great, one of the
inaugurators of Mac Carrthaigh Mor.
O Donnell, v. O Domhnaill and Ua Domhnaill.
O Donnelly, v. O Donnghaile.
O Donnghaile, O Donnelly, marshal of hosts to O Neill.
O Donoghue More, v. O Donnchadha Mor.
O Doran, v. O Deoradhain.
O Dorna, abbey of, at Abbeydorney, on r. Brick, bar. of Clanmaurice,
Co. Kerry; built, anno 1154; some of its lands were granted by Queen
Elizabeth to the provost, fellows, and scholars of Trinity College,
Dublin.
O Driscoll, v. O hEidirsceoil.
O Dubhagain, O Dugan, says Lorcan was k. M. a year and a half after
Cormac, s. of Cuileannan; John More O Dugan, author of a topographical
poem (ed. O'D.), d., 1372, Fm.; some of his poetical and prose work is
preserved in the Book of Hy Many, Book of Ballymote, and in several
more recent manuscripts; v. O Reilly's Irish Writers for an account of
his life and writings; the work quoted by K. here is a poem on the
kings of Cashel beginning, Caisiol Cathair Clanna Mogha, in which he
makes Lorcan (s. of Lachtna) of the Dal gCais reign over Cashel for a
year and a half after Cormac, s. of Cuileannan; v. poem in 23 D 5,
R.I.A., also in 23 G 12, R.I.A.
O Duibhidhir, O Dwyer, of Coill na Manach, a marshall of hosts to O
Briain (prince of Thomond.)
O Duibhidhir, O Dwyer, one of the chief Leinster families,; sprung
from Lughaidh, s. of Breasal Breac.
O Duinn, O Dunne, one of the chief Leinster families; sprung from
Rossa Failgheach.
O Duinnins, Dinneens, the, v. Muinntear Dhuinnin.
O Dunain, Maolmuire, Mulmury O'Downan (Ann. Clon.), abp. of Munster
(i.e., abp. of Cashel), at national council of Fiadh Mic Aonghusa, 
anno 1111 Fm.; d. anno 1117  Fm.
O Dunne, v. O Duinn.
O Dwyer, v. O Duibhidhir.
O Dwyers, the, v. Muinntear Dhuibhidhir.
O hEadhra, O'Hara, sprung from Cormac Gaileang; sprung from Cian,
third son of Oilill Olom.
O hEidhin, O'Heyne, f. of Cailleach Dhe (m. of Muircheartach O
Briain.)
O hEidhin, O Heyne, Hynes, Aodh, k. of Ui Fiachrach, sl. by a body of
Munstermen, anno 1121 Fm.
O hEidirsceoil, O Driscoll, sprung from Lughaidh, s. of Ioth.
O Faherty, v. O Fothartaigh.
O Faolain, O Phelan, k. of Deise Thuaisceirt; resided at Dun Ui
Fhaolain, on r. Siur.
O Faolain, O Phelan, Maoilseachlainn, k. of the Deise.
Offaly, v. Crioch Ua bhFailghe and Ui bhFailghe.
Offerlane, Queen's Co., v. Ui Faircheallaigh.
O Fiorghail, O Freel, inaugurates O Domhnaill (prince of Tyrconnell).
O Flaherty, v. O Flaithbheartaigh.
O Flaithbheartaigh, O'Flaherty, Muireadhach, k. of West Connaught, sl.
by the Munstermen, anno 1121 Fm.
O Floinn Arda, O Flynn of Ard (near Baltimore, West Cork); sprung from
Lughaidh, s. of Ioth.
O Floinn, Eochaidh, Eochy O Flynn; poet; v also Ua Floinn, Eochaidh
O Flynn, v. O Floinn and Ua Floinn.
O Fothartaigh, O Faherty, Domhnall, vicar general of bp of Osruighe,
at Council of Ceanannus.
O Freel, v. O Fiorghail.
O Gadhra, O Gara, spring from Cian, s. of Oilill; (and/also spring
from Cormac Gaileang.)
O Gallaher, v. O Gallchubhair.
O Gallchubhair, O Gallaher, marshal of hosts to O Domhnaill (prince of
Tyrconnell.)
Ogan, s. of Cinneide, s. of Lorcan, goes to bt. of Cluain Tarbh.
O Gara, v. O Gadhra.
Oghaman, s. of Beodhaman.
Oghaman, s. of Fiatach Fionn; al. Oghamhal.
Oghamhal, v. Oghaman, s. of Fiatach Fionn.
Oghma Grian Eigis, al. Oghma, s. of Ealatha, of the T. D. D.
O Gorman, v. Mag Cormain.
Ogygia (? 'O????a, a mythical island in the Mediterranean, also an
ancient name of Egypt and also of Attica and Boeotia), the fourteenth
name of Ire.
O Hagan, v. O hAgain.
O Hanlon, v. O hAnnluain.
O Hara, v. O hEadhra.
O Heyne, v. O Heidhin.
Oidhche Samhna, the Eve of Samhain (a Pagan festival held at the
beginning of November) corresponds to Hallow E'en.
Oidhidh na gCuradh, 'The Tragic Fate of the Champions,' an Irish
historico-romantic tract; cf. list of Heroic tragedies from Ll. in M.
M., 587, and Death-tales of the Ulster Heroes, ed. Meyer, Todd
Lectures, R.I.A.
Oige, follows Eibhear, I. 98.
Oige (al. Uige), s. of Ealloit, s. of Neanual, goes to Spain with
Bratha.
Oileach Neid, al. Oileach or Aileach, Greenan Elly, near the head of
Lough Swilly, Co. Donegal, an ancient residence of the kings of
Ulster; a common limit of Er's and of Feargna's part of Ire.
Oileach, v. Oileach Neid.
Olleain, npl. gpl. Oilean, the Isles, i.e., the Hebrides; Maghnus, s.
of Aralt, k. of, II. 72; Domhnall O Briain rules tyrannically over for
three years, II. 308.
Oilean Arda Neimheadh, al. Oilean Mor an Bharraigh, 'Barry's Great
Island,' Great Island in bar. of Barrymore in Cork Harbour; the town
of Cove or Queenstown is built on the south shore of Great Island; a
limit of the portions of Ire. given to Orba and Fearon.
Oilean Mor an Bharraigh, v. Oilcan Arda Neimheadh.
Oilean na Naomh, the Island of Saints, a name applied to Ire. in early
Christian times according to Henricus Antisiodorensis.
Oilean Ui Bhric, 'O'Brick's Island,' now Dane's Island, off the
Deise coast in the par. of Ballylaneen, Co. Wat., a limit of
Urmhumha (Ormond), I. 126; a. stronghold of O Brie, I. 316. Oilill, f.
of Caitheasach (k. of the Cruithnigh), III. 150.
Oilill, f. of Cobhthach, and gf. of Brighid (w. of Ainmire).
Oilill, f. of Cormac (k. L.)
Oilill, f. of Seancha (a pagan author of the Seanchus Mor.)
Oilill, f. of Ughaire (who fought in bt. of Ceann Fuaid).
Oilill, s. of Aodh Slaine (k. Ire.).
Oilill, s. of Cathaoir Mor, an. of St. Mochua (of Teach Mochua, in
Laoighis.)
Oilill, s. of Donnchadh (k. Ire.)
Oilill, s. of Dunlaing (k. L., d. anno 526 Fm.)
Oilill, s. of Earc, and f. of Eochaidh Eigeas.
Oilill, s. of Eochaidh, s. of Daire Cearb.
Oilill, s. of Eochaidh Muighmheadhoin.
Oilill, s. of Eoghan, a noble, sl. at Bealach Mughna.
Oilill, s. of Flann Ruadh, of race of Lughaidh, s. of Ioth.
Oilill, s. of Iar, of the race of Eireamhon.
Oilill, s. of Labhraidh Loingseach; v. O Bracain.
Oilill, s. of Muireadhach, k. L., d., III. 54.
Oilill, s. of Slanoll, k. Ire. sixteen years, I. 136; sl. by Siorna, s.
of Dian, anno 4019 Fm.
Oilill Aine, s. of Laoghaire Lorc, and f. of Maon (Labhraidh
Loingseach), sl. by Cobhthach Caol mBreagh.
Oilill Anbhann, k. C., sl. in bt. of Cuil Chonaire.
Oilill Bracain, s. of Labhraidh Loingseach.
Oilill Caisfhiaclach, 'Oilill of the Twisted Teeth,' s. of Connla
Cruaidhchealgach, k. Ire. twenty-five years; sl. by Adhamair
Foltchaoin, anno 4782 Fm.
Oilill Earann, s. of Fiachaidh Fear Mara.
Oilill Fionn, 'O. the Fair,' head of the Gamhanruidh of Iorrus
Domhnann.
Oilill Fionn, 'Oilill the Fair,' s. of Art, k. Ire. nine years, I.
146; sl. ib. (anno 4415 Fm.); rt., 148, 156, 174.
Oilill Flann Beag, s. of Fiachaidh Muilleathan, exacted the eiric of
Eidirsceol from the Leinstermen; an. of St. Ruadhan of Lothra.
Oilill Flann Mor, s. of Fiachaidh Muilleathan; leaves no issue but
adopts his br. Oilill Flann Beag on condition of his being placed in
genealogy before him. I. 322.
Oilill Glas, 'O. the Dark Grey,' s. of Fearadhach Foghlas, of the race
of Eireamhon.
Oilill Molt, s. of Dathi, k. Ire. twenty years; sl. in bt. of Ocha,
anno 478 Fm.
Oilill Mor, al. Oilill, s. of Rossa Ruadh, a Leinsterman, married
Meadhbh (queen of Connaught).
Oilill Olchaoin, s. of Siorna Saoghlach, of race of Eireamhon.
Oilill Olom (or O. Olum), s. of Eoghan Mor (al. Mogh Nuadhat); of the
race of Deirgthine; acquired sovereignty of the two provinces of M.
Oirbsean, the proper name of Manannan, s. of Lear; Loch Oirbsean named
from him.
Oirghialla, 'Oriel,' the tribe sprung from the three Collas who about
A.D. 322 defeated the Ulstermen and took from them the portion of
Ulster lying westward of Glenn Righe, Lough Neagh, and the Lower Bann;
the Oirghialla territory originally included the counties of Armagh,
Monaghan, Tyrone and Londonderry and a large part of Fermanagh; but
the district corresponding to counties of Tyrone and Londonderry were
wrested from them in the fifth century by the dss. of Eoghan, s. of
Niall Naoighiallach; O. included as sub-territories Ui Niallain, Ui
Breasail, Ui Eachach, Ui Meith, Ui Tortain, Ui Briuin Archaill, Tri
Tuatha, Dartraighe, Feara Manach, Fearnmhagh, Mugdorn and Ross, and
Leithrinn; it does not seem to have included Conaille Muirtheimhne, v.
Ulaidh.
Oiris Eachlonnach, s. of Earndolbh, an. of Cairbre Chinn Chait (k.
Ire.)
Oirtheacht, s. of Simeon, of the Fir Bolg.
Oisin, s. of Fionn, s. of Cumhall; br. of Mogh Corb's mother.
Oitir, a chief of the Lochlonnaigh; sl. by Caius, s. of Aodh, anno 916
Fm.
O Kane, v. O Cathain.
O Kealy, v. O Caolluidhe.
O Kennedys, the, v. Siol gCinneididh.
Olanus, al. Amhlaoibh, s. of Gothfruidh, held hereditary title to be
ruler of the Isles.
O Laoghaire, O Leary of Ros (Roscarbery), sprung from Lughaidh, s. of
Ioth.
Olchobhar, s. of Cionaoth, ab. of Imleach Iobhair, becomes k. of
Munster; d., anno 849 Fm.
Olchu, s. of Eochaidh Muinreamhar (sprung from Cairbre Rioghfhada),
Dal Riada of Ulster sprung from.
O Leary, v. O Laoghaire.
O Lehanes, territory of the; v. Ui Liathain.
Olibha, Oliva, w. of Cham.
Olibhana, Olivana, w. of Japheth.
Olla, w. of Sem.
Ollamh, s. of Dealbhaoth, of the T. D. D.
Ollamh Fodhla, s. of Fiachaidh Fionscothach, k. Ire. thirtv years; d.
in his house, anno 3922 Fm. which gives him a sovereignty of 40
years;buried at Cruachain (here called simply Ollamh and even this
name does not appear in the Leabhar na hUidhre copy of the poem
quoted)
Ollarbha, Larne Water, on whose shore is the town of Larne, Co. Antrim,
Fothaidh Airgtheach sl. by the Fian in bt. of, anno 285 Fm.; limit of
see of Cuinnire.
Ollghothach, 'great-voiced,' name given to Geidhe (k. Ire.)
Oll shaith, 'great plenty,' Ulaidh said to be derived from.
Olmucaidh, an epithet given to Aonghus, s. of Fiachaidh Labhruinne, k.
Ire.
Olom, i.e., Oilill Olom, Sadhbh was m. of the race of Olom (i.e., w.
of Oilill Olom and m. of his sons who left issue.)
O Longargain, O Lonnergan Domhnall, abp. of Munster (i.e., of Cashel),
at Council of Ceanannus; d. anno 1158 Fm.
O Longargain, O Lonnergan, Tadhg, bp. of Cill Dalua, d. anno 1161 Fm.
O Lonnergan, v. O Longargain.
O Lughair; v. Dubhthach Mac Ua Lughair.
O Mahony of Carbery, v. Ua Mathghamhna Cairbre.
O Maighin, Giolla Aodha, bp. of Corcach, at Council of Ceanannus; d.
anno 1172, Fm. which gives the name as Ua Muidhin, and says that he
was "the tower of the virginity and wisdom of his time."
O Maoilidhir, Muircheartach, bp. of Cluain Mic Nois, at Council of
Ceanannus.
O Maolchonaire, O'Mulchonry, John, s. of Torna, chief professor of
Seanchus in Ire..
O Maolconaire, O Mulconry, Torna, s. of Muiris, a learned seancha of
Leath Cuinn; perhaps this Torna O M. is the poet of which an account
is given in O'Reilly's Irish Writers, p. 96.
O Maoldoraidh, O Muldory; and O Neill and Maoilseachlainn (k. Ire.),
sl. Ath Cliath, anno 1014, recte 1015, Fm.
O Maolmuaidh, O Molloy, Giolla Brighde, k. of Cineal Fiachaidh, and of
Feara Ceall.
O Meachair, O Meagher, sprung from Cian, s. of Oilill Olom; or/also
from Iomchaidh, s. of Connla.
O Meaghair, v. O Meachair and Siol Meachair.
O Meehan, v. O Miodhchain.
O Miodhchain, O Meehan, Etras, bp. of Cluain Ioraird, at Council of
Ceanannus; d. 1173, Fm.
O Moores or O Mores, the, v. Siol Mordha.
O Moran, v. O Mugroin.
O Mugroin (O Mughroin), O Moran, Mac Craith, bp. of Conmhaicne, at
Council of Ceanannus.
O Mulchonry, O Mulconry, v. O Maolchonaire, O Maolconaire, and Ua
Maolconaire.
O Mulchronys, the, v. Ui Mhaolchonaire
O Muldery, v. O Maoldoraigh.
O Murrys, the, v. Ui Muireadhaigh.
Onaoi, a harper who came with the sons of Milidh to Ireland.
O Neill, Domhnall, v. Domhnall O Neill.
O Neill, Flaithbheartach, of the Pilgrim's staff, went on a pilgrimage
to Rome; v. Flaithbheartach O Neill.
O Neill, Maoilseachlainn (k. Ire.), Maoldoraidh and, pl. Ath Cliath,
anno 1014, recte 1015, Fm.
O Neill, prince of Tir Eoghain, inaugurated at Tulach Og.
O Neill, v. Ua Neill.
Oneilland, bar. of, Co. Arm., v. Ui Niallain.
O Neills, the, v. Clanna Neill.
O Nolan, v. O Nuallain.
O Nuallain, O Nolan, a Leinster family sprung from Cobhthach Caol
mBreagh.
O Nuallain, O Nolan, inaugurated Mac Murchadha.
O Phelan, v. O Faolain.
Opposition, 'freasabhra '; kings of Ire. with opposition from
Maoilseachlainn, s.of Domhnall, to Norman Invasion.
Orach, f. of Eithne (w. of Dathi, k. Ire.)
Oranstown, Co. Meath, v. Odhran.
Orba, s. of Eibhear, jk. Ire., a part of a year; a leader of the
Milesian expedition; sl. by Irial Faidh.
Orba, s. of Partholon, his division of Ire.
Orca, s. of Carrthann, and f. of Brighe (m. of Aodh Ollan, k. Ire.).
Orca Mac Eirc, s. of Eochaidh, and f. of Brigh (m. of Aodh Uairiodh
nach, k. Ire.)
Orda, s. of Allaoi, of the T. D. D.
Oriel, v. Oirghialla.
Ormond, v. Urmhumha.
O Rody, v. Ua Rodain.
Orosius, Paulus (fl. 415), historian and Christian apologist, author
of "Historiarum adversus Paganos, libri septem," which purports to be
an Universal History from the Creation down to his own day; gives 5199
years as time between Adam and Christ.
O Rourke, v. O Ruairc and Ua Ruairc.
O Rourkes, the (people of O Rourke's Country, i.e., Brefny), v.
Ruarcaigh.
O Rourkes, the, v. Muinntear Ruairc.
Ortelius (Ortels, Wortels), Abraham (1527-1598), a celebrated
geographer, born at Antwerp but of German extraction.
O Ruairc, O Rourke, Art Coileach (Art the Cock), k. of Breithfne, pl.
Cluain Fearta Breanainn; the sacrilege avenged on same day by
Donnchadh, s. of Brian, anno 1031 Fm.
O Ruairc, O Rourke, k. of Ui Briuin and Conmhaicne.
O Ruairc, Tighearnan Caoch, 'Tiernan the Purblind O Rourke,' k. of
Breithfne; Dearbhforgaill, w. of, elopes with Diarmaid Mac Murchadha.
O Ryans, the, v. Muinntear Riain.
Osbhran, bp. of Cluain Chreamhuidh, d. anno 747 Fm.
O Shaughnessy, v. O Seachnasaigh.
O Shaughnessy's Country, v. Duthaigh Ui Sheachnasaigh and Ui
bhFiachrach Eidhne.
O Seachnasaigh, O Shaughnessy, Country of; v. Duthaigh Ui
Sheachnasaigh.
Osnadh, m. of Beibhionn (m. of Brian Boraimhe.)
Osruighe, Ossory; the ancient territory comprised bar. of Upper Ossory
in Queen's Co., and almost the whole of the Co. of Kilk.; during the
Christian period it practically corresponds to the present see of
Ossory; Raith Beitheach in; from Gabhran to Grian of, joined to
Munster in time of Conaire Mor on account of Eidirsceol's eiric, [this
arrangement does not seem to have been persevered in as Osruighe is
always in the oldest writings regarded as a district in Leinster,
Munster having no share in it; on the other hand the Ossorians seem to
have encroached on Munster, the rough limits of the territory being
from the Siur to the Bearbha and from Bladhma (Slieve Bloom) to the
sea (at Waterford Harbour).]
Osruighigh, gpl.; ns. Osruigheach; Ossorians, followers of Aonghus
Osruighe, v. Osruighe.
Ossorians, the, v. Osruighigh.
Ossory, v. Osruighe.
O Suilleabhain Mor, 'O Sullivan More,' inaugurated Mac Carrthaigh.
O Sullivan More, v. O Suilleabhain Mor.
O Sullivans, the, v. Siol Suilleabhain.
Othorb, s. of Goiste, a Fear Bolg.
O Toole, Eochy, v. Eochaidh O Tuathail.
O Toole, Lawrence, v. O Tuathail Labhras.
O Toole, v. O Tuathail.
O Tooles, the, v. Tuathalaigh.
O Tuathail, O Toole, sprung from Fiachaidh Aiceadha, s. of Cathaoir
Mor.
O Tuathail, Labhras, Lawrence O Toole, St. (c. 1128-4180) abp. of Ath
Cliath; sent by the inhabitants of Ath Cliath to negotiate peace with
the Earl of Stranguell; al. Lorcan O.T.
Owencharra, r., v. Abhainn Chara.
Owles, The, Co. Mayo. v. Umhall.

P.
Padraig, St. Patrick.
Paladius, Palladius, sent to Ire. by Pope Coelestinus, anno 430.
Palap, s. of Eireamhon, a leader of the Milesian expedition to Ire.;
sl. in bt. of Geisill.
Pallia, given to four archbishops in Ire.; a pallium (pl. pallia) is a
circular band worn over the chasuble on the neck and shoulders, with
front and back pendants. It is worn by the Pope and by archbishops.
Pamp, s. of Tat, gf. of Neimheadh.
Pannonia, a country washed on north and east sides by the Danube, and
on the west side touched by Noricum and Upper Italy, and bounded on
the south by Dalmatia and Upper Moesia; brought under his sway by
Attila.
Papiron, Cardinal John, presides at Council of Ceanannus, anno 1152.
Paps, the two, Mountains in Kerry, v. Da Chich Danann.
Parmenius, a hermit, cursed Dathi (k. Ire.), for pillaging his
penitentiary.
Partholon, Bartholomew, St., Earl of Stranguell came to Ire. after
Feast of, anno 1170; the feast of St. Bartholomew occurs on the 24th
of August.
Parthians, the, v. Parti.
Partholon, s. of Sera, called Bartholinus by Hanmer, comes to Ire. 300
years after Deluge, anno mundi 1978 (others say 1002 years after
Deluge.)
Parti, Parthians, sprung from Iobath, s. of Magog.
Patrick's Purgatory, v. Purgadoir Phadraic.
Pelagius (late 4th and early 5th centuries), founder of the Pelagian
heresy; a Briton; begins to sow heresy anno 395; (Pelagius was of
Irish origin according to St. Jerome, his words are; habet enim
progeniem Scoticae gentis de Britannorum vicinia. Praef. in Ierem.,
lib. I. et. II.; the same author refers to him as Scotorum pultibus
praegravatus. In that age the Scoti were the Irish; nevertheless
Orosius, Augustine, Prosper, and other writers of weight assign him to
Britain).
Pembroke, Arnulfus earl of, married da. of Muircheartach O Briain (ok.
Ire.), anno 1101.
Pharao Cincris, k. of Egypt, invites Niul to Egypt; gives Niul his da.
Scota in marriage; gives him the land of Capacyront.
Pharao Intuir, succeeds Pharao Cincris as k. of Egypt; and
the Egyptians, expel the race of Gaedheal (Glas) from Egypt.
Pharao Nectonibus, fifteenth k. of Egypt after Pharao Cincris; Scota,
da. of, marries Milidh.
Pictavium, al., Pictavi (called Limonum at the time of the Roman
conquest of Gaul), Poitiers, capital of the department of Vienne;
built by the Picti and named from them.
Picti, Picts, al., often, Cruithnigh (q.v.), a Scythian tribe who
settled in a district of the North of Scotland, and are associated
with the Scots or transplanted Gaels of Scotland in a common warfare
against the inhabitants of Britain especially about the period of the
decline and extinction of Roman power in Britain; v. Cruithnigh,
Cruitheantuaith, Scuit, Cille Scuit.
Pillar stone at Gort an Oir, Mac Con sl. at; to the west of r. Slaine,
between Cill Brighde and Tulach O bhFeidhlimidh; near Hill of Usna,
the common meeting point of the provinces; v. Gort an Oir.
Pluingceadaigh, the Plunkets, their descent from Donnchadh, s. of
Brian Boraimhe, unsupported by evidence; said to be of Lochlonnach
origin.
Plunkets, the. v. Pluingceadaigh.
Plutarchus, Plutarch (c. A.D. 46-120) Greek biographer, etc., calls
Ire. Ogygia.
Policronicon, Polychronicon, an universal history down to the author's
own time by Ranulf Higden (d. 1364), a Benedictine monk at St.
Werburgh's, Chester. It has been printed in nine volumes in the Rolls
Series; says that the name Scoit (Scuit).
Polidorus, Polydore Virgil (c. 1470-1535), English historian of
Italian origin; his work "De rerum Inventoribus," quoted by K., was
published in Paris 1499, and in an enlarged form in 1521.
Poll Tighe Liabhain, 'the Hole or Pool at Liabhan's House,' in Ui
Fiachrach Eidhne, that is in South Hy Fiachra; Poll Tighe Liabain (the
b unaspirated) has made its way into folk-lore and even into the
language of ordinary life even in Munster. 'Siar go Poll T. L.' means
'ever so far west.'
Pomponius Mela (fl. c. A.D. 43), Roman geographer, author of 'De Situ
Orbis,' speaks of the Irish as ignorant of all the virtues.
Port Lairge, Waterford city, a sea port built by the Norwegians after
death of Turgesius.
Port Murbhoilg, Murlogh Bay in par. of Culfeightrim, bar. of Carey, Co.
Antrim, about midway between Fair Head and Tor Point. a limit of the
see of Cuinnire
Power, Robert le, comes to Ire. at beginning of the Norman Invasion;
an. of the Pueraigh (the Powers) and of the Eustasaigh (the Eustaces.)
Powers, the, v. Puerigh.
Prendergasts, the, v. Prionndarghasaigh.
Prionndarghasaigh, the Prendergasts, come to Ire. at the Norman
Invasion.
Prophecy, Bearachan of the; v. Bearachan.
Psaltair Chaisil, Psalter of Cashel, al. Psaltair of Cormac (s. of
Cuileannan), an ancient compilation on historical, genealogical, legal,
etc. subjects, traditionally ascribed to Cormac, s. of Cuileannan,
whose death took place at the beginning of the tenth century. The work
is often referred to and quoted in Irish tracts, but only a fragment
of a copy of a fragment of it made anno 1454 now survives; this copy
was made by Sean O Clery for Mac Richard Butler and is to be found in
the Bodleian Library (Laud 610); one of the chief books of the
Seanchus; v. Saltair Chaisil and Saltair of Cormac, s. of Cuileannan.
Psaltair na Rann, attributed to Aonghus Ceile De; quoted
on the patron saints of Ire.; v. Saltair na Rann.
Psaltair na Teamhrach, the Psalter of Tara, al. called Rolla na Riogh,
the Roll of the Kings; the Psalter of Tara is now lost and very little
is known of its contents. It is traditionally attributed to Cormac, s.
of Art, and to his chief ollamhs; the earliest and most authentic
account of it is given in a poem by Cuan O Lochainn quoted in MS. Mat.
10; this description, vague as it is, justifies so far as it goes the
alias 'Rolla na Riogh,' 'Roll of the Kings,' given it in K.; Bb.,
quoting Leabhar na hUachongbhala (also lost), calls it a source and
fountain for the seanchas of Ire.; v. O Curry, MS. Mat.. 497.
Psalterium or saltair, equated to duanaire, 'a poem-book.'
Ptolomeus (Claudius) Ptolemy (c. 100-152), celebrated mathematician,
geographer, and astronomer, born in Egypt; says that Ire. was called
Iuernia (Ivernia).
Puerigh, the Powers, a family who came to Ire. with the Normans;
sprung from Robert le Power.
Purgadoir Phadraic, Patrick's Purgatory, the cave of, in the island of
purgatory, that is in Station Island, Lough Derg, bar. of Tyrhugh, Go.
Donegal; Hanmer says it was not discovered by Patrick the apostle but
by another Patrick, an abbot.

Q
Quin, Co. Clare, v. Cuinche.

R
Radulphus, al. Ranulphus, Ralph d'Escures, abp. of Canterbury (1114-
1122), ordered by Henry I. to consecrate a bp. in Ath Cliath at the
behest of the k. of Ire. (the date given is 1123 as in Ussher; but it
is generally admitted that Radulphus died on October 20th, 1122.)
Raghallach, s. of Udaidh (O'D. writes nominative Udach which is the
usual gen. form), k. of Tuatha Taidhon and of part of Breithfne; sl.,
anno 645, Fm. anno 648, Au.; this latter date O'D. says is the more
correct. The date 642 in the Ann. of Clonmac. is erroneous. He is an.
of the O Connors, kk. of Connaught, but not of the Cavan O'Reillys; v.
Fm. I. 260. where text embodies a metrical account of the slaying of
Raghallach.
Raghnall, s. of Amhlaoibh (Olaf Cuaran), heir apparent of the
sovereignty of the Lochlonnaigh, sl. in bt. of Tara, anno 980 C. G.
e.)
Raghnall, a. of Gothfraidh, s. of Aralt, k. of the Isles.
Raghnall, s. of Samhairle, Earl of Antrim (in K.'s time), sprung from
Colla Uais; he was created earl of Antrim, anno 1620, and d., 1636.
Rahan, King's Co.. v. Rathain.
Rahugh, Co. West.. v. Raith Aodha Mic Brie.
Raith Aodha Mic Bric, Rahugh, par. in bar. of Moycashel three miles
south-east of Kilbeggan, Co. West., National Assembly at, anno 857 Fm.
Raith Bachaill, in Lotharna (district of Larne, Co. Antrim).
Raith Beitheach, Rathbeagh moat, about a mile south of Ballyraggett,
Co. Kilk.; in Airgeadros on the brink of the Feoir (Yore.)
Raith Bheag, in Magh Line (q.v.), Rathbeag, two miles east of Antrim
town.
Raith Both, Raphoe. Co. Donegal, see of, al. see of Doire (Derry).
Raith Breasail, on Magh Mossaidh, which bordered on Magh Feimhean, Co.
Tipp., National Council or synod convened at, anno 1110, in the reign
of Muircheartach O Briain (ok. I.)
Raith Buireach (Raith Buirg, Fm.), in Sleachta; Sleachtmhagh with
which Sleachta is no doubt identical was in par. of Ryemoghy bar. of
Raphoe, Co. Don.
Raith Chairrge Feadha, built by Fulman; this fort was built by Un or
En. according to Fm., and assuming this, O'D. thinks it may be at Rath
Uin, anglice Rahoon, near Galway town.
Raith Cheannait, in Brefny; a sort of university, where ollamhs taught.
Raith Cinneach, in Ui Niallain, i.e., in barr. of Oneilland East and.
West, Co. Armagh, built by Neimheadh.
Raith Ciombaoith, at Eamhain (Navan Fort near Armagh), built by Irial
Faidh, anno 3520 Fm.
Raith Ciombaoth, in Seimhne, i.e., in the plain of Island Magee, Co.
Antrim, built by Neimheadh.
Raith Clochair, at Clogher, Co. Tyrone, Lughaidh Iardhonn (k. Ire.),
sl. at, anno 4328 Fm.
Raith Coincheadha, in Seimhne, that is, in Island Magee, Co. Antrim.
Raith Cro, on the side of Drom Ineasclainn, between Crionna and Glas
Neara in Breagha; near Slane, Co. Meath, Fm. I. 110.
Raith Croichne (R. Croich, Fm.) in Magh Inis, i.e., in bar. of Lecale,
Co. Down; built by Irial Faidh, anno 3520 Fm.
Raith Cruachan, al. Raith Eochach; Rathcroghan, Co. Rosc., ancient
seat of the kk. of Connaught; v. Cruachain.
Raith Eochach, al. Raith Cruachan, built by Eochaidh Feidhlioch (k.
Ire.), government of given by Meadhbh to Crochain Chroidhearg; v.
Raith Cruachan.
Raith Eomhain, in Laigheanmhagh (q.v.), built by Eibhear.
Raith Leamhna, enumerated amongst the strongholds possessed by Conall
Eachluaith in Munster.
Raith Lochaid, in Glascharn, that is, in Glascarn a tl. in par. of
Mullingar. Co. West; built by Irial Faidh, anno 3520 Fm.
Raith Maistean, at Mullaghmast, 6 miles east of Athy, Co. Kild.
Raith Meadhbha, a mile to the south by east of Tara Hill; named from
Meadhbh Leithdhearg, w. of Art Aoinfhear.
Raith Mhaighe Delsceirt, Ratass, near Tralee, cf. Raith Mhaighe
Tuaisceirt, which is identified as Rattoo(the modern names may be
corruptions of Raith Theas and Raith Thuaidh); see of corresponds to
see of Ardfert, Co. Kerry.
Raith Mhor, in Magh Line, Rathmore in par. of Donegore near Antrim
town.
Raith Mothaigh, Ryemoghy, in par. of Ryemoghy, bar. of Raphoe, Co.
Don.; in Deaghcharbad (al. Eocharbud); built by Irial Faidh, anno 3520
Fm.
Raith Naoi, a stronghold of the Munster kings in time of Fiachaidh
Muilleathan, al. Cnoc Rathfonn, Knockgraffon, in bar. of Middlethird,
2 miles north of Cahir, Co. Tipp.; Cormac, s. of Art, undertakes to
send hostages to Fiachaidh Muilleathan to.
Raith Rathfainne, al. Cnoc Rathfonn, al. Raith Naoi, Knockgraffon,
Fiachaidh Muilleathan resides at; v. Raith Naoi.
Ramsey, al. Ramsay, Scottish family name.
Ranulphus, v. Radulphus.
Raoire, Reelion, Co. Kild. (O'D. Irish Grammar 106), Rearymore in bar.
of Tinnahinch, Queen's Co. (Fm. I. 38).
Raph Griffin, Rice ap Griffin (Campion's History), a Welsh prince, al.
Rhys ap Gruffud, gs. of Rhys ap Tewdwr, who was the last independent
prince of South Wales.
Raphoe, Co. Don., v. Raith Both.
Ratass, Co. Kerry, v. Raith Mhaighe Deisceirt.
Rathain, Rahan in bar. of Ballycowan, King's Co.
Rathbeag, Co. Antr., v. Raith Bheag.
Rathbeagh, Co. Kilk., v. Raith Beitheach.
Rathcore, Co. Meath, v. Dun Cuair.
Rathcroghan, Co. Rosc., v. Cruachain, Cruacha, Raith Cruachain and
Raith Eochaidh.
Rathfonn, foster mother of Fiachaidh Muilleathan.
Rathlin Island, v. Reachrainn.
Rathmore, Co. Antr., v. Raith Mhor.
Raymond le Gros, al. R. de la Gros, 'R. the Fat,' s. of William
Fitzgerald (an elder brother of Maurice Fitz Gerald), a Norman leader.
Reachrainn (dat. form used for nom. Reachra, g., Reachrann), Rathlin
Island, north of Ballycastle, Co. Antrim.
Reachruinn (dat. for nom. Reachra or Reachru, g. Reachrann), Lambay
Island, north of Howth; a limit of the see of Gleann da Loch.
Reachtaidh Righdhearg, 'R. Red Arm,' s. of Lughaidh Laighdhe, k. Ire.
twenty years; sl. by Ughaine Mor,  anno 4566 Fm.
Reafloir, s. of Neomann, k. of Scythia.
Reafloir, s. of Rifill, k. of Scythia, sl. by Aghnon, s. of Tat.
Reaghaman, v. Tain Bo Reaghamain.
Realta na bhFileadh, 'the Star of the Files,' a house at Tara where
brehons and files fixed a tax on those who violated the laws and
customs.
Rearymore, Queen's Co., v. Raoire.
Redmond, v. Ruamonn.
Reim Rioghraidhe, the Succession of the Kings, an Irish tract in the
books of the Seanchus; O'Clery's version of the Reim Rioghraidhe is
described by O Curry, MS. Mat. 164 sq., and an autograph is to be
found in the Franciscan Library, Merchants' Quay.
Reir, a slave who came to Ire. with the sons of Milidh.
Rex Scotorum, 'king of the Scots,' title given to Muircheartach Mor.
Rheada, Rheuda, an Irish chief who colonised the North of Scotland,
according to Beda; identical with Cairbre Rioghfhada; Dal Riada named
from him.
Riada, poet. for Dal Riada, the country of the Gaels of Scotland.
Riaghlan, s. of Eoinbhric, of race of Lughaidh, s. of Ioth.
Rider, John (1562-1632), Protestant bp. of Killaloe and author of an
English Latin and Latin English Dictionary which appeared in 1589;
Rider was favourable to the study of the Irish language.
Ridire na Greine, 'the Knight of the Sun.'
Ri Feinnidh, chief leader; Fionn, s. of Cumhaill, appointed R. F. over
the warriors of Ire.
Rifill, f. of Reafloir.
Righe, r. Rye, which flows partly in Cos. of Kild. and Meath, and
partly as their boundary, and joins the Liffey at Leixlip; a limit of
Meath.
Rinn mBeara, Kinvarra, in bar. of Kiltartan, Co. Gal.
Rinn Muinntire Baire, in Carbery, West Cork.
Rinn Tamhain, Tawin Point in Co. Galway.
Rioghall, f. of Roth.
Rioghnach, second w. of Niall Naoighiallach; mother of Laoghaire (k.
Ire.)
Rioghphuirt, npl., ns. Rioghphort, royal fortress or seat.
Rionnal, s. of Geannan, k. Ire. six years.
Rionnal Dagharmach, s. of the k. of Lochloinn, and an. of Cairbre
Chinn Chait.
Riphat, s. of Gomer.
Risteard Mac Gilbeirt, v. MacGilbert.
Roan, Rouen, city of, in Normandy.
Roan, s. of Failbhe.
Roanus, al. Ronanus, i.e., Caoilte, s. of Ronan; a name falsely given
to Fionntain by Cambrensis; probably a mistake of Cambrensis for
Ronanus; a confusion of three names, Roanus or Ronanus (i.e., Caoilte),
Ruadhan of Lothra, and Tuan, of Caireall; Fionn, s. of Cumhall, called
R. by some.
Robhog, s. of Madan Muinreamhar, of the Fomorians.
Roches, the, v. Roistigh.
Rochorb, s. of Gollan, sl. in bt. of Eille, anno 3656 Fm.
Rochruidhe, f. of Mal, and s. of Cathbhadh.
Rock of Cashel, v. Carraig Chaisil, and Carraig Phadraic.
Rodan, s. of Madan Muinreamhar, of the Fomorians.
Roderick, v. Rodericus, and Ruaidhri.
Rodericus, Roderick, s. of prince of Wales, comes to plunder Ire.; sl.
by the Irish, anno 996 Hanmer.
Rogh or Roigh, m. of Fearghus, s. of Rossa Ruadh, usually called
Fearghus Mac Roigh; McF. 573 says Roch Rioghfhoda inghean Ruaidh Mic
Dheirg Dathfola asi ro ail Feargus agus as uaithe ro hainmnigheadh
Feargus Mac Roich ris; no go madh i Roch inghean Daire Dhoimhthigh a
mhathair "Roch Longarm, daughter of Ruadh, s. of Dearg Dathfola it was
who fostered Fearghus and it was from her he was called Fearghus, s.
of Roch; or that his mother was Roch, daughter of Daire Doimhtheach."
Roibeard Mac Stiabhna; v. Mac Stiabhna.
Roighne, a plain in bar. of Kells, between the Siur and the Barrow, in
Co. Kil.
Roighnen Ruadh, 'R. the Red,' s. of Easaman Eamhna.
Roilig Diarmada, v. Disirt Diarmada.
Roilig na Riogh, 'the Cemetery of the Kings'; a common cemetery of the
kk. of Ire., near Cruachain.
Roilt, a leader of the Lochlonnaigh, sl. by Muircheartach, s. of Niall.
Roimh, an, Rome.
Roincheann, first name of St. Conlaoch.
Roisin, s. of Triun, of the race of Eireamhon.
Roistigh, the Roches, a family that came to Ire. at the Norman
Invasion.
Roistigh, v. Crioch Roisteach.
Roitheachtaigh, s. of Maon, k. Ire. twenty-five years; sl. by Seadna,
s. of Art, anno 3842 Fm.
Roitheachtaigh, s. of Roan, k. Ire. seven years; killed by lightning
in Dun Sobhairce, anno 4176 Fm.
Roitheachtaigh, s. of Rossa, s. of Glas.
Roithriun, s. of Airndil.
Rolla na Riogh, the Roll of the Kings, al. the Psalter of Tara, the
ardollamh wrote the approved annals and records, etc., there.
Rolla Teamhrach, the Roll of Tara, the names of the nobles and lords
inscribed there; identical with Rolla na Riogh.
Roll of the Kings, the, v. Rolla na Riogh.
Roll of Tara, the, v. Rolla Teamhrach.
Romans, the, v. Romhanaigh.
Rome, v. Roimh.
Romhanach, an, Romhanaigh, npl.; gpl. Romhanach; the Romans.
Romhar, g. is Romhair, the nom. does not occur in K., Romuir nom. Lb.
99 (perh. =Rua-mhuir); the Red Sea; occurs in K. only in verse
quotations.
Rona, da. of Dunghal, and w. of Suibhne Meann (k. Ire.).
Ronan, f. of Caoilte.
Ronan, s. of Aonghus.
Ronan, s. of Tinne, and f. of St. Adhamnan.
Ronanus, al Roanus, a name proper to apply to Caoilte, s. of Ronan,
and not to Fionntain; Cambrensis may have written Roanus in mistake
for it; v. Roanus.
Ros, s. of Trichim, ollamh; among the purifiers of the Seanchus in
Patrick's time.
Ros Cre, Roscrea, Co. Tipp., slaughter of three or four thousand
Lochlonnaigh under Oilfinn at fair of, on feast of Sts. Peter and Paul
(anno 845); Keating gives as his authority for the number slain a
booklet by Finghin Mac Carrthaigh, which is a letter in English
addressed to a lord (original in E. 3, 16, T. C. D.); C. G. says
'countless numbers 'were slain, and no other early authority refers to
the battle.
Roscrea, Co. Tipp., v. Ros Cre.
Rosenallis, Queen's Co., v. Ros Fionnghlaise.
Ros Fionnghlaise, Rosenallis, a tl. and par. in bar. of Tinnehinch,
Queen's Co.; the par. including the tl. and part of Mountmellick town;
a limit of the see of Cill Dara; the r. Murglash which flows through
the par. in an easterly direction is prob. the Fionnghlaise.
Ros Fraochain, Rosreaghan in bar. of Murresk, Co. Mayo; Gann and
Geanann, two Fomorian leaders, sl. in bt. of.
Ros Maolaidh (in C. G. Ros Maolain); as it is mentioned between Cluain
Uama (Cloyne) and Sceilig Mhichil it is probably on or near the
southern coast; C. G. suggests Rostellan par., in bar. of Imokilly, Co.
Cork; prob. par. of Marmullane, in which is the town of Passage on the
west side of entrance to Cork Harbour.
Ros mic Triuin, New Ross, Co. Wexf.; said by Stanihurst to be in
Munster.
Ros Nair, in Sliabh Bladhma (Slieve Bloom), so called from Nar, a
Milesian leader.
Rosnaree, v. Ros na Riogh.
Ros na Riogh, Rosnaree, a hamlet in par. of Knockcommon, bar. of Lower
Duleek, Co. Meath; it is situated on the Boyne, two miles south-east
of Slane; the modern par. is called Rosnaree.
Rosreaghan, Co. Mayo, v. Ros Fraochain.
Rossa, s. of Fiachaidh Suighdhe; a leader of the dss. of Fiachaidh
Suighdhe, afterwards called the Deisigh, in their expedition to
Munster.
Rossa, s. of Glas, of the race of Eibhear.
Rossa, s. of Iomchaidh, of the race of Ir.
Rossa Failgheach, senior of the sons of Cathaoir Mor, who had issue.
Rossa Ruadh, f. of Oilill (husband of Meadhbh).
Rossa Ruadh, 'R. the Red,' s. of Fearghus Fairrge.
Rossa Ruadh, s. of Rudhruighe, of the race of Ir.
Roth, s. of Rioghall.
Rothlan, s. of Mairtine, of the race of Lughaidh, s. of Ioth.
Route, the, Co. Antrim. v. Ruta.
Ruadh, da. of Airteach Uichtleathan, and third w. of Dathi (k. Ire.)
Ruadhan, of Lothra, in Urmhumha, St., confounded by some English
writers with Roanus (Ronanus) or Caoilte, s. of Ronan, and with Tuan,
s. of Caireall.
Ruaidhri, f. of Cathal (k. of West Connaught).
Ruaidhri, k. of Connaught; v. O Conchubhair, Ruaidhri.
Ruaidhri O Conchubhair, v. O Conchubhair, Ruaidhri.
Ruamonn, Redmond, a Lochlonnach leader, sl. at bt. of Sulchoid.
Ruanuidh, a name applied to Diarmaid (k. Ire.)
Ruaraidh (g. Ruarach), f. of Muireadhach.
Ruarcaigh, npl.: gpl. Ruarcach, the people of O'Rourke's Country
(i.e.), Brefny.
Rudhruidhe, s. of Partholon, comes to Ire. with Partholon.
Rudhruighe, k. of the Pictish tribe from Scythia
Rudhruighe, s. of Diochun Uairiodhnach, gf. of Cairbre Chinn Chait.
Rudhruighe, s. of Moirmhinn, k. of Britain, flies to Ire. from the
Lochlonnaigh.
Rudhruighe, s. of Sithrighe, k. Ire. thirty years or seventy years (Fm.
and Annal. of Clonmac. give him seventy, but Flann Mainistreach
appears to have given him a shorter reign, v. Fm. I. 84); d. of plague
at Airgeadros,  anno 4981 Fm.
Rudhruighe Mor, 'R. the Great,' Clanna Rudhruighe sprung from;
identical with Rudhruighe, s. of Sithrighe.
Rughruidhe, s. of Deala, a Fear BoIg, k. Ire. two years; sl. In Brugh
os Boinn, anno 3269 Fm.
Ruibhne, s. of Madan Muinreamhar, I. 176.
Ruidire Gaiscidh, 'Knight of Chivalry'.
Rurthach, i.e., the r. Liffey.
Ruta, the Route, in Co. Antrim; al. Dal Riada; v. Dal Riada of Ulster.
Rye, r., v. Righe.
Ryemoghy, Co. Don., v. Raith Mothaigh.

S.
Sabhall, s. of Nionuall.
Sacsa, g. Sacsan, d. Sacsain, England.
Sacsa, Anglia, England, History of the Church of, "Historia
Ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum" by Beda (Bede), of which there is an
edition by Plummer, Clarendon Press, 1896.
Sacsain, npl.; dpl. Sacsaibh, the Saxons, English.
Sacsanach, a., English.
Sacsanach, an Englishman, a Saxon.
Sacsanaigh, npl., Saxons, English.
Sadhbh, da. of Conn Ceadchathach, married Maicniadh and is m. of Mac
Con; also married Oilill Olom and is m. of Cormac Cas, and Cian; m.
also of seven other sons by Oilill Olom, who were slain in bt. of Magh
Muchruimhe, including Eoghan Mor (who left issue).
Sadhbh, da. of Donnchadh, s. of Ceallach (k. of Osruighe), and w. of
Donnchadh, s. of Flann Sionna.
Saighir, St. Ciaran of, II. 108; v. Saighir Chiarain, and Ciaran.
Saighir Chiarain, 'Saighir of St. Ciaran,' al. Saighir; Sairkeiran;
four and a half miles south-east of Birr, Co. Tipp.; burying place of
the kk. of Osruighe.
Saile, f. of Eibhear (from whom the Hebrew language is named.)
Saimher, a hound-whelp belonging to Partholon.
Sairbhreathach, 'Iustin,' f. of Carrthach (k. of Eoghanacht Chaisil.)
Sairkeiran, Seirkeiran, Co. Tipp., v. Saighir Chiarain.
Salisburie, Salisbury, John, bp. of, sent by Henry I. to Ire. to make
known the Pope's granting of Ire. to him under certain conditions.
Salisbury, v. Salisburie.
Salisbury Plain, v. Magh Salsburie.
Saltair Chaisil, Psalter of Cashel; one of the chief books of the
Seanchus of Ire.; name given to the chronicle of Cormac, s. of 
Cuileannan; v. Psaltair Chaisil and Saltair of Cormac, s. of
Cuileannan
Saltair na Rann, 'Psalter of the quatrains,' a collection of 162
poetical pieces in Early Middle Irish on Scriptural subjects; one of
the chief books of Ire.; Saltair na Rann is traditionally but
erroneously attributed to Aonghus Ceile De, 'A. the Culdee,' who
flourished early in the ninth century; it was published with an Index
Verborum but without translation by Stokes, for the Clarendon Press in
1883; v. Psaltair na Rann.
Saltair na Teamhrach, Psalter of Tara, called Saltair 'Psalter,' from
being in metre; a chief book in the custody of the king s own ollamhs,
ib.; v. Psaltair na Teamhrach
Saltair of Cormac, s. of Cuileannan, identical with Saltair (or
Psaltair) Chaisil, or Psalter of Cashel; v. Saltair Chaisil.
Samaliliath, introduced ale-drinking into Ire.
Samhain, at Cnoc Samhna, Knocksamhna near Bruree, bar. of Coshma, Co.
Limer.
Samhain, an ancient Irish festival corresponding in time to the
beginning of November; Oidhche Shamhna, corresponds in time to Hallow
e'en, and La Samhna to festival of All Hallows; it is still an
important date in the year to fix rent-paying, etc.
Samhain, v. Oidche Samhna.
Samhairle, Sorley, i.e., Sorley Buidhe, f. of Raghnall (Earl of
Antrim.)
Samhaoir, da. of Fionn, a. of Cumhall, and w. of Cormac Cas.
Samhaoir, r. Erne, mostly in Co. Fermanagh; found by Partholon in Ire.
Samhpait, bt. of, in which Mogh Nuadhat def. Conn Ceadchathach.
Samhra, s. of Ionbhoth, sl. in bt. of Sliabh Modhairn.
Sanchan, a. of Cuairfheartach, eigeas placed over Connaught.
S(an) Daibhidh, St. David's, Ty Dewi, in Wales.
Sanders, v. Sanderus.
Sanderus, Sander or Sanders, Nicholas (1530-1581), author of "De
Schismate Anglicano," first published in 1585, that is after the
author's death.
San Steaphan, v. San Stiabhna.
San Stiabhna, al. San. Steaphan, St. Stephen, Monastery of, in Rome;
Donnchadh, s. of Brian Boraimhe, d. in penance in San Steaphan;
deposition and death of Donnchadh are recorded in Fm. anno 1084.
Saran Saobhdhearg, airchinneach or eireannach of Seanbhoth Sine,
sl. Brandubh, s. of Eochaidh, anno 601 Fm.
Saruit, da. of Conn Ceadchathach, w. of Conaire, s. of Mogh Lamha, and
m. of the three Cairbres; w. also of Neimheadh, s. of Sraibhgheann; gm.
on both sides to Corc.
Saturnalia, work by Macrobius; v Macrobius.
Saxain, npl.; dpl. Saxaibh; England.
Saxolbh, a leader of the Lochlonnaigh, sl. by the Ciannachta of Glen
Geimhean or by Ui Colgan (anno 836 Fm. and Au., both of which Annals
say he was sl. by the Ciannachta; C. G. states that he was sl. by Ui
Colgan), v. C. G., lxvi., lxvii.
Saxones (Latin form), Saxons.
Saxons, the, v. Sacsain, Sacsanaigh and Saxones.
Saxum Fatale, 'Stone of Destiny,' name by which Lia Fail is called by
Hector Boetius.
Sbid, Speed, John (1552-1629), historian, author of "The History of
Great Britaine under the Conquests of ye Romans, Saxons, Danes . . .
from Julius Caesar to King James," which was published in 1611.
Scandinavia, v. Lochloinn.
Scandinavians, v. Lochlonnaigh.
Scannal, f. of Dunghal (k. of the Cruithnigh.)
Scannlan, s. of Cathal, k. of the Eoghanacht of Loch Lein, sl. at
Cluain Tarbh.
Scannlan Mor, s. of Ceannfaolaidh, k. of Osruighe.
Scannlan Sciathleathan, 'Scannlan Broadshield,' f. of Conghal Claon.
Scarbh Uachtarach, 'the Scariff, shally or stony ford, of the Upper
District;' D. iv. 2 reads (correctly), co Gairb Uachtair Achaid, to
the Garbh or Scariff of Uachtar Achaid, which is Oughteragh near
Ballinamore, Co. Leit.; a limit of Meath; note that Rawlinson B. 512
reads Sgairbh.
Scathach, a female champion of Alba; trains Cuchulainn in valour.
Scattery Island, v. Inis Cathaigh.
Sceilig Mhichil, 'S. of St. Michael,' Greater Skellig, a rock rising
above the ocean in two pinnacles, the larger of which has an altitude
of 710 feet; it lies a mile and a quarter south-west of the Little
Skellig; there are two curious wells of water considerably above the
sea-level in the island. The water in them is almost fresh. These
wells, together with some cells found in the island are dedicated to
St. Michael.
Sceine, w. of Aimhirgin, drowned in Innbhear Sceine; one of the seven
chief women who came with the sons of Milidh.
Sceldua, Sceldwa, s. of Eremod, an. of Aelfred.
Schismate Anglicano, de, v. Siosma na Sacsan.
Sciath Neachtain, 'Neachtan's Shield,' near Castledermot, Co. Kildare,
name is now unknown unless it linger in a corrupt form in Skearnagun
tl. (v. Onom); Munstermen and Leinstermen def. Lochlonnaigh in bt. of,
anno 846 Fm.
Scitae, Scythians, i.e., the Scotic race, take possession of Ire. in
the fourth age; al. Scithae.
Sciteadheach, a., Scythian, a S. nobleman (Sru, s. of Easru) expelled
by the Egyptians.
Scitia, Scithia, Scythia, used by Herodotus as a name for the region
lying between the Carpathians and the r. Tanais (the Don); in
classical literature it is applied to the regions north and northeast
of the Euxine or Black Sea.
Scoiriath, k. of Corca Duibhne.
Scoit-Albanaigh, Scoti Albani, Albanian Scots, the Irish of Scotland
(or Alba) so named.
Scoitbhearla, 'language of the Scots,' Gaelic, spoken by every tribe
who invaded Ire.; al. Gaelic; regulated by Gaedheal, s. of Eathor,
called Gaelic from Gaedheal; v. Gaedhealg.
Scoithniamh, da. of Eoghan Mor.
Scon, Scone, abbey of, the site of this abbey is now called Old Scone,
and is situated some 2 miles north of Perth near the left bank of the
Tay; the abbey proper was founded anno 1115; most of the Scottish kk.
were crowned at Scone, Charles II. (1st Jan., 1651) being the last
crowned there; Lia Fail brought by Edward I. from to England, anno
1296.
Scone, abbey of, v. Scon.
Scot, al. Scota, one of the seven chief women who came to Ire. with
the sons of Milidh; v. Scota.
Scota, da. of Pharao Cincris, w. of Niul and m. of Gaedheal (Glas).
Scota, da. of Pharao Nectonibus, w. of Milidh; Ire. called Scotia from.
Scotia, ninth name of Ire.; reason of name, ib.; name given to Alba by
Niall Naoighiallach and the Dal Riada through veneration for Scota, w.
of Galamh (Milidh); S. Minor, name given to Alba; S. Maior, name given
to Ire., ib.; the two Scotias, Ireland and Scotland; the New Scotia,
that is Alba.
Scotia Maior, 'Greater Scotia', name for Ire.
Scotia Minor, 'Lesser Scotia,' name for Scotland.
Scotic race, v. Cine Scuit.
Scotland, v. Alba.
Scotorum Attavi, i.e., the Forbears of the Scots, a name Camden gives
the Irish.
Scots, Albanian, v. Scoit-Albanaigh.
Scots, Irish, v. Scuit Eireannaigh.
Scots, the, v. Scuit, al. Scoit.
Screaball, (screapall) from Latin scrupulum, scripulunn, the twenty-
fourth part of an uncia; it was value for three pence (tri pingne),
each pinginn weighing eight grains of wheat ("Ancient Laws of Ire."
Glos).
Scuit, al. Scoit, npl.; ns., Scot; the Scots, a name for the Gaels of
Ire. and for their offshoot in the north of Scotland; v. Cine Scuit.
Scuit-Eireannaigh, Scoti Ierni, Irish Scots, as distinguished from
Albanian Scots.
Scythia, v. Scitia (Scithia).
Scythians, the, v. Scitae.
Seachnasach, s. of Blathmhac, k. Ire. six years; sl. by Dubh nDuin,
anno 669 Fm.
Seachnasach, s. of Colga, k. of Ui Cinnsealaigh, d. anno 741 Fm.
Seadgha, a leader of the Milesian Expedition to Ire.
Seadhamus, s. of Morann, a pagan author of the Seanchus Mor.
Seadna, f. of. Comhghall (ab.)
Seadna, s. of Art, of the race of Ir, k. Ire. five years.
Seadna, s. of Earc, f. of St. Maodhog of Fearna.
Seadna, s. of Fearghus Ceannfhoda, and an. of St. Adhamnan.
Seadna Ionnaraidh, 'Seadna of the Wages,' s. of Breisrigh, k. Ire.
Seadna Siothbhac, s. of Lughaidh Loithfhionn.
Seaghais, gen. Seaghsa, the Curlieu hills near Boyle on the borders
of Cos. Roscommon and Sligo; Duach Teangumha, k. C., sl. in bt. of,
anno 499, recte 504, Fm., anno 501, Au.
Seaghdha, leader under Failbhe Fionn in the rescue of Ceallachan
Caisil.
Sealbhach, s. of Ailghionan, gf. of Cormac, s. of Cuileannan.
Seamus, James I. of England.
Seamus, James, St.; feast of Sts. Philip and, coincide with Bealltaine
(the Feast falls on the first day of May).
Sean, s. of Aighe, a pagan author of the Seanchus Mor; a brehon or
judge.
Seanach, bp. of Cluain Ioraird, d. anno 587 Fm.
Seanar, plain of, v. Magh Seanair.
Seanbhoth, f. of Breagha, of Partholon's company.
Seanbhoth, prob. Templeshambo, Co. Wexf.; v. Seanbhoth Sine.
Seanbhoth Sine, Templeshambo, par. in bar. of Scarawalsh and 41/2 miles
south by west of Newtownbarry, Co. Wex.; the airchinneach of sl.
Brandubh (k. L.),anno 601 Fm.
Seanbhreatain, npl., old Britons.
Seancha, al. seanchaidhe, npl. seanchadha, 'historian, antiquary,
seancha,'.
Seancha, s. of Cul Claon, a pagan author of the Seanchus Mor.
Seancha, s. of Oilill, a pagan author of the Seanchus Mor.
Seanchan, a leader of the files at their third banishment.
Seanchan, s. of Cinneide, goes to bt. of Cluan Tarbh
Seanchus, a term used by K. extensively in the sense of the body of
historical tradition contained in the chief Irish ancient books.
Seanchus, seanchas, records, law, customs, etc.; antiquarian lore
of Ire.; v. Records and Seanchus Mor.
Seanchus Mor, ancient record of Ire., approved every third year at the
Feis of Tara.
Seanchus Mor, 'Chronicon Magnum,' a body of laws, said to have been
compiled anno 438 (Au., Fm.), Fm. speaks of the Seanchus and the
Feineachus in this connection; v. " Ancient Laws of Ireland."
Seang, da. of Reafloir (k. of Scythia), and w. of Milidh.
Seangann, s. of Dela, a Fear Bolg.
Sean-Ghaedhil, the old Irish.
Sean Ghaill, 'old Foreigners,' the old foreign settlers in Ire., such
as those who came at the time of the Norman Invasion;
Seanmhagh, v. Seanmhagh Ealta Eadair.
Seanmhagh Ealta Eadair, al. Seanmhagh, 'old plain,' the plain
that stretches from Howth to Tallaght, and contains Clontarf; al. Magh
nEalta (Moynalty.)
Seanna, St., protector of Clann Briain of Eatharla.
Seannaid, Shanid Castle, at which there is a Cyclopian fort, a mile to
the south-east of Shanagolden, bar. of Shanid, Co. Limer.; Ui Conaill
Gabhra def. Lochlonnaigh in bt. of, anno 834.
Seantuatha Taidhean, Magh Sainbh and, from Fidheac to Teamhair Brogha
Niadh, constitute the division of Connaught given to Tinne, s. of
Connraidh, its royal seat being Cruachain.
Seara, a slave who came to Ire. with the sons of Milidh.
Seara (al. Searra), s. of Sru, and f. of Partholon; an. of Neimheadh;
the Fir Bolg, the T. D. D. and the sons of Milidh separate in pedigree
at.
Searlus, an ceid ri, Charles I. of England (1625-1649), sprung from
Maine, s. of Corc, s. of Lughaidh.
Sedna, s. of Fearghus Ceannfhoda.
Seimhne, the plain of Island Magee (Rinn Seimhne), in Co. Antrim.
Seiridmheadh, at Kells, Co. Meath.
Seiscnen, f. of St. Beinen.
Seisreach, a ploughland, six score acres.
Sem, al. Seim, s. of Noe.
Semias, a sage of the T. D. D., who taught in the city of Murias.
Sentcler, St. Clair, Scottish family name.
Seon, John, bp. of Salisbury; v. Salisburie.
Seon, John, king of England, d. anno 1216.
Septuagint, 'seventy-two men,' the translators of the Old Testament
from Hebrew into Greek.
Serarius, Nicholas, S.J., author of a work entitled "S. Kiliani gesta
cum notationibus," published at Wurtzburg in 1598; the passage quoted
in reference to St. Bonifacius is from a work by Serarius entitled:
Epistolae S. Bonifaci martyris primi Moguntini Archiepiscopi
Germanorum apostoli, etc., published in Moguntia (Maintz) in 1629.
Seth, s. of Adam; all who lived after the Deluge sprung from; came to
Ire. according to some.
Shanid Castle, v. Seannaid.
Shannon, r., v. Sionann.
Shortals, the, v. Suirtealaigh.
Siadhal, bp. of Ros Commain, d. anno 813 Fm., anno 817 Au.
Sidhe, s. of Ainbhile.
Silbhester, Sylvester I., Pope (314-335); story of his obtaining as a
gift the islands of Western Europe from Constantine at his baptism;
this story is a legend.
Siluias, Silvias, f. of Brutus.
Simeon, s. of Cearb, one of the Forthuatha of Leinster, sl. Cairbre
Lithfeachair in bt. of Gabhra, anno 284 Fm.
Simeon Breac, 'Simeon the Speckled,' s. of Aodhan Glas, k. Ire. six
years; sl. by Duach Fionn,  anno 4296 Fm..
Simeon Breac, s. of Starn, a chief of the race of Neimheadh.
Simplicius, Pope (468-483), a contemporary of Oilill Molt (k. Ire.)
Sin, f. of Deaghaidh (who got a prov. of Munster from Eochaidh
Feidhlioch).
Sin, s. of Maitsin, of race of Lughaidh, s. of Ioth.
Sin, s. of Roisin, of race of Eireamhon.
Sineach Chro, a nun or female recluse, complains to Diarmaid (k. Ire.)
that Guaire, s. of Colman, took her only cow.
Sineall, f. of St. Molua.
Sioda, da. of Flann (one of the Earna), and m. of Mogh Nuadhat.
Sioda, f. of Sioda.
Sioda, s. of Sioda, a chief of Clann Choilein, sent with 500 Dal gCais
to rescue Ceallachan Caisil.
Siodh, s. of Maolcluiche.
Siodha, Neara, s. of Fionncholl of (a Siodhaibh), a pagan author of
the Seanchus.
Siodhmall, sl. Eochaidh Airiomh (k. I), anno 5084 Fm.
Siodhmall, s. of Cairbre Crom.
Siol Aodha, proper surname of the Mac na Maras; spring from Cormac Cas,
274.
Siol mBrain, the O Byrnes; said by Spenser to be of British origin.
Siol Cearbhaill, the O'Carrolls of Ely O Carroll, sprung from Connla
Clamh, s. of Tadhg, s. of Cian.
Siol Conaill, al. Cineal Conaill (q.v.), not at bt. of Cluain Tarbh.
Siol Conchubhair, the O'Connors of Connaught.
Siol gCinneididh, the O'Kennedys of Ormond; are under the protection
of St. Ruadhan of Lothra.
Siol gCuinn, the dss. of Conn Ceadchathach, principally the Ui Neill
North and South; sprung from Eanna Aighneach; include dss. (sliocht)
of Fiachaidh Sraibhtheine and of Eochaidh Doimhlen, and are sprung
from Cobhthach Caol mBreagh.
Siol Eoghain, the Eoghanachts of Cashel.
Siol Flannchuidhe, the Clancys of Tulach Finn, near Sliabh Eilbhe, in
north-west of Co. Clare; sprung from Cormac Cas.
Siol Meachair, the O'Meaghars, sprung from Connla Clamh, s. of Tadhg,
s. of Cian.
Siol Mordha, the O'Moores or O Mores of Leix; have St. Fionntain as
protector.
Siol Muireadhaigh, dss. of Muireadhach Muilleathan, k. C. who d. anno
701; they were the O Conors of Magh nAoi or Machaire Connacht and
their correlatives, as the Mac Dermots, Mac Donoughs, O Beirnes, O
Flanagans, Mac Gerathys, O Morans; of these the O Conors were the most
powerful.
Siol Suilleabhain, the O'Sullivans, sprung from Fiachaidh Muilleathan.
Sionann, an tS., nsf.; dat s., Sionainn; g., na Siona; Flann Sionna
(q.v.), 'F. of the Shannon,'; the r. Shannon; a limit of Meath; a
limit of Garbh-Fhearann Luighdheach (i.e., Co. Clare); a limit of West
Munster.
Siorchaidh, s. of Fiatach Fionn, of race of Eireamhon.
Siorlamh, 'Longhand,' s. of Fionn, of the race of Ir, k. Ire. sixteen
years; sl. by Eochaidh Uaircheas, 4344 Fm.
Siorna Saoghlach, 'Siorna the Longlived,' s. of Dian, k. Ire. 21
years; said by some to have reigned thrice fifty years; sl. by
Roitheachtaigh, anno 4169 Fm.
Siosma na Sacsan, 'de Schismate Anglicano,' a work by Sanderus
(Sanders); v. Sanderus.
Siothbholg, s. of Fear Uillne of the race of Lughaidh, s. of Ioth.
Siothdhruim, ancient name of the place now called the Rock of Cashel,;
other names for it are Leac na gCead and Druim Fiodhbhuidhe.
Sithcheann, s. of Riaghlan, of race of Lughaidh, s. of Ioth.
Sitheach, s. of Eachdonn, s. of Alasdar, s. of Domhnall; Clann
tSithigh (the Mac Sheehys) sprung from.
Sith Neannta, Fairymount, par. of Kilgefin, bar. of Ballintober, Co.
Ros. (Atlantis, III. 386.)
Sithrighe, s. of Dubh, and f. of Rudhruighe, of race of Ir.
Sith Truim, al. Sith Dhruim (Sithdhruim), old name of Rock of Cashel;
v. Siothdhruim.
Sitric, with his brothers, Amhlaoibh and Iomhar come to Ire. on
pretext of trading, after death of Turgesius, according to
Polycronicon.
Sitric, f. of Amhlaoibh (i.e., Olaf Cuaran); v. Amhlaoibh Cuaran.
Sitric, f. of Gothfraidh (who pl. Ceanannus anno 949 Fm., 951 Au.);
appears to be identical with Sitric who d. anno 925 Fm.
Sitric, s. of Amhlaoibh (i.e., Olaf Cuaran), spoils Ulster in reign of
Brian Boraimhe.
Sitric, s. of Iomhar, sl. by a party from Normandy in reign of Flann
Sionna, anno 896 Au., 891 Fm.
Sitric, s. of Iomhar, k. of the Fionnlochlonnaigh and the
Dubhlochlonnaigh, d. anno 925 Fm.; with Clann Iomhair came to Ire.
with a large fleet and seized on Ath Cliath in time of Niall Glundubh,
anno 917 Fm.
Sitric, s. of Iomhar, leader of the Lochlonnaigh of Port Lairge, sl.
by k. of Osruighe, anno 1022 Fm., Au.
Sitric, s. of Iomhar, of Port Lairge.
Sitric, s. of Turgesius, treacherously proposes to marry his sister
Beibhionn to Ceallachan Caisil; and his host go to Dun Dealgan with
Ceallachan as prisoner; drowned at Dun Dealgan by and with Fianghal in
the rescue of Ceallachan.
Siuir, g. na Siuire, r. Suir, springs from brow of Sliabh Aildiuin
which is called Sliabh an Bhearnain in Ui Cairn (the Devil's Bit Mount
in Ikerrin) not from Sliabh Bladhma (as Cambrensis says.) [It rises
near the source of the Nore at the southwest extremity of the par. of
Bourney, bar. of Ikerrin, Co. Tipp. on the mountain called Borresroe,
a lofty peak of the Devil's Bit range, 21 miles south-east of
Moneygall, P. G.], joins Feoir (Nore) and Bearbha (Barrow) at Cumar na
dTri nUisce (q.v.); limit of sees of Caiseal and Lios Mor.
Skellig of St. Michael, off coast of Kerry, v. Sceilig Mhichil. Slaine,
r. Slane, in Ui Criomhthainn flows into the Boyne near town of Slane
on north side; Aodh Slaine (jk. Ire.) named from.
Slaine, Slane, a town in par. of Slane and bar. of Upper Slane, Co.
Meath, it is situated on the left bank of the Boyne; Stanihurst says
it is named from Slainghe (k. Ire.); elsewhere and generally called
Baile Slaine.
Slainghe, s. of Deala, s. of Loch, a Fear Bolg, k. Ire. one year;
first k. Ire.; Hanmer says he was 30 years k. Ire.
Slainghe, r. Slaney, rises in the eastern part of par. of Donaghmore,
Co. Wicklow, and flows into Wexford Harbour (Innbhear Slainghe).
Slan, a slave who came to Ire. with the Milesians.
Slane, r., v. Slaine.
Slaney, r., v. Slainghe and Innbhear Slainghe.
Slangha, s. of Partholon; d. and is buried at Sliabh Slangha, anno
2533 Fm.
Slanoll, s. of Ollamh Fodhla, k. Ire. fifteen years; d. in the
Banqueting-hall (Teach Miodhchuarta) at Tara, anno 3959 Fm.
Sleachta, a plur. form; dpl. Sleachtaibh; in par. of Ryemoghy, Co. Don.
(Fm. I. 36).
Sleamhain Midhe, al. Sleamhain (Sleawyn, Ann. of Clonmacnoise), the
tll. of Slane Beg and Slane More in an isolated portion of par. of
Dysart, Co. West.; there is also a tl. named Slanestown in par. of
Mullingar.
Sleibhte Ghlinne da Loch, the Mountains of Glendalough, a limit of the
see of Cill Dara.
Sleibhte Riffe, al. Sliabh Rife, 'Rhipaei Montes,' on the north-west
of Asia according to Pomponius Mela; the position of Rhipaei Montes in
classical times was undefined; the Tanais had its source in them; and
they were blasted with perpetual frost, cf.:
"Solus Hyperboreas glacies Tanaimque nivalem,
Arvaque Rhipaeis numquam viduata pruinis
Lustrabat." ( Virgil., Georgic. IV).
loosely corresponds to western branch of the Ural Mountains.
Sliabh, pl. Sleibhte, a mountain, a range of mountains or hills; a
mountainous plain or district; a moor, a marsh, heathery land; it is
sometimes applied to a district consisting of a long mountain range
and a wide contiguous plain.
Sliabh Aildiuin, al. Sliabh an Bhearnain, the Devil's Bit Mountain in
Ikerrin, Co. Tipperary.
Sliabh Alpa, the Alps.
Sliabh an Bhearnain, 'the Gapped Mountain,' al. Sliabh Aildiuin, the
Devil's Bit Mountain, in bar. of Ikerrin, Co. Tipperary; v. Sliabh
Aildiuin.
Sliabh an Bhogaigh, 'the Mountain of the Bogland,' between Fiodh
Gaibhle and Ceann Choradh.
Sliabh an Iarainn, 'the Iron Mountain,' Slieve Anierin, in Co. Leitrim,
summit of being 21/2 miles east of the shore of Lough Allen; limit of
see of Ard Charna or Ardachadh.
Sliabh Badhna, Slievebawn, in the eastern part of Co. Ros., a range,
which runs parallel to the Shannon; its highest point having an
altitude of 857 feet, and situated 4 miles north-west of Lanesborough.
Sliabh Bealgadain, Bulgaden, 21/2 miles north-east of Kilmallock, Co.
Limer.
Sliabh Bealgadain, Maolcobha (k. Ire.) sl. by Suibhne Meann in bt. of,
anno 610 Fm; Fm. and also Ll. say the bt. took place at Sliabh Toadh,
i.e., Sliabh Bealgadain Toadh, and there is a mountain of this name
near village of Ardara, bar. of Banagh, Co. Don.; there is an alias
reading in Au. And in Ann. of Clonmac. viz., Sliabh Truim, which name
appears as Slevetryn in a map of Ulster of 1590 by Francis Jobson,
this mountain is now called Bessy Bell and is situated to the south of
Newtown Stewart, Co. Tyrone (v. Fm., II. 424).
Sliabh Beatha, Slieve Beagh, al. Slieve Baught or Slabay, at the
joining of the counties of Tyrone, Fermanagh and Monaghan (the entire
range as well as this particular peak, which is 1254 feet high, is
named Slieve Beagh); limit of see of Clochar.
Sliabh Bladhma, Slieve Bloom, a range of mountains running on the
mutual borders of Queen's Co. and King's Co. and encroaching on Co.
Tipp., near town of Roscrea; a limit of see of Cill Chainnigh; v.
Bladhma.
Sliabh Breagh, in its widest signification seems to have been
coextensive with the mountainous region of Magh Breagh (v. Magh Breagh
and Breagha) and may have been sometimes used loosely for Magh Breagh,
thus Sliabh Luachra as we know included an extensive plain as well as
mountain ranges; in the narrower signification it seems to have been
applied to the hill range between Mount Oriel and Drogheda and to that
between Collon and Slane; as a diocesan limit it refers to a
particular hill in the latter range, Slieve Bregh, hill on the
contiguous borders of barr. of Upper and Lower Slane, 31/2 miles north
by west of the town of Slane, Co. Meath; limit of sees of Ard Macha
and Daimhliag (Duleek)
Sliabh Cailge, perh. Slieve Callan, bar. of Inchiquin, Co. Clare; as
Bb. 20 a aliases the bt. of with bt. of Cuinche or Quin, Co . Clare;
bt. of fought by Aonghus Olmucaidh, anno 3790 Fm.
Sliabh Caoin, Slieve Reagh on the contiguous borders of Cos. Cork and
Limer.; it contains the Bearna Dhearg or Red Gap where Mathghamain, br.
of Brian Boraimhe, was sl., anno 976; common limit of Middle and South
Munster; a limit of the see of Cill Dalua.
Sliabh gClaire, al. Ceann Claire, al. Claire, a conspicuous hill near
and to the east of the church of Duntryleague, Co. Limer.; from its
summit, on which there is a well-preserved cromlech said to be the
tomb of Oilill Olom, there is a fine view of Sliabh Eibhlinne (q.v.)
the Galtees, etc. The position of this hill will appear from the
following passage from Fm., anno 1600: "O'Neill marched from Cashel
westward across the Suir and set out for Kinsale by the route of
Cnamhchoill and Sliabh na Muice keeping to the east side by Sliabh
gClaire and passing through Bearna Dhearg into Clongibbon and Roche's
country," v. Suppl. to O'R.'s Diet. under Claire.
Sliabh gCrot, Slieve Grud or Mount Grud, par. of Kiliardry, Co Tipp.;
Cill Bheacain on north side of; Eatharlah (Glen of Aherlow) beside; v.
Cill Bheacain.
Sliabh Cua, Sliabh gCua, Slieve Gua, in par. of Seskinan, Co.
Waterford; this range of mountains includes Cnoc Maoldomhmaigh or
Knockmeldown.
Sliabh Cuailgne, the Cooley Mountains, near Carlingford; often "the
Cooley Hills."
Sliabh Cuala (for Sliabh Cualann), the Sugar-Loaf Mountain,
Co. Wicklow.
Sliabh Eibhlinne (corruptly Sleibhte Eidhlim), Slieve Phelim, a range
of mountains in barr. of Owneybeg and Coonagh, Co. Limerick; it is
some ten miles in length with an average breadth of about three miles;
a limit of Thomond or North Munster a common limit of North and Middle
Munster; a limit of see of Cashel; v. Supp. to O'R.'s Dict.
Sliabh Eichtghe, Slieve Aughty, or Slieve Baughta, on the conterminous
borders of Co. Galway and Co. Clare; a limit of Thomond; a limit of
Garbh-fhearann Luighdheach (Co. Clare); v. Echtghe.
Sliabh Feimhean, Slievenaman Mountain (2,364 feet above sea level), 63/4
miles north-east of Clonmel, Co. Tipp.
Sliabh Fuaid, mountains in bar. of Fews near Newtownhamilton, in Co.
Armagh; O'D. says the name was applied in his time to the highest
mountain in the Fews. This mountain has peaks some 1,200 feet in
height such as Carrigatuke and Deadman's hill between which the road
from Dundalk to Armagh passes; the mountain is of frequent mention in
the Irish Annals; a limit of the sees of Clochar and Ard Sratha.
Sliabh Mairge, Slieve Margy; a range of hills that borders on the par.
of Castlecomer, Co. Kilk. and the Co. of Carlow and Queen's Co.; a
limit of the sees of Leithghlinn and Cill Chainnigh.
Sliabh Mis, Slieve Mish, a range of mountains in barr. of Trughenackmy
and Corkaguiney, Co. Kerry; the range has a length of 13 miles due
westward from the valley of the Maine, Slieve Mis proper is to the
east of the Tralee-Milltown road.
Sliabh Modhairn, name obsolete, a range of hills in bar. of Cremorne,
Co. Mon., and west of Sliabh Fuaid.
Sliabh Musaigh, Magh Nuadhat, def. Conn in bt. of.
Sllabh na mBan, Slievenaman, Co. Tipp.; v. Sliabh Feimhean.
Sliabh Rife, v. Sleibhte Riffe.
Sliabh Slangha, al. Sliabh Domhanghairt, Slieve Donard, in Co. Down
(altitude 2,796 feet), highest peak of the Mourne chain.
Sliabh Ughmhoir, Ughmhor (an. of Ciocal) from.
Sliabh Uidhe an Riogh, al. S. Oidhidh an R. ('Mountain of the king's
death '); the Cratloe or Gleann-na-gross Mountain, bar. of Lower
Bunratty, Co. Clare; a limit of the see of Cill Dalua; Crossa (Gleann-
na-gros) in, a limit of see of Luimneach.
Sliabh Uidhe Laighean, al. S. Suidhe L., al. Suidhe Laighean, i.e.,
Sessio Lageniensium, Mount Leinster, the loftiest peak (altitude 2,610
feet) of the Blackstairs and Leinster range, on the conterminous
borders of Cos., Carlow and Wexford; it is 51/4 miles east-north-east of
the town of Borris-in-Ossory; a limit of see of Leithghlinn; a limit
of the see of Fearna.
Slieve Anierin, Co. Leitrim, v. Sliabh an Iarainn.
Slieve Aughty, v. Echtghe and Sliabh Eichtge.
Slieve Baughta, v. Echtghe and Sliabh Eichtge.
Slieve Beagh, or Slieve Baught, in Ulster, v. Sliabh Beatha.
Slieve Bloom, mountain, v. Bladhma and Sliabh Bladhma.
Slieve Bregh, Co. Meath, v. Sliabh Breagh.
Slieve Donard, Co. Down, v. Sliabh Slangha, and Sliabh Domhanghairt.
Slieve Grud, Co. Tipp., v. Sliabh gCrot.
Slieve Gua, Co. Wat., v. Sliabh Cua.
Slievelargy, Co. Tyr., v. Sliabh Larga.
Slieve Margy, in Leinster, v. Sliabh Mairge.
Slieve Mish, in Kerry, v. Sliabh Mis.
Slievenaman, Co. Tipp., v. Sliabh Feimhean, and Sliabh na mBan.
Slieve Phelim, Co. Limer., v. Sliabh Eibhlinne.
Sligeach, Sligo r., or r. Garrogue, flows from Lough Gill into Sligo
Bay, near the town of Sligo.
Slighe Dhala, al. Bealach Mor Osruighe, a limit of Thomond or North
Munster; a limit of Muscruidhe Tire or the two Ormonds; a limit of see
of Cill Dalua; v. Bealach Mor Osruighe.
Sligo, r., v. Sligeach.
Sliocht Dairine (al. S. Dairfhine), of the race of Lughaidh, s. of
Ioth, one of the two families who possessed the two provinces of
Munster before time of Oilill Olom; held the sovereignty of Munster
while Sliocht Deirgthine held the brehonship and tanistship and vice
versa,; the person K. calls Dairine here seems to have been Daire
Siorchreachtach, al. Daire Daimhtheach, f. of Lughaidh Laighe, f. of
Maicniadh, f. of Lughaidh Mac Con (k. Ire.); it would seem that Slioch
Dairine is really equivalent to Sliocht Daire or Dairfhine (Dairine)
'the des. of Daire Daimhtheach,' by terminal assimilation to Sliocht
Deirgthine, with which the tribe is placed in co-relation; v. Sliocht
Deirgthine.
Sliocht Deirgthine, of the race of Eibhear, one of the two families
who possessed the two provinces of Munster before the time of Oilill
Olom; held the sovereignty of Munster while Sliocht Dairine held the
brehonship and tanistship, and vice versa v. Sliocht Dairine;
Deirgthine was f. of Derg, f. of Mogh Neid, f. of Mogh Nuadhat, f. of
Oilill Olom, v. Celtic Misc. 4 sq.
Smiorghull, s. of Eanbhoth(a), of race of Eireamhon.
Snamh Eugnachair, a ford to the south of Cillshleibhe (Kileavy, co.
Armagh), a limit of Meath; D. IV. 2 has co Cuan Snama Aighneach. while
Rawlinson B. 512 has the word after co Snam illegible; Snamh Aighneach
is Carlingford Lough.
Soanus, a disciple of St. Comhghall, builds 100 monasteries.
Sobhairce, of the race of Ir, jk. Ire. forty years; takes the northern
half of Ire. (the boundary line being from Innbhear Colpa to
Luimneach); sl. in bt. of Geisill; Fm. says he was slain by Eochaidh
Meann, of the Fomorians, anno 3707.
Sochet, baptismal name of Patrick.
Soilen, a leader of the Cruithnigh who came to invade Leinster.
Solinus, Gains Julius (fl. third century), author of "Collectanea
Rerum Memorabilium."
Solloghod, Co. Tipp., v. Sulchoid.
Solon, the Greek philosopher.
Sord Choluim Chile, Swords, Co. Dublin.
Sorley, v. Samhairle.
Soully, Scottish family name.
Spenser, Edmund (c. 1552-1599), English poet, author of "The Fairie
Queene," also of "View of the State of Ireland," which is the work on
which K. animadverts.
Spid, Speed, chronicle of,; v. Sbid.
Sraibhgheann, f. of Neimheadh.
Sraith an Fhearainn, Shramore, Ballysadare, Co. Sligo; a limit of the
see of Cill Aladh.
Sru, s. of Easru, gf. of Partholon; an. of Neimheadh (s. of Agnomen).
Stu, s. of Easru, s. of Gaedheal.
Srubh Broin, a r. in West Munster.
Srubh Broin, Stroove, tl. and point a little to the south of
Innishowen Head, Co. Doneg.; common limit of sees of Doire and Raith
Both.
Stanihurst, Stanyhurst, Richard (1547-1618), born in Dublin, author of
a "Description of Ireland" and a "History of Ireland under Henry
VII.," both of which works appeared in Holinshed's Chronicles anno
1577; the Dict. of Nat. Biog. misrepresents Keating's charge against
him that he looked for advancement from a certain party into a charge
of his having been "bribed by large gifts and promises of advancement
to blacken the character of the Irish nation".
Starn, s. of Neimheadh; sl. by Conaing, s. of Faobhar, in bt. of
Murbholg.
Starn, s. of Rughraidhe, s. of Deala.
Stirne, s. of Dubh, s. of Fomhor, sl. in bt. of Ard Ionmhaith.
St. Mullins, Co. Carlow, v. Teach Moling.
Stoo, Stow, John (c. 1525-1605), author of "Annales, or a Generale
Chronicle of England from Brute unto the present yeare of Christ, 1580
"
Stow, John, v. Stoo.
Strabo (born c. 63 B.C.), Greek geographer; says the Irish are a man-
eating people.
Strangford Lough, v. Loch Cuan, and Murthola.
Stranguell, Earl of, v. Mac Gilbeirt, Risteard.
Suairleach, bp. of Fobhar, d. anno 750 Au.
Suama, Mogh Nuadhat def. Conn. Ceadchathach in bt. of.
Suca, the three  -- s burst over land in Connaught, in time of
Eireamhon; between Co. Galway and Roscommon, O'Fl., 187; the chief
river called Suck, flows from Lough O Flyn (it does not rise from this
lake but from various mountain sources beyond it) to Castlerea, then
to the borders of Cos. Galway and Roscommon, between which counties it
forms a boundary excepting a detour of some five miles into Roscommon
near Athleague; it flows into the Shannon a little below Shannon
Harbour, half a mile below Shannon Bridge; a limit of see of Cluain
Fearta.
Suck, r., v. Suca.
Sugar Loaf Mountain, Co. Wick., v. Sliabh Cuala.
Suibhne, not identical with Swyn.
Suibhne, f. of Foghartach (k. of Ciarraidhe).
Suibhne Aruidhe, f. of Aodh Dubh (who sl. Diarmaid, k. Ire.).
Suibhne Meann, 'Suibhne the Stammerer, s. of Fiachna, k. Ire. thirteen
years.
Suibhne Meann, 'Suibhne the Stammerer' s. of Colman Mor; f. of Conall
Guithbhinn.
Suidhe Finn, on Sliabh na mBan, named after Fionn, s. of Cumhall.
Suir, r., v. Siuir.
Suirghe, s. of Caicher, and a leader of the Milesian Expedition.
Suirtealaigh, the Shortals, a family who came to Ire. at the Norman
Invasion.
Sulchoid, Solloghod or Swallowhead, four miles w. of Tipperary town;
bt. of won by the brr. Mathghamhain and Brian Boraimhe over the
Lochlonnaigh; v. C. G., cxviii. sq.
Swords, Co. Dublin, v. Sord Choluim Chille.
Sylvester, v. Silbhester.
Symmachus, Pope (498-514), elected pope the sixth year of the reign of
Muircheartach, s. of Earc.
Synod, Council, v. Raith Breasail, Ceanannas, Fiadh Mic Aonghusa

T.
Tabharn, s. of Enna, of the T. D. D.
Tacitus, Cornelius (c. 55-120), Roman historian
Tadhg, s. of Brian Boraimhe, and br. of Murchadh, s. of Brian, goes to
Cluain Tarbh.
Tadhg, s. of Cathal, k. C., twenty years; d.  anno 956, Au.
Tadhg, s. of Cian, usually called Tadhg Mac Cein.
Tadhg, s. of Faolan, k. of Ui Cinnsealaigh, among the victors of
Bealach Mughna.
Tadhg, s. of Lorcan, k. of Ui Cinnsealaigh, d. in penance at Gleann da
Loch, anno 1030 Fm.
Tadhg, s. of Murchadh O Ceallaigh, k. of Ui Maine (and usually
called 'Tadhg Chatha Bhriain,' 'Tadhg of Brian's Battle'; sl. in bt.
of Cluain Tarbh.
Tadhg, s. of Nuadha, druid of Cathaoir Mor.
Tadhg, s. of Oilill Olom, sl. in bt. of Magh Muchruimhe, anno 195 Fm.
Tadhg O Riain, k. of Ui Drona, sl. by Donnchadh Mac Giolla Padraig,
anno 1015 Fm.
Taghmon, Co. Wex., v. Teach Munna.
Taillte, da. of Maghmhor (k. of Spain), and w. and queen of Eochaidh,
s. of Earc, last Fear Bolg k. Ire; buried at Taillte which is named
from her; w. also of Eochaidh Garbh (s. of Duach Dall) of the T. D. D.
Taillte, Fair of (Aonach Tailltean), at Telltown; Log an Aonaigh, 'the
Fair Hollow,' is beside the road running from Kells to Donaghpatrick.
Taillte, Telltown, tl. and par. in bar. of Upper Kells, 31/2 miles
southeast by east of town of Kells, Co. Meath; named from Taillte, da.
of Madhmhor (k. of Spain) who is buried there.
Tain Bo Cuailgne, 'The Cattle Spoil of Cooley,' a famous Irish heroic
romance. It has been edited with a German translation by Windisch. His
edition was published at Leipzig in 1905.
Tain Bo Fliodhais, an Irish heroic romance; published in Irische Texte
(Second Series), vol. I., ed. Windisch.
Tain Bo Reghamain, an Irish heroic romance; published in Irische Texte
(Second Series), vol. I., ed. Windisch.
Tairbeart, Tarbert, on r. Shannon in Co. Kerry; a limit of the see of
Luimneach.
Tal, v. Clann Tail.
Talamonach, k. of Ui Liathain, sl. in bt. of Carn Conaill.
Tallaght, Co. Dublin, v. Tamhlachta.
Tamhlachta, Tallaght, Eochaidh, bp. of, d. anno 807 Fm.
Tanais, r. Don, flows into the Mediterranean Sea according to all
writers on geography [this is the ancient view; it really flows into
the Sea of Azov.
Tanistry, 'tanisteacht,' "the system under which the grown men of the
tribe elect their own chief generally choosing a successor before the
ruling chief dies, and almost invariably. electing his brother or
nearest mature male relative," Maine, Early Laws and Customs, p. 145;
there was a marked tendency to appoint the 'strongest'candidate, the
fittest and best for the position; this custom was declared illegal in
the early part of the reign of James I. of England.
Tanuidhe, v. Ua Maolconaire.
Taoiseach, 'leader,' title of an Irish chief.
Taprobana, al. Taprobane, the island of Ceylon.
Tara, s. of Tuirreall, of the T. D. D.
Tara, Co. Meath, v. Teamhair and Teamhair Breagh.
Tarbert, Co. Kerry, v. Tairbeart.
Tasach, a chief of Ui Liathain.
Tat, s. of Aghnaman (Ogaman), s. of Beodhaman.
Tat, s. of Seara, s. of Sru.
Tat, s. of Tabharn, s. of Enna.
Tat Teadhmannach, s. of Luaighne Lainhchinn, and an. of Cairbre Chinn
Chait.
Taurin, St., Abbey of, in Normandy; the Ancient abbey of St. Taurin
grew up round the relics of St. Taurin which were discovered in the
seventh century by St. Landulphe, bp. of Evreux; the abbey buildings
do not now exist, but the Church of St. Taurin still remains, and on
its stained glass windows (c. 1400) scenes from the life of the saint
are painted; the reliquary of the saint,which has an eventful history
is kept in the sacristy.
Tawin Point, Co. Gal., v. Rinn Tamhain.
Tea, da. of Lughaidh, s. of Ioth, w. of Eireamhon; one of the seven
chief women who came with the Milesians; built a fortress at Teamhair
(Tara), which is named from her.
Teach Duinn, 'Donn's House,' al. Dumhacha, 'Sandbanks,' off west coast
of Kerry. in Corca Duibhne prob. Smerwick Harbour.
Teach Mochua, 'House of St. Mochua'; Timahoe, par. and village in bar.
of Cullenagh, Queen's Co., 61/2 miles north-east of Abbeyleix.
Teach Moling,'St. Moling's House,' St. Mullins on the river Barrow, Co.
Carlow (the par. of St. Mullins is chiefly in bar. of Lower St.
Mullins, Co. Carl., but partly in bar. of Bantry, Co. Wex.); a limit
of the see of Leithghlinn.
Teach Munna, 'St. Munna's House,' Taghmon, a small town in par. of
Taghmon, bar. of West Shelmalier, Co. Wex.
Teach na Romhanach, 'The House of the Romans,' in Ui Garrchon in Lower
Leinster in neighbourhood of Innbhear Deaghaidh (Arklow); perh.
Tigroney (a hill and tl. of the name), par. of Castle Mac Adam, bar.
of Arklow, Co. Wick.
Teacht, s. of Triobuat, a Fear Bolg.
Teagasc Riogh, 'Instructions for a king,' an Irish tract written by
Cormac, s. of Art, for Cairbre Lithfeachair; this tract is no doubt
identical with Tecosca Chormaic, ed. Meyer, Todd Lecture Series XV.
and first published by O'Donovan in Dublin Penny Journal, I.
Tealach, the g. Teilge only given in K.; Fm. gives obit of Ultan, s.
of Cuimmine, bp. of Tealach Olann (g. Telcha), anno 709; Tealach Olann
is not identified.
Tealach an Choscair, 'the Hill of Slaughter,' (or of Victory) in
Bregia; in Moymurthy near Gormanstown, Reeve's Adamman, 108; O
Flaherty says Ughaine Mor was sl. at Cill Droichid, on the Boyne,
which would represent Oldbridge, Co. Meath; Fm. says it is in Magh
Muireadha in Bregia; Ughaine Mor (k. Ire.) sl. by his brother on, anno
4606 Fm.
Teach Miodhchuarta, the Banqueting Hall at Tara.
Teamhair, Tara, Feis of, v. Feis Teamhrach.
Teamhair, Tara, Psaltair of, v. Psaltair na Teamhrach and Saltair na
Teamhrach.
Teamhair, g. Teamhrach, na T., dat. Teamhraigh, Tara Hill, par. of
Tara, bar. of Skreen, Co. Meath; the expression King of Teamhair or
Tara meant k. of Ireland, but from about a hundred years before the
Norman Invasion the kings of Midhe or Meath were called kings of
Teamhair.
Teamhair Breagh, Tara of Breagha or Bregia; v. Teamhair.
Teamhair Brogha Niadh, a limit of Tinne's division of Connaught;
Cairbre Nia Fear's palace in Leinster, v. O'Fl. 269, 273, 282.
Teannmhagh, in Connaught (also Fm. I. 38 text); bt. of fought by Irial
Faidh (k. Ire.) against the Fomorians; cleared of woods in reign of
Eithrial (k. Ire.)
Tearmonn Feichin, 'sanctury of St. Feichin,' Termonfeckan, or
Torfeckan, a village in par. of same name, bar. of Ferrard, Co. Louth,
4 miles north-east of Drogheda.
Teathbha, Teffia, in Co. Westmeath, comprised in ancient times barr.
of Rathconrath, the part of the bar. of Magheradernon to the west of r.
Brosna and of Lough Owl and Lough Ennell, barr. of Kilkenny West,
Brawney, Clonlonan, Kilcoursey (King's Co.); the r. Eithne or Inny
divides North Teffia from South Teffia; North Teffia is often called
Cairbre Gabhra, and for centuries before the Norman Invasion belonged
to the O Farrells, and was called South Conmhaicne or Anghaile; v. Fm.
II. 156, O'Fl. 402, sq.
Teathur, proper name of Mac Ceacht (q.v.); a s. of Cearmad Milbheoil.
Teffia, v. Teabhtha and Feara Teabhtha.
Teimheanain, k. of Ui Deaghaidh, among the victors at Bealach Mughna.
Teitill Treinmhileadh, 'T., Stout Warrior,' sl. in bt. of Sulchoid.
Teltown, Telltown, v. Taillte and Aonach Taillteann.
Termonfeckan, or Torfeckan, Co. Louth; v. Tearmonn Feichin. Terryglass,
Co. Tipp., v. Tir da Ghlas.
Thomas a Becket, v. Tomas.
Thomasius, Thomas Thomas (1553-1588) a Cambridge printer and
lexicographer; his Latin Dictionary first appeared at Cambridge in
1587, and Rider (q.v.) made much use of it in his Lexicon which was
published two years later; Thomasius had published "Fabularum Ovidii
interpretatio" in 1584; the third edition of his Dictionary appeared
in 1592, its title being; "Thomae Thomasii Dictionarium tertio . . .
emendatum et longe auctius . . . redditum; ex officinis Johannis
Legate Cantabrigiae, 1592," the eleventh edition was published in
London in 1619.
Thomas, Thomas, v. Thomasius.
Thomond, v. Tuadh Mhumha.
Thrace, v. Tracia.
Tighearnach, of the race of Daire Barrach, and bp. of Cluain Eois, d.
anno 548 Fm.
Tighearnach, f. of Cronan (k. of Ciannachta Ghlinne Geimhean.)
Tighearnach, f. of Feidhlim (k. M.), II. 78.
Tighearnach, k. of Loch Gabhair, def. Lochlonnaigh at Doire Dhisirt
dha Chonna; sl. 1200 Lochlonnaigh at Drom da Chon, (seems identical
with the last mentioned event; the number who fell in this bt. is
given as twelve score (incorrectly translated twelve hundred) in Fm.
anno 846; in Au. it is 1200 and in C. G. 500).
Tighearnach, s. of Muireadhach, bp. of Drom Ionasclainn, d. anno 876
Fm.
Tighearnach Teidbheannach, s. of Luchta, gets a province of Munster
from Eochaidh Feidhlioch.
Tighearnbhard, s. of Brighe.
Tighearnmhas, s. of Ollamh Fodhla.
Tighearnmhas, s. of Follach, of the race of Eireamhon, k. Ire. fifty
years (or sixty years according to some); d. at Magh Sleacht, anno
3656 Fm.
Timahoe, Queen's Co., v. Teach Mochua.
Tinne, s. of Aodh, and gf. of St. Adhamnan.
Tinne, s. of Connraidh, gets a division of Connaught from Eochaidh
Feidhlioch.
Tinne, s. of Cormac Cas.
Tiobraid Fhinn, Fionn's well; T. Fh. seems in Ui Maine (v. Fm. I.
354); O'D. conjectures that it was in Magh Finn, bar. of Athlone, Co.
Rosc., Fm. I. 354; Fionn was chief of Dealbhna Nuadhat, many of whom
were sl. around him.
Tiobraide, comhorba of Ailbhe, i.e., bp. of Imleach Iobhair (Emly).
Tiobraide Tireach, s. of Breasal.
Tiobraide Tireach, s. of Mal, and k. U.; sl.. Conn Ceadchathach
treacherously, anno 157 Fm.
Tiobruid Arann, Tipperary, County of.
Tiobruid Arann, Tipperary town.
Tiobruid Naoi (al. called Tiobraid Mac Neanna), Tubrid, bar. of Iffa
and Offa, Co. Tip.
Tipperary, v. Tiobruid Arann.
Tir Conaill, a territory wider than Tir Conaill Gulban or Tyr Connell,
though smt. used loosely as equivalent to it; it comprised; Cairbre
(bar. of Carbury, Co. Slig.), Cineal Eanna (bar. of Raphoe, Co. Don.),
Cineal Boghaine (bar. of Bonagh and part of bar. of Boylagh, Co. Don.),
Dartrighe (bar. of Rosclogher, Co. Leit.), Tuath Ratha (Toorah in bar.
of Magheraboy, Co. Ferm.), Fir Luirg (bar. of Lurg, Co. Ferm.), Cineal
Luighdheach in bar. of Kilmacrenan, Co. Don.
Tir da Ghlas, Terryglass, vil. and par. in bar. of Lower Ormond, Co.
Tip.
Tir da Loch, Dealbhna, of, in Connaught, I. 296; v. Dealbhna. Tir
Eoghain, comprised Cos. of Tyrone and Derry and the barr. of
Innishowen and Raphoe in Co. Donegal, also portion of Co. Armagh.
Tir Luighdheach, al. Cineal Luighdheach, included bar. of Kilmacrennan,
Co. Don.
Titus, Epistle of St. Jerome to; what is meant is St. Jerome's
Commentary on St. Paul's Epistle to Titus. This commentary is to be
found in vol. VI. of St. Jerome's works in Migne's Cursus Completus
Patrologiae.
Tlachtgha, the Hill of Ward near Athboy (Ath Buidhe Tlachtgha), 6
miles north-west of Trim, in bar. of Lune, Co. Meath.
Tobar Finn, Fionn's Well, at Tiobraid Fhinn, q.v., named from Fionn, s.
of Arb.
Tochar Cairbre, 'causeway of Cairbre,' in bar. of Carbery, Co. Kild.,
and a limit of Meath; lying south of Clonard, Man. Mat. 487; Fr. P.
Walsh thinks Roosk Togher leading from King's Co. to Kild., represents
Tochar Cairbre, v. Archivium Hibernicum, vol. I., p. 7.
Todhga, servant of Partholon; story of his intrigue with Partholon's
wife.
Togorma, Thogorma, s. of Gomer.
Toibinigh, the Tobins, a family who came to Ire. at the Norman
Invasion.
Toirinis, al. Tor Conaing, Tory Island off north-west coast of Donegal,
four miles north by west of Innisboffin; a limit of Briotan's division
of Ire.; called Tor Conaing from Conaing, s. of Faobhar.
Toirrdhealbhach, s. of Cathal, s. of Aodh Caomh, an. of Brian Boraimhe.
Toirrdhealbhach, s. of Murchadh, s. of Brian; sl. in the bt. of Cluain
Tarbh.
Toirrdhealbhach, s. of Tadhg, s. of Brian Boraimhe; v. O Briain,
Toirrdhealbhach.
Toirrdhealbhach Mor O Conchubhair, v. O Conchubhair, Toirrdhealbhach.
Tola, Tulla, in par. of Kinnity, King's Co.; Fiachaidh, s. of Baodan,
def. the men of Eile and Osruighe in bt. of, anno 571 Fm.
Tomair, al. Tomrair, Tomar, a leader of the Lochlonnaigh;
Maolseachlainn takes a collar of gold from, anno 994 Fm.; what seems
to have happened is that Maoilseachlainn took by force the torc of
Tomair, earl and tanist to the k. of Lochloinn, who was sl. anno 847;
this torc or chain seems to have been preserved as an heirloom; O'D.
(Fm. I. 475) thinks that Tomair or Tormair was an. of the Danish kings
of Dublin.
Tomaltach, one of the four servants who bore the corpse of Dathi, k.
Ire., to the grave, buried at Cruachain.
Tomaltach, f. of Diarmaid (k. C.).
Tomar, al. Tomrair, Tomair, earl, tanist to k. of Lochloinn, sl. In bt.
of Sciath Neachtain (anno 847 Fm.); v. Tomair.
Tomas, St. Thomas a Becket, abp. of Canterbury, murdered anno 1171.
Tomregan, in Ulster, v. Tuaim Dreagain.
Tonn Cliodhna, 'Cliodhna's Wave,' from the Boyne to, Eibhear's half of
Ire.; al. Tonn Inghine Geanainn, the Wave of Geanann's daughter; in
Glandore Harbour, v. Poems of Egan O Rahilly, Intr.; T. C. was one of
the three celebrated "waves" off the Irish coast; O'Curry (Man. Mat.
and M.L.) places it in the bay of Clonakilty.
Tonn Tuaidhe, off Ballintoy, which is a village on the Antrim coast,
four miles north-west of Ballycastle and six miles east of Bushmills
(K.A.J. IV. 127); O'Curry places it at mouth of the Bann, M.L. 95; the
former identification suits the K. context best, but in Rathlin
Ballintoy is Baile na Tuaighe.
Toomgraney, Co. Clare, v. Tuaim Greine.
Tor, a leader of the Lochlonnaigh, br. to Sitric and Maghnus, drowned
in the rescue of Ceallachan Caisil.
Torbhuirg, Tor Head, bar. of Carey, Co. Antrim, five miles north of
Cushendun. It is the nearest point of the Irish mainland to Scotland;
a limit of the see of Cuinnire.
Tor Coning, Conaing's tower, al. Toirinis, q.v.
Tor Head, Co. Antrim, v. Torbhuirg.
Torgestius, bp. of Luimneach, at Council of Ceanannus; d. anno 1167
(Fm., where he is called Torgelsi; v. K., III. 384, note on line 4938,
I. Intro. XXXI.); cf. the Scandinavian name Thorgestr and Thoirgheis
or Turgesius.
Torna, s. of Miuris O Maolconaire, a learned seancha of Leath Cuinn; v.
O Maolconaire.
Torna Eigeas, poet and instructor of Niall Naoighiallach, poem on
Cruachain by, beginning "Ata futsa ri fionn Fail"; O Reilly, Irish
Writers, pp. 25, 26, mentions four poems, including the one here
referred to, which are attributed to Torna Eigeas.
Torolb (v. C. G. 79, where a variant name is Tolbarb), a chief of the
Lochlonnaigh, sl. in bt. of Sulchoid.
Toron, Tours in France, Martin bp. of.
Toronn, a black river of Ire. which sprang up in time of Tighearnmhas
(k. Ire.); r. Torrent, a tributary of r. Blackwater, in Co. Tyrone.
Torrian Sea, v. Muir Torrian
Tortan, near Ardbraccan, Co. Meath, bt. of won by the Leinstermen;
Earc, s. of Oilill Molt, sl. in bt. of, ib. (anno 543 or 548 Au.).
Tortan, f. of Feadha.
Tory Island, v. Toirinis.
Tostius, bp. of Port Lairge, at Council of Ceanannus.
Tothacht, ploughman to Partholon.
Tountinna, Co. Tipp., v. Tultuinne.
Tours, in France, v. Toron.
Tower of Breoghan, in Galicia.
Tracht Eise, in Ulster, Conchubhar and the nobles of U. at, on arrival
of Conlaoch from Alba.
Tracht Rughruidhe, in Ulster, O Fl. 171; inner Bay of Dundrum, Co.
Down (v. Raith na Sciath, Onom.).
Tracia, Thrace
Thracia, sea of, v. Muir Tracia.
Tradruidhe, Tradry, a deanery in Co. Clare, comprising the following
parr.; Tomfinlough, Killonasoolagh, Kilmaleery, Kilcorney, Clanloghan,
Dromline, Feenagh, Bunratty, Killowen, and the island of Inis da dhrom
in the r. Shannon at mouth of the Fergus (Fm. I. 867)
Tradry, deanery of, Co. Clare, v. Tradruidhe.
Traigh Eothuile, Beltra Strand, at Ballysadare, Co. Sligo.
Traigh Li, Tralee, Co. Kerry.
Tralee Bay, v. Loch Foirdreamhain.
Tralee, Co. Kerry, v. Traigh Li.
Trea, a slave who came to Ire. with the sons of Milidh.
Treachuire, s. of Trean, an. of Cochlan.
Trean, s. of Sidhe, an. of Cochlan.
Treanmhor, f. of Cumhall (f. of Fionn), and fourth in descent from
Nuadha Neacht (k. L.)
Trecassensis, Troyes in France, Lupus, bp. of.
Treitheirne Mumhan, T. of Munster, the land of Triath Mac Iughaine
Moir, Lec. 36; named from Triath-ri-Thorc.
Tren, ploughman to Partholon, I. 172.
Trian Chluana Meala, Clonmel Third, barony of Iffa and Offa, Co. Tip.;
Trian Meadhonach (Middlethird) and, constitute Magh Feimhean.
Trian Meadhonach, bar. of Middlethird, Co. Tipp.; and Trian. Chluana
Meala, constitute Magh Feimhean; al. Eoghanacht.
Trichinn, f. of Ros (an author of the Seanchus Mor).
Trim, Co. Meath, v. Ath Truim.
Triobuat, s. of Othorb, a Fear Bolg.
Triostan, a druid of the Cruithnigh or Picts.
Triun, s. of Roithriun, of the race of Eireamhon.
Troyes, in France, v. Trecassensis.
Tuadh Mhumha, 'North Munster,' Thomond; one of the five sub-divisions
of Ire. made by the Fir Bolg.
Tuaigh Innbhir, the estuary of the Bann.
Tuaim da Ghualann, al. Tuaim; Tuam, Co. Gal.;1st abp. of, consecrated,
anno 1150.
Tuaim Dreagain, Tomregan, par. partly in bar. of Knockninny, Co. Ferm.,
but chiefly in barr. of Tullaghagh and Lower Loughtee, Co. Cav.;
Eochaidh Faobharghlas def. dss. of Eireamhon in bt. of, anno 3727 Fm.
Tuaim Drubha, in Connaught; bt. of, anno 499 Fm.
Tuaim Greine, Toomgraney, bar. of Upper Tulla, Co. Clare.
Tuaim Teannbhaoth, al. Dinn Riogh, a little to the south of Leighlin
Bridge on r. Barrow; v. Dionn Riogh.
Tuam, Co. Gal., v. Tuaim da Ghualann.
Tuan, s. of Caireall, an ancient sage supposed by some to have
recounted Irish traditions to Patrick.
Tuath, division of land; tuath means primarily people in reference to
the ruler or king; it came to mean laity in contrast with clergy; also
the district or townland where the people lived, but it does not
denote a district of fixed extent.
Tuath, name of a section or division of the Tuatha De Danann.
Tuathach, a title, equated to tighearna, 'chief lord.'
Tuath Eibhe, in Machaire Eibhe, or Magherow between Ben Bulben
Mountain and the sea, in bar. of Carbery, Co. Sligo.
Tuath Gheisille, bar. of Geashill, King's Co.
Tuath Odhrain, Oranstown, Co. Meath, a district near Tara, given by
Cormac, s. of Art, to Buicead.
Tuatha Fiodhgha, a British tribe, make conquests at mouth of Slaney;
def. in bt. of Ard Leamhnachta, by Criomhthann Sciathbheal.
Tuatha Taidhlon, one of the Teora Tuatha of Connaught, situated in the
east of the Co. Rosc. and adjoining Brefny O Ruairc; Raghallach, k. of
Breithfne Ui Ruairc and of.
Tuathal, a servant of Dathi (k. Ire.); buried at Cruachain.
Tuathal, a warrior, from whom the Tuathalaigh or O Tooles are named;
[they are named from Tuathal, s. of Ughaire, k. L., fl. 935-955.]
Tuathal, f. of Ughaire (k. L.).
Tuathal, s. of Ughaire, a. of Oilill, of Leinster.
Tuathal, s. of Ughaire, k. of Ui Muireadhaigh, among the victors at
Bealach Mughna.
Tuathal Maol Garbh, 'T. the Bald and Rough,' s. of Cormac Caoch, k.
Ire. thirteen years.
Tuathal Teachtmhar, 'T. the Legitimate,' s. of Fiachaidh Fionnoladh, k.
Ire. thirty years; sl. by Mal, s. of Rochruidhe, (anno 106 Fm.; v.
O'D., note on this date.)
Tuathal Tlachtgha, i.e., Tuathal Teachtmhar.
Tuathalaigh, npl.; the O Tooles.
Tubrid, Co. Tipp., v. Tiobraid Naoi.
Tuilen (al. Tolan), Dulane, par. near Kells, Co. Meath; Ciaran, bp. of,
d. anno 919 Fm.
Tuireall, f. of Tara, of the T. D. D.
Tulach Leis, Tullalease, tl. and par., 7 miles north north-east of
Newmarket, Co. Cork; a limit of the see of Luimneach.
Tulach O bhFeidhlimidh, Tullow O Feilimy, al. Tallow, a town in bar.
of Rathvilly, Co. Carl.
Tulach Og, Tullaghogue, a village in par. of Desertcreaght, bar. Of
Dungannon, Co. Tyrone.
Tulach Oichne, an ancient name of Cruachain.
Tulla, King's Co., v. Tola.
Tullaghogue, Co. Tyr., v. Tullach Og.
Tullalease, Co. Cork, v. Tulach Leis.
Tullow O Feilimy, al. Tullow, Co. Carl., v. Tulach O bhFeidhlimidh.
Tultuinne, al. Torn Tuine, Tountinna, in par. of Templechala
(Templecallow), in bar. of Duharra (Duthaigh Aradh), Co. Tipp.; near
Loch Deirgdheirc.
Tur Breoghain, al. Tor B., the tower of Breoghan; in Corunna in Spain,
built by Breoghan (gf. of Milidh of Spain).
Turcaigh, npl., the Turks.
Tur Conaing, I. 202, v. Tor Conaing.
Turgesius, al. Tuirgeis, leader of the Norwegians or
Fionnlochlonnaigh; the year 841 is generally assigned to his
usurpation of the abbacy of Ard Macha; Cambrensis is our prime
authority for the story of his capture; Lynch (C. E., II. 287) makes
it out to be a legend; cf. the Scandinavian name Thorgils or Thorkils
but esp. Thorgestr.
Turgesius, sons of, II. 228, 230; v. Clann Turgesius.
Turloch Innbhir Mhoir, a fort built by Aimhirgin,; it appears to have
been at Arklow whose estuary is called Innbhear Mor.
Ty Dewi, in Wales, v. S(an). Daibhidh.
Tyrconnell, v. Tir Conaill, and Cineal Conaill.

U.
Ua Briain, O Brien; Earl of Urmhumha (Ormond) contracted matrimonial
alliance with.
Ua Cearbhaill, O Carroll; Earl of Urmhumha (Ormond) contracted
matrimonial alliance with.
Uachongmhail, Book of, one of the chief books of Ire.
Uachongmhail, al. Uachonghbhail (al. (not in K.) Nuachongmhail); there
are several places of this name in Ire. usually anglicised Nohoval or
Noughaval; there is a Nohoval in bar. of Burren, Co Clare; in
Westmeath; in Co. Cork four miles east of Kinsale; in the same county
near Knocknagree; there is also a Faughanville near the shore of Lough
Foyle, Co. Derry; Uachongmhail or Nuachongmhail was also the ancient
name of Navan, it is Latinised Nova Habitatio by Colgan, who thus
gives its position "Nuadhchongbhail, i.e., Nova habitatio est oppidum
Mediae ad ripam Boinii fluvii a Pontano (Drogheda) decem millibus
passuum distans, ab Authrumia (Trim) quinque," Acts Sanctorun 141, col.
1, n. 8. In an interesting passage in the Ordnance Survey Letters
(Meath) O'D. tells how he identified Colgan's Nova Habitatio with
Navan, being helped thereto by Colgan's measurements; the Uachongmhail
giving its name to the Book of U. is, not improbably, Navan; Book of
(now unknown); v. Leabhar na hUachongmhala.
Ua Domhnaill, O Donnell.
Ua Dubhagain, O Dugan, poem on Cashel by, beginning " Caiseal Cathair
Clann Mogha," quoted.
Ua Floinn, Eochaidh, Eochy O Flynn; d. anno 894 (O'Reilly, Irish
Writers), chief ollamh in poetry in his time; poem by, on the
partition of Ire. among Partholon's sons, quoted by K.; stanzas from a
poem by on the Milesian Invasion which begins "Taoisigh na luingse tar
lear," quoted by K.; v. Eochaidh Ua Floinn.
Uala, Hwala, s. of Bedug, an. of Aelfred.
Ualentinian, Valentinian II., Emperor of the Western Roman Empire
(425-455), Scots and Picts kept disturbing Britain from time of Julius
Caesar to time of.
Uallach, s. of Diothorba.
Ualsingham, Tomas, Thomas Walsingham (d. c. 1422), a Benedictine monk,
author of 'Historia Anglicana,' and of Ypodigma Neustriae, which is a
history of the dukes of Normandy; it is printed in the Rolls Series,
anno 1876, edited by Riley; his Ypodigma quoted by K. in ref. to Sru.
Ua Mac Uais Breagh (for Ui Mac, etc.), bar. of Moygoish, Co. West.
Ua Maolconaire, O Mulcrony, Tanuighe (al. Tanuidhe), d. anno 1136
(O'Reilly, Irish Writers), stanzas on the quarrel between Eibhear and
Eireamhon quoted from; on the Fir Bolg, quotedby K.
Ua Mathghamhna Cairbre, O Mahony of Carbery (in West Cork.)
Uandali, Vandals, destroyed the old records of countries they invaded.
Ua Neill, O Neill; Earl of Cill Dara (Kildare) contracts matrimonial
alliance with.
Uar, a druid; sl. in bt. of Sliabh Mis.
Uar, s. of Ughmhor, a Fear Bolg; Loch Uair named from him.
Ua Rodain, O Rody, or O Rodan, bp. of Luighne (Achonry), at Council of
Ceanannus.
Ua Ruairc, O Rourke; earl of Clann Riocaird enters into matrimonial
alliance with.
Ua Treasaigh, O Tracy, Breasal, quoted as to the tribes and companies
of the five divisions of Munster; there is a poem (23 E. 16, R.I.A., p.
319) on the five divisions of Munster by Breasal Ua Treasaigh (as
appears from the last quatrain); the poem which consists of only seven
quatrains is very rare and begins: Coig Mumhain a Mumhain Mhoir. But
K.'s reference cannot be to this poem, as it says nothing about the
companies, etc.
Uchadan, an artificer employed by Tighearnmhas.
Uchbhadh, bt. of, al. bt. of Ath Seanaigh, at Ballyshannon; near
Kilcullen Bridge, Co. Kild., fought between Aodh Ollan (k. Ire.) and
Aodh, s. of Colga, k. L., anno 733 Fm; Mac Neill (Arch. Hib. I. 66)
thinks Uchbhadh is a common noun, 'the bt. of Groans.'
Uchtan, f. of Maoilfinen (bp. of Ceanannus).
Udaidh (g. Udach), f. of Raghallach (k. C.).
Udhaire, k. of Alba.
Uerindo, Verindo, an estuary in Biscay; the Milesians come to Ire.
from, according to some.
Uernia, Vernia, a name for Ire. according to Eustatius.
Uespasian, Vespasian, Roman Emperor (70-79); made Emperor anno 73,
according to Stow.
Uestcester, Westchester, 'waste Chester,' Chester town in Cheshire;
abbey of Beannchair (Bangor) near, according to K. (it is some 15
miles from Chester).
Ughaine mor, 'U. the Great,' s. of Eochaidh Buadhach, k. Ire. thirty
years (or forty according to some); sl. by his br. in Tealach an
Choscair; buried at Cruachain.
Ughaire, s. of Dunlaing, k. L., def. Sitric, s. of Amhlaoibh, and the
Lochlonnaigh of Ath Cliath; burnt by Donn Sleibhe at Dubhloch Leasa
Cuile; the bt. in which Ughaire was victorious was fought in Dergne
Mogorog, al. Deilgne Moghoroc, or Delgany, Co. Wick., anno 1021.
Ughaire, s. of Oilill, sl. in bt. of Ceann Fuaid, anno 915 Fm.;
Ughaire was k. of Leinster.
Ughaire, s. of Tuathal, k. L., captured by the Lochlonnaigh of Ath
Cliath,; sl. in bt. of Biothlann,  anno 978 Au.
Ughmhor, a Fear Bolg.
Ughmhor, f. of Garbh, and an. of Ciocal.
Ui, npl.; ns. o, ua; gpl. o, ua; dpl. uibh; descendants, used with the
g. case of name of founder to express a tribe or tribe-land, as Ui
Liathain, Ui Chonaill Gabhra. In the text generally Ui aspirates the
first letter of the succeeding proper name, but in Trans. and in the
body of the Index, the h of aspiration is usually omitted.
Ui Bhairrche, territory of the dss. of Daire Barrach, consisting
mainly of bar. of Slewmargy, Queen's Co..
Ui Bhloid, dss. of Cas (an. of the Dal gCais), a branch of the Dal
gCais whose territory lay in Co. Clare, north-east of see of Killaloe;
the deanery Omelode or Omulled represents the name.
Ui Bhriuin, the, Ui. B. were the dss. of Brian (k. C.), s. of Eochaidh
Muighmheadhoin; their territory lay in Connaught, mostly in Co. Cavan.
Ui Chairin, bar. of Ikerrin, Co. Tipp.; Sliabh Aildiuin, al. Sliabh an
Bhearnain (i.e., Devil's Bit Mountain) in.
Ui Chaisin, dss. of Cas (an. of Dal gCais), the Macnamaras of Clare, a
branoh of Dal gCais, whose tribe land corresponds to deanery of
Ogashin, which comprises the following parr. in East Clare: Quin,
Tulla, Clooney, Doora, Kilraghtis, Kiltalagh, Templemaley, Inchicronan
and Kilmurry na nGall.
Ui Chinnsealaigh, Hy Kinselagh, the territory included Co. Wexford, a
portion of Co. Wickl. and in Co. Carl., it included the district of Ui
Feilmeadha, round Tullow, Donaghmore near Sleaty, Ui Drona and Ailbhe.
Ui Chogarain, a Munster tribe sprung from Cogaran, a servant of Brian
Boraimhe.
Ui Choingheoidh, the nine crosans from hell who chanted on the grave
of Donnchadh (k. of Osruighe) belonged to the company of.
Ui Cholgan, a small territory in Leinster, near Lusk, Co. Dublin, but
apparently not bordering on the sea. [cf. "A prey by Sitric Cam from
the sea to Ui Colgan," Fm. I. 683; anno 1055, " the airchineach of
Lusca (Lusk) was chief of Ui C.," Fm. 868]; it seems to have been
distinct from Breagha, cf. Fm. II. 1154; the tribe sl. Saxolbh, anno
836 Fm.
Ui Chonaill Gabhra, barr. of Upper and Lower Connello.
Ui Chonghmhala, Book of; v. Leabhar na hUa Chongmhala and Uachongmhail.
Ui Chriomhthainn, territory in barr. of Upper and Lower Slane, Co.
Meath; the tribe were a branch of the Oirghialla; won by the Collas
from the Ultonians; the tribe sprung from Colla da Chrioch.
Uichtdhealbh, da. of Aonghus (s. of Natfraoch), and w. of Oilill Molt.
Uictor, Victor, Patrick's angel, a vision of seen by two swineherds.
Ui Deaghaidh (name survives in deanery of Oday, bar. of Gorey); bar.
of Gorey, Co. Wexf.
Uidhir Chiarain, the Dun Book of Kiaran, cf. the existing book known
as Leabhar na hUidhre, "the Book of the Dun Cow;" one of the chief
books of the Seanchus of Ire.; Leabhar na hUidhre (c. A.D. 1100) has
been published in facsimile by the Royal Irish Academy, but Uidhir
Chiarain is lost.
Ui Drona, barr. of Idrone East and West, Co. Carlow; O Drona in Trans.
Ui Eachach, barr. of Upper and Lower Iveagh, Co. Down.
Ui Eachach Mumhan, Ivaha Peninsula, extending from Ballydehob to
Dunmanus Bay, the territory of the O'Mahonys of Carbery.
Ui Fallghe, Ui bhFailge, al. Crioch Ua bhFailghe, the territory of O
Connor Faly, which before the Norman Invasion consisted of the present
barr. of Offaly (Ophaly) East and West, Co. Kild.; Philipstown, Lower
and Upper, Geashill, Warrenstown, Coolstown, King's Co.; Portnahinch,
Tinnahinch, Queen's Co.; after the invasion, however, barr. of Offaly
East and West came into the possession of the Fitzgeralds of Kildare;
the tribe are sprung from Rosa Failghe, s. of Cathaoir Mor.
Ui bhFaircheallaigh, al. Ui Faircheallain. Offerlane, a par. in bar.
of Upperwoods, 31/2 miles west-south-west of Mountrath, Queen's Co.; in
Osruighe.
Ui bhFaithche, al. Ui Fathaidh, bar. of Iffa and Offa, Co. Tipp.;
Gleann Gharaidh in.
Ui bhFaolain, al. Ui Brain, the O Byrnes of Leinster; their territory
comprised barr. of North Naas, North and South Salt, Clane, and the
united barr. of Ikeathy and Oughterany, all in Co. Kild.
Ui bhFlachra Eidhne, South Ui Fiachra, corresponds to see of
Kilmacduagh in the south-west of Co. Galway.
Ui bhFiachrach, 'Hy Fiachra,' comprises North Ui. F., that is the barr.
of Carra, Erris, Tirawley in Co. Mayo, and Tireragh, Co. Sli., and
South Ui F. or Ui F. Eidhne, q.v.
Ui bhFidhgheinnte, now Clar Chonntae Luimnigh, 'the plain of County
Limerick,'; the territory embraced the Co. of Limerick west of r.
Maigue, and also the bar of Coshma.
Uige, a leader who came to Spain with Bratha; f. of Un.
Uilceathach, a smith, f. of Eachtach (m. of Cormac, s. of Art).
Uilliam, William, k. of Scotland (1165-1214), taken captive and
imprisoned in Rouen in Normandy by Henry I. of England.
Uilliam Concur, William the Conqueror, k. of England (1066-1087).
Uilliam Rufus, William Rufus, k. of England (1087-1100), sent to Ire.
for timber for the roofing of Westminster Hall, anno 1098.
Ui Liathain, the O Lehanes, their territory consisted of barr. of
Barrymore and Kinnataloon, Co. Cork; Ard Neimhidh (i.e., the Great
Island on which Queenstown is built) in.
Ui Mac Coille, bar. of Imokilly in the extreme south-east of Co. Cork;
the tribe have St. Colman as protector.
Ui Mac Uais, sprung from the Collas (i.e., from Colla Uais); prob. on
west side of r. Bann, Co. Derry.
Ui Mhaine, Hy Many, or the O Kellys' country, comprised barr. of
Ballymoe, Ballintobar, South Athlone, and Moycarn, in Co, Ros.;
Ballymoe, Traquin, Killian, Kilconnell, Cluainmacnowen Longford,
Leitrim, Loughrea, and portions of Dunkellin and Athenry in Co. Gal.;
part of Upper Tulla in Co. Clare; par. of Lusmagh in King's Co.
Ui Mhaolchonaire, the O'Mulchonrys of. Connaught; chiefs of, at
inauguration of Connaught kings.
Ui Mhuireadhaigh, the O'Murrys, the tribe name of the family of O
Tuathail (O Toole), whose territory originally lay in the southern
half of Co. Kild. and comprised the barr. of Kilkea, Moone, Narragh
East and West, also Reban and parts of Connell; the O Tooles were
driven to the adjacent uplands from this territory soon after the
Norman Invasion.
Ui Neill, 'Hy Niall,' divided into Northern and Southern branches; the
Northern consists of Cineal Eoghain, Cineal Conaill, Cineal Cairbre,
bar. of Carbery, Co. Sli., and Cairbre Gabhra in Co. Long., Cineal
Eanna in Tir Eanna, between Loughs Foyle and Swilly, and Cineal Eanna,
near Hill of Usna in Cineal Fiachach, v. O Fl. 401; the Southern Ui
Neill is coextensive with the see of Meath; it extends from the
Shannon to the sea; nearly all the references in K. are to the
Southern Ui Neill.
Ui Niallain, in Ui Failghe, Lec. 200; Raith Cinneach in; O'Fl. places
Raith Cinneach in Ui Niallain in Leinster, O Fl., 169; the Ui N.
corresponding to bar. of Oneilland, Co. Arm., is more widely referred
to in the Seanchus.
Uinnseann, the three Uinnseanna rivers, burst forth in Ui nOiliolla in
time of Eireamhon; there is a r. Unshin or Uncion, al. Arrow, flowing
from Lough Arrow into Ballysadare Bay; to this there is a tributary on
the east named r. Douglas, and one on the west between Tirerril and
Corran; these are prob. the three Uinnseanna; v. Onom.
Ui nOiliolla, bar. of Tirerrill or Tiraghrill, in the south-east of Co.
Sligo.
Ui Rathach, bar. of Iveragh, in West Ker.; the tribe were the
O Sheas.
Uisneach, children of, that is, Naoise, Ainle, and Ardan; Naoise was
the lover of Deirdre.
Uisneach, al. U. Midhe; Usnagh, Usna, a hill in the par. of Conry, bar.
of Rathconrath, Co. West., 31 miles east of vil. of Ballymore; it has
an altitude of above 600 feet.
Uisneach, convention or assembly of (Dail or Mordhail Uisingh), held
annually at Bealltaine (about the 1st of May) at Uisneach.
Uisneach Midhe, v. Uisneach.
Ui Tairsidh, a non-Gaelic tribe in Ui Failghe, said by some to be of
the Fir Bolg.
Ui Toirrdhealbhaigh, a small tribe in a district in the neighbourhood
of Killaloe; O'Fl. calls the tribe O Meara.
Ui Tuirtire, called Turtyre anno 1291; from the Trip. Life it appears
that the Ui Tuirtire were situated to the west of Lough Neagh in the
barr. of Dungannon, Co. Tyrone and Loughinsholin, Co. Derry; at a
later period the tribe moved eastward and gave their name to the barr.
of Upper and Lower Toome, Co. Antrim, a tract which roughly coincides
with the deanery which anno 1291 was called Turtyre and Turtria in
Dowdall's Registry, and Hi Turtre by Colgan; v. Reeves Eccl. Ant. 82
and 292-297.
Ulaidh, npl.; gpl. Uladh, dpl. Ulltaibh, Ulstermen or Ultonians,
Ulster; Ulaidh up to the sack of Eamhain Mhacha, anno 332, meant the
entire province of Ulster. After this event the province was shorn of
the territory of Oirghialla which roughly extends from Loch nEachach
(Lough Neagh) to the Boyne, and in the fifth century it was further
deprived of its northern and western parts, being thus reduced to the
territory corresponding to the present counties of Antrim and Down.
This last territory is often called Ulidia, and its people Ulidians,
while the Ultonians are the people of all Ulster. It has been
contended by Fr. Murray that Conaille Muirtheimhne, which is roughly
the present county of Louth, did not form part of ancient Oirghialla
(v. County Louth Arch. Journal, Dec., 1912, p. 52 sq.), but was
included in ancient Ulaidh, though it is not denied that Donnchadh Ua
Cearbhaill the last pre-Norman king of Oirghialla held a portion of
West County Louth.
Ulcha, 'long beard,'.
Ulltaigh, npl.; ns. and gpl. Ulltach; Ulstermen, Ultonians (the name
Ulltaigh is restricted to the inhabitants of Cos. Down and Antrim
after the dismemberment of the province of Ulster by Ui Neill in the
fifth century. In the early fourth century the sack of Eamhain Mhacha
or Emania and the founding of the principality of Oirghialla cut off
from the province the portion of it lying between Loch nEachach (Lough
Neagh) and the Boyne; in this restricted sense they are often called
Ulidians (and their territory Ulidia) to distinguish them from the
Ultonians or people of the larger province of Ulster; in K. Ulltaigh
in most passages means the Ultonians).
Ulltan, al. U. Mac Ui Chonchubhair, St., founder and 1st bp. of
Ardbreacan (Ardbracan 3 miles from Navan, Co. Meath), where St.
Breacan had previously built a church; s. of Aodh Beannan; d. anno 657
or 663 Au.; anno 656 Fm.
Ulpia, a Pictish leader, comes to Ire. from Thrace.
Ulster, v. Ulaidh.
Ulstermen, v. Ulltaigh.
Ultonians, v. Ulltaigh.
Umhall, g. Umhaill, The Owles, which comprises barr. of Murresk and
Borrishoole, Co. Mayo.
Un, s. of Oige (or Uige), a leader of the Milesian expedition.
Una, da. of k. of Lohcloinn, and m. of Conn Ceadchathach.
Uortigern, Vortigern, k. of Britain, at the time of the coming of the
Saxons; seeks the aid of Hengist with his German host against the
Gaels.
Uraicheapt, sometimes rendered 'Accidence,' an Educational tract of
considerable interest; written by Ceannfaolaidh the Learned in time of
Columcille; contained in some of the chief books of the Seanchus.
Uras, v. Euras.
Urbanus, Urban I., Pope (1088-1099); Donnchadh, s. of Brian
Boraimhe, and the Irish nobles give the possession of Ire. to, anno
1092; v. Donnchadh, s. of Brian Boraimhe.
Urlaidhe, 'long hair,' gives rise to name Baile Orluidhe (q.v.)
Urmhaol, made chief eigeas or bard over the two Munsters.
Urmhumha, Ormond, Earl of, contracted matrimonial alliance with
O Briain, Mac Giolla Padraig and O Cearbhaill.
Urmhumha, 'East Munster,' al. Muscruidhe Tire, Ormond; it corresponded 
roughly to barr. of Upper and Lower Ormond, Owney, Arra, in Co. Tipp.;
al. Muscruidhe Tire, 124, II. 100; Loch Ribh in, I. 152; Leacoin in,
old Book of; Tir da Ghlas in,.
Ursula, al. Fitzursula ('a noble family in England,' according to
Spenser's View of the State of Ireland), said by Spenser to
be the origin of Mac Mathghamhna or Mac Mahon.
Urus; v. Eurus.
Usnagh (Usna) hill, Co. West.; v. Uisneach.
Usser, Ussher, Doctor James (1581-1656), archbishop of Armagh and
author; the book of Ussher's referred to by K. is entitled "Veterum
Epistolarum Hybernicarum Sylloge," Dublin, 1632.
Ussher, v. Usser.

V.
Valentia Island, v. Dairbhre and Dairinis.
Vandals, the, v. Uandali.
Ventry Harbour, v. Fionntraigh.
Verdon, Bertram (d. 1192); friend of Cambrensis and a judge Cambrensis
leaves portion of his work on Ire. to be finished by.
Victor, v. Uictor.
Vivianus, Cardinal, sent by Pope Alexander II. to Ire. to make known
the grant of that country to Henry I., according to Stanihurst.
Wales, v. Cambria and Breatain.
Walley, Scottish family name.
Walshes, the, v. Breathnaigh.
Walsingham, Thomas, v. Ualsingham, Tomas.
Ward Hill, Co. Meath, v. Tlachtgha.
Waterford, v. Port Lairge.
Wellegan, Scottish family name.
Welsh, the language, v. Breathnais.
Westchester, v. Uestcester.
Westminster Hall, Irish timber used for the roofing of.
Westmorland, the Brigantes settle in.
Wexford, town and harbour and county, v. Loch Garman.

Y.
York, v. Eborach, and Yorke.
Yorke, York, territory of, the Brigantes settle in.

Z.
Zeliorbes, k. of the Huns, sprung from Magog.
Zopiron, Zophyron, leader of Alexander the Great's army, destroyed by
the Scythians.
Zoroastres, Zoroaster.

