THE MEMOIRS OF COUNT BORUWLASKI


Introduction -- The Last Court Dwarf
by
Armand Leroi


FROM THE WALLS OF THE PRADO, the Louvre and the National Gallery they
stare balefully at us. As depicted by Velazquez, Argenti, Bronzino,
Carracci, Van Dyck and another dozen now forgotten painters, the
court dwarfs stand clad in rich and elaborate dress, miniature
daggers at their sides, surrounded by the other possessions of rich
and powerful men. In one painting, a princeling stands next to a
dwarf, the better to display the boy's youthful elegance. In another,
a dwarf is placed next to a glossy, pedigreed hound. The man's
shoulders are level with the dog's withers.

'Towards the end of the seventeenth century,' wrote Isidore Geoffroy
Saint-Hilaire, 'It was necessary to dream up amusements of a special
sort for the leisure of princes and it was to dwarfs that fell the
sad privilege of serving as the toys of the world's grandees.' But
the court dwarfs were older than that. Most of the paintings that
depict them date from a century earlier. Catherine de Medici (1519-
89) had set the fashion. In the hope of breeding a race of miniature
humans she had arranged a marriage between a pair of dwarfs. A few
years later, the Electress of Brandenburg tried the same thing, but
both couples proved childless. Peter the Great took the amusement to
its extreme. In 1701 he staged a wedding between two dwarfs to which
he invited not only his courtiers, but also the ambassadors of all
the foreign powers posted to his capital. He also ordered all dwarfs
within two hundred miles to attend. A dozen small men and women rode
into the capital on the back of a single horse, trailed by a jeering
mob. At court some of the dwarfs, perceiving that they were there to
he ridiculed, refused to take part in the fun. Peter made them serve
the others.

Were all the court dwarfs unhappy, degraded creatures stripped of all
human dignity? Geoffroy, writing in 1832 thought so. So had Buffon
fifty years earlier. Joseph Boruwlaski, however, would not have
agreed. For him, being small was a gift. an opportunity. It had
lifted him out of obscurity.

The Boruwlaskis were poor. Joseph was only nine years old when his
father died, leaving the family destitute. Eighteenth-century rural
Poland was, however, a profoundly feudal society in which patronage
counted for all; Boruwlaski's mother had a patron, a young local
noblewoman, the Staorlina de Caorliz. Charmed by the young Joseph,
she prevailed upon his mother to send the boy to live with her so
that he could be educated. Boruwlaski thrived in his new home. By his
early teens he was only 61 centimetres (two feet) tall, but he had
acquired graces that would not have shamed the most noble of Polish
youths. Things became a bit difficult for Boruwlaski when the
Staorlina got married and had a child, but even then he had an eye
for a good thing. He became the protégé of another, even wealthier,
aristocratic woman, the Comtesse de Humiecka. It was the making of
him. For the Comtesse was not one to linger in the obscurity of
provincial Poland; she had a yen for travel and for society. Bundling
Boruwlaski into a carriage, she set out to conquer the courts of
Europe.

Vienna, 1754. 'What,' asked Marie-Theresa. 'is the most remarkable
thing in this room?' Boruwlaski gazed about the rococo splendours of
the Schönbrunn. but knew the answer. 'The most remarkable thing in
this room is the sight of a little man in the lap of a great woman.'
Her Imperial Majesty, Empress of all Austria and Hungary, was
delighted. In Munich, Prince Kaunitz offered Boruwlaski a pension for
life. In Lunéville the exiled Stanislaus, King of the Poles,
professed himself delighted by his conversation -- so much more
interesting than that of his own court dwarf, an unhappy youth by the
name of Bébé. The Comte de Treffan was also there, making notes for
his article Nain in the Encyclopédie. In Paris Boruwlaski stayed with
the Duc d'Orleans; at The Hague he had an audience with the Prince
Stadholder. At Versailles the teenage Marie Antoinette gave him a
diamond ring front her very own finger.

Ten brilliant years passed in this manner. And then Boruwlaski fell
in love. He paid his court to an actress. She rejected him with
scorn. Years later he would write: 'If I can upbraid nature with
having refused me a body like that of other men, she has made me
ample amends, by endowing me with a sensibility which, it is true,
displayed itself rather late, but, even in my constitutional warmth,
spread a taint of happiness, the remembrance of which I enjoy with
gratitude and a feeling heart.' But by then he could reflect on his
youthful passion with calm. For he had long won the heart of another,
a dark-eyed young noblewoman named Isalina Borboutin. She too had
laughed at him, toyed with him, treated him like a child. But he
persisted. He wrote to her, often and passionately. He petitioned the
King of Poland for a pension so that he could support her. He was
given one and a title as well: she relented.

Joseph Boruwlaski died in his sleep on 5 December 1837 in the quiet
English cathedral town of Durham. He had had a happy life, a rich
life. Born into obscurity, he had achieved dizzying social heights.
Famed for his conversation and his skill with the violin, he had
known most of the crowned heads of Europe. Ennobled by the King of
the Poles, he had also won the patronage of the Prince of Wales. He
could call the Duke and Duchess of Devonshire his friends. He was an
ornament of Durham; its council paid him merely to live there. He had
married a noble beauty, raised a family and, when he died at the
distinguished age of ninety-eight, had outlived nearly all his
contemporaries. It was a graceful end to a remarkable life. For
Joseph, le Comte de Boruwlaski, was not merely any Continental
aristocrat exiled from his homeland. He was the last of the court
dwarfs.

© Armand Marie Leroi 2003.
Quoted with permission, which is gratefully acknowledged



Title Page

MEMOIRS
OF
COUNT BORUWLASKI

CONTAINING

A SKETCH OF HIS TRAVELS

WITH

AN ACCOUNT OF HIS RECPTION 
AT THE DIFFERENT COURTS OF EUROPE
&c. &c.

WRITTEN BY HIMSELF

DURHAM

PRINTED BY
FRANCIS HUMBLE AND CO.
AND SOLD BY 
BALDWIN, CRADDOCK AND JOY, LONDON; ANDREWS, DURHAM; AND BY THE
BOOKSELLERS IN NEWCASTLE, SUNDERLAND, NORTH AND SOUTH SHIELDS,
STOCKTON, DARLINGTON, ETC.

1820



DEDICATION.

TO HIS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY,
GEORGE THE FOURTH,
KING OF THE UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND IRELAND,
&C. &C. &C.


May it please your Majesty,
	I can find no words sufficiently expressive, to convey my
grateful sense of the numerous favours conferred upon me by your
Majesty, since my arrival in this kingdom, as well as of your
gracious condescension in permitting me to dedicate to your Majesty
this humble work. Allow me, therefore, to assure your Majesty, that
what my language is inadequate to describe, I yet most deeply feel.
By extending your patronage to this my publication, your Majesty has
evinced to the world, that you are not willing to leave destitute of
encouragement the feeblest literary efforts in that country, which
your Majesty's counsels have restored to peace, and to establish
which, in prosperity, your endeavours are unremittingly exerted. I
trust that, as the patron of literature, your Majesty will be
rewarded, by your empire proving as glorious in arts as it has been
in arms. Under the auspices of your Majesty's protection, I cannot
permit myself to entertain a doubt of the success of this little
work; and, however imperfect it may in other respects be deemed, I
have the satisfaction of knowing, that it will at least be a memorial
of your Majesty's kindness to,
Your Majesty's most devoted,
And most humble Servant,
JOSEPH BORUWLASKI.
Durham, June 5, 1820.



CHARACTER of COUNT BORUWLASKI,
BY THE LATE W. BURDON, ESQ. OF HARTFORD,
NORTHUMBERLAND.
PRINTED FROM A MANUSCRIPT IN THE HAND-WRITING OF THAT GENTLEMAN.

BEING intrusted by the Author with the correction and publication of
these MEMOIRS, I cannot forbear saying a few words concerning that
interesting and amiable individual to whom they relate.
Though Nature has formed him of size much below the ordinary
standard, she has nevertheless endowed him with a mind superior to
the generality of men. His talents, though of the lighter kind, are
not altogether unequal to serious exertions; and, had they been
earlier cultivated, would have left him little below the most
profound and intelligent philosophers. As it is, he is most
remarkable for his temper and accomplishments,-- for his ingenuity,
vivacity, wit, humour, and penetration. He has seen much of mankind
in various stations of life; and,. though considered more as a
plaything than as a companion, he has omitted no opportunity of
making observations on individuals, and on the human species. Few men
have a quicker conception than he has; or more readily lay hold of
the prominent parts, or represent them with greater humour or greater
power of mimicry. His talents for music are of the most agreeable
kind: he composes, and plays on the violin and guitar, the most
beautiful, little lively airs, with an elegance and facility, that
are both rare and astonishing. He dances with all the lightness and
ease of an opera performer, and hardly ever tires. His temper is the
most agreeable and placid, his feelings lively and correct, and his
principles are those of honour, integrity, and gratitude. He never
forgets a kindness, nor ever remembers an injury. His head and his
heart are equally estimable; and, in short, I cannot naive a man for
whose amiable amenity and estimable qualities I have a greater
regard.
W. BURDON.
Welbeck-Street, London, May 14, 1818.



CHAP. I.
Apology -- Birth; Some account of my family -- Visit to the Staroslin
de Caorlix; cause of my leaving that noble lady, and my residence
with the Countess Humiecka -- Visit to the Pacha of Hochim -- Arrival
at Vienna; introduction to the Queen of Hungary -- Journey to Munich
and Luneville; introduction to Stanislaus, King of Poland -- Visit to
the Queen of France at Versailles -- Arrival at Paris; affectionate
attention of the Duke of Orleans; anecdote of the Duchess of Modena,
&c. &c.

IT is so uncommon to find reason and sentiment, with noble and
delicate affections, in a man whom nature, as it were, seemed unable
to make up, and who in size has the appearance of a child, that,
being persuaded no body would ever take the trouble to cast an eye
upon these Memoirs, I began to commit to paper some of the principal
events of my life, merely by way of memorandums, for my own use only,
to remind me of the different situations I had been in, and to recall
to my memory scenes too interesting, and emotions too strong, to be
suffered to perish in oblivion. As the reflections which I shall have
occasion to make can be interesting only to those who delight in
following nature through all her varieties, and who consequently may
be curious to see a being like me assimilate himself to creatures of
a common size, as to his ideas, pursuits, sentiments, and passions,
and as persons of my description are apt to be looked upon by the
multitude as sunk far beneath other men, both in body and mind, I
should not have taken the liberty of presenting them to the public,
had not persons, to whom I ought not to refuse any thing, imposed it
upon me as a duty. May I be so happy in offering them this tribute of
my gratitude, as to convince them how deeply sensible I am of the
interest they have taken in my concerns.

I was born in the environs of Chalicz, the capital of Pokucia, in
Polish Russia, to which place my father had retired with his family,
in consequence of the loss of his estate near the Borosthenes. My
mother was of the middle size, and from her account my father was of
the same: I do not recollect him, as he was killed during my infancy.
They had six children, five sons and one daughter; and by one of
those sports of nature for which it is impossible to account, or
perhaps to find another instance of in the annals of the human
species, three of those children grew to above the middle stature,
whilst the two others, like myself, reached only that of children in
general at the age of four years. I am the third of this family. My
eldest brother was near three inches taller than I am, and constantly
enjoyed a robust constitution. My second brother was of a handsome
figure, but delicate in his constitution: he was killed in battle
with my uncle at the age of twenty-six, and was at that time six feet
four inches high. Those who came into the world after me were
alternately tall and short. Among them was a sister, who died at the
age of twenty. She was at that time only two feet four inches high,
and to a lovely figure united an admirably well-proportioned shape.
It was easy to judge from the very instant of my birth that I should
be extremely short, being at that time only eight inches in length,
yet notwithstanding this diminutive proportion, I was neither weak
nor puny; on the contrary, my mother has often declared that none of
her children gave her less trouble. I walked and was able to speak at
the same age as other infants, and my growth was slowly progressive
till the age of thirty years, when I was three feet three inches
high. This is the size at which I remained fixed. My brother, as well
as myself, grew till thirty years of age, and at that period ceased
to grow. I had scarcely entered my ninth year when my father died,
and left my mother with six children, and a very small share of the
favours of fortune; a circumstance which may account for the part I
have since acted in the world. Had it not been for this, I should
,undoubtedly have passed my days in a province on the banks of the
Dniester, where I might have experienced more happiness.

A friend of my mother, the Starostin de Caorlix, who had shown me
much affection, and had often solicited my parents to commit my
education to her care, now availed herself of the embarrassed
circumstances of our family to repeat her kind offers to my mother,
who, painful as the separation must have been, yielded to the desire
of making me happy, and consented, though not without tears, to part
with me; and the lady took me to her estate, which was not far from
my mother's abode. We had no sooner arrived there, than the
Starostin, eager to fulfil her promises to my mother, bestowed upon
me all the care that my age required. I lived with her a little time;
and the fondness of my benefactress no way diminishing, I was likely
to be fixed for ever with her, when an unexpected event changed the
face of things. Lady de Caorlix was a widow, somewhat advanced in
years, but still blooming and graceful, and mistress of a large
fortune. The Count de Tarnow, who had been drawn by business to the
neighbourhood, paid his court to her, and I soon perceived that she
highly distinguished him above all the persons who composed her
society. She became pensive and absent, and seemed to be no longer
amused with my little prattle, so that I was not surprised at soon
after beholding Hymen unite these two lovers. I was not unconscious
of the alteration my situation would experience by their marriage. I
perceived that my protectress, by taking a husband, had procured
herself a master, and that, should I chance to displease him, I was
in danger of being grievously embarrassed, as my family affairs,
which were totally deranged, left me no resource. However, young as I
was, I considered it to be my duty to be more than ever assiduous in
my efforts to please, that I might render myself agreeable to the
husband of my benefactress; and I think I should have succeeded, had
not a new event given rise to other projects. This happy couple were
congratulated on the event of their marriage by all their friends,
among whom they numbered the Countess Humiecka.

This lady, who was descended from one of the most ancient families in
Poland, was held in the highest esteem in that country, not more for
her birth and wealth, than for her personal attractions. Her estate
being situated near the seat of the Starostin, she had frequent
opportunities of seeing me, and seemed to have some affection for me,
as she often expressed what pleasure she should feel if I would come
and live with her at Rychty. My answers to her obliging offers gained
me her friendship more and more, and she immediately wrote to my
mother, to beg she would give me leave to go and live with her,
mentioning the marriage of the Starostin as a circumstance that might
deprive me of my happiness in future. My mother was pleased with her
request, and allowed me to be under her protection. After this
favourable answer from my mother, the Countess Humiecka formed the
resolution to ask me of the Countess de Tarnow, and only waited for a
favourable opportunity, which soon after presented itself. The
circumstance of the Countess de Tarnow, my protectress, being likely
to become a mother, furnished the Countess Humiecka with a pretext.
Being one day with the married pair, she artfully insinuated, that
maternal love would prevent the Countess from sharing her tenderness
with me when the infant should be born, and concluded by offering to
take one home with her, promising faithfully the greatest care of my
little person, and of my future welfare. Whether they feared that the
new object of their tenderness might impede their attention to my
future education, or whether they were unwilling to disoblige the
Countess, they made but a slight opposition, and declared that they
left it to me, and to my mother's decision. I was absent: the servant
who came to fetch me informed me of what had passed. I entered the
apartment quite prepared with my answer, and assured the Countess,
that if the Lady de Tarnow, whose bounty rendered her the mistress of
my fate, deigned to grant me her consent, I should deem myself happy
to live under the protection of the Countess, and would follow my
inclination, as much as my duty, in earnestly endeavouring to deserve
her kindness. The Countess Humiecka seemed overjoyed at my consent.
"I am very glad," said she, my dear Joujou" (for so they called me),
"to see you have no reluctance to come and live with me." Then
addressing the Count and Countess de Tarnow, "You cannot retract,"
she said, "I have your word, and that of Joujou and his mother, to
whom I wrote before." The remainder of the visit passed in
compliments, and our departure was fixed for the next day.

Great as were the obligations I was under to the Countess de Tarnow,
yet being at that time but a child, and not having arrived at that
maturity of mind, which might enable me to reflect on her benevolent
disposition, I was easily reconciled to my separation from her,
having my head filled with the lively picture my protectress had
given me of the pleasures I should enjoy at her house. She carried me
to her estate at Rychty, in Podolia, where we stayed some time, and
where she received a visit from a Pacha of Hochim, a Turkish city
near Rychty. This Turkish grandee, not more eminently distinguished
by his rank of Pacha, than by his amiable, polite, and affable
manners, invited my benefactress to visit his palace at Hochim. I was
present at his invitation, and with great pleasure heard him politely
request that I might accompany the Countess, declaring that a sight
of the seraglio would afford me entertainment. I went with the
Countess, and on our arrival we were received with all the honours
due to the rank of my protectress. As for me, I felt quite happy, and
was much caressed in the palace, where they had been apprised of our
coming. We were served, amongst other entertainments, with an elegant
collation after the Turkish fashion, in which the sherbet was not
spared. I was highly delighted with the expectation of being admitted
into the seraglio, of which I had heard the Pacha speak, but I had no
idea of it at that time, my benefactress having merely told me that
they were grand apartments, which contained many pretty things. How
agreeably was I surprised when I beheld about twenty beautiful women,
all graced with manners the most polite, and a behaviour the most
tender and affectionate! Yet notwithstanding all the dazzling lustre
of eastern beauty, had Mahomet, proud as he was of those enchanting
females, who served him as models from whence to furnish his
fictitious paradise with Houries, been fortunate enough to behold
those exquisite specimens of beauty of which England, Scotland, and
Ireland so justly boast, he must have bent his knee in humble
acknowledgment of their superiority. I shall not enter into a
particular description of the seraglio, as it exactly resembled those
so often described by travellers, of whom, however, none have been
admitted like me by special favour within the interior apartments,
the smallness of my stature having procured me this very particular
honour.

Her Ladyship now determined to visit Germany, France, and other
countries, and being desirous to have me with her, I felt the
greatest pleasure in the flattering idea which I entertained of these
travels. The requisite preparations being completed, we set out for
Vienna. After a very fatiguing journey of some days, we reached the
neighbourhood of Zurawno, where we stopped some months. We there saw
a manufactory of gunpowder, and the lake of Zurawno, which is in
length three Polish miles, and in breadth one. We observed that the
boat at this lake was made very broad, and high in proportion, to
prevent the vast numbers of fish which abound there from leaping into
it, and oversetting it, as many accidents have happened from their
voracious disposition. This lake belongs to the great General of
Lithuania, Count Oginski. After a long and dull stay in this retired
spot, we proceeded to Vienna, where the report of our arrival was no
sooner spread, than we were visited, invited, and entertained with
the utmost eagerness. Soon after we had the honour to be presented to
her Imperial Majesty the Queen of Hungary, who was graciously pleased
to say that I exceeded by far all that she had heard of me, and that
I was one of the most astonishing beings she had ever seen. At that
time this great Princess was engaged in a war with the King of
Prussia, and by her firmness, courage, and wisdom, had rendered
herself no less terrible to her enemies than dear to her subjects. I
had the honour to be one day in her apartment, when her courtiers
were complimenting her on a victory obtained by her army, of which
every one extolled the advantageous consequences, so that, according
to their account, the King of Prussia was likely to be soon reduced
to the last extremity. The Empress, near whom I was standing, asked
me how the King of Prussia was looked upon in Poland, and what
opinion I entertained of that Prince. "Madam," I answered, "I have
not the honour to know him; but were I in his place, instead of
losing my time in waging a useless war against you, I would come to
Vienna, and pay my respects to you, deeming it a thousand times more
glorious to gain your esteem and friendship, than to obtain the most
complete, victories over your troops." Her Majesty seemed much
pleased with my reply, clasped me in her arms, and said to my
benefactress, she esteemed her very happy in having so pleasing a
companion in her travels. At another time when, according to her
desire, I had performed a Polish dance in the presence of this
Sovereign, she took me on her lap, and after having fondly caressed
me, and asked me many questions, how I spent my time, she wished to
know what I found at Vienna most curious and interesting. I answered,
I had seen there many things worthy of a traveller's admiration, but
nothing seemed to me so extraordinary as what I beheld at this
moment.

And what is that?" said her Majesty. "It is," replied I, "to see so
little a man on the lap of so great a woman." This answer gained me
new caresses. The Empress had on her finger a ring, upon which her
cypher was set in brilliants with the most exquisite workmanship. My
hand being by chance locked in hers, I happened to look upon the ring
attentively, which she perceived, and asked whether the cypher was
pretty. "I beg your Majesty's pardon," replied I, "it is not the ring
I admire, but the hand which I beseech you give me leave to kiss;"
and with these words I took it to my lips. The Empress seemed charmed
at this little gallantry, and would have presented me with the ring
which had caused it; but the circle proving too wide, she called to a
young Princess about six years old, took from her finger a very fine
brilliant she wore, and put it on mine. This young Princess was the
unfortunate Queen of France, wife of Louis XVI.

It is easy to conceive that the kind notice with which the Empress
honoured me, procured me the attention of other Courts of Europe. We
stayed at Vienna, to the best of my recollection, only six months,
during which time, my benefactress availed herself of the opportunity
of having me taught dancing by Mr. Angelini, the ballet master to the
Court, who has since by his eminent talents in the art, and his taste
for literature, rendered himself so famous. Being obliged to depart,
I could not improve under his care so much as I wished: yet my
protectress could not forbear expressing to him with raptures, her
thanks for what she was pleased to call my great progress, before we
set off for Bavaria. Arriving at Munich, we were most graciously
welcomed by his Electoral Highness; and it seemed I excited no less
curiosity there than at Vienna. The Princess Christiana, and two
other Royal Polish Princesses, who were with the Electress their
sister, on account of the war between Saxony and Prussia, honoured me
with their attention, and engaged me in their hunting party. During
our stay, which was not long, and which presented nothing particular,
we spent our time in pleasure and entertainments.

On leaving Munich, we repaired to Luneville, where Stanislaus
Lesczinski, the titular King of Poland, held his Court. I could not
help being filled with respect, admiration, and astonishment, at
seeing this venerable Prince, who, after such an agitated life, after
having undergone the most fatal reverses of fortune, still preserved,
at the age of eighty years, all the faculties of his soul, and
employed them with so much energy to promote the happiness of his new
subjects. I was struck with his noble aspect, his mild and affable
look, his serene and dignified deportment. I immediately recollected
the impression he made at first sight upon Charles the Twelfth. It is
known that this extraordinary Monarch, after having conversed with
him for a quarter of an hour, said to the Generals who composed his
retinue, "This is the man who shall be King of Poland!" It is also
known how Charles kept his word; how Stanislaus, after the disgraces
of his friend, saw himself stripped of that crown to which he had
aspired, only from his consciousness of the good he might do to his
own country; how, when he was recalled to the throne, an adverse
faction, supported by foreigners, rendered the efforts and hopes of
the soundest part of the nation useless and vain. The dangers are
likewise well known to which he was exposed, and the disguises to
which he was obliged to submit, in order to effect an escape from his
enemies. It is known, too, that at last peace having secured him the
tranquil possession of the Dukedoms of Lorraine and Bar, he carefully
employed himself to make those people lose the remembrance of their
ancient masters. Need I tell here all that he did for that purpose? I
will only say, that his buildings at Nancy and Luneville appeared to
me far superior to all that I had seen in other countries. On our
arrival, this Monarch received us with that bounty and affability
which gained him the affection of every heart; and being of his own
country, we were by his order lodged in his palace.

With this Prince lived the famous Bebe, till then considered as the
most extraordinary creature, for the smallness of his stature, that
was ever seen. He possessed indeed a perfectly proportioned shape,
with very pleasing features, but (I am sorry to say it, for the
honour of our species) had in his mind and way of thinking, all the
defects commonly attributed to us. He was at that time about thirty,
and on our being measured, it appeared that I was much less in size.
At our first interview he shewed much fondness and friendship towards
me; but when he perceived that I preferred the company and
conversation of persons of sense to his own, and above all, when he
saw that the King took pleasure in my company, he conceived a most
violent jealousy, and I saw fury sparkle in his eyes. It was during
my stay at Luneville, that I had the honour to cultivate an
acquaintance with the celebrated Count de Tressan, who was come to
reside there a little while. He took much notice of me, and it was he
who made mention of me in the Encyclopaedia. After having seen and
admired all that King Stanislaus had done to embellish Nancy and
Luneville, we took leave of this amiable Prince, who gave my
benefactress letters for the late Queen of France, his daughter, and
repaired to Paris.

I need not say, that the first care of the Countess Humiecka was to
go to Versailles, where, as a native of Poland, she easily obtained
admittance to the Queen, to whom she delivered the letters with which
the King had honoured her. This Princess, who had preserved much
affection for every thing belonging to her own country, received her
Ladyship most graciously. Her Majesty, being informed that I was
along with my benefactress, wished to see me. She was astonished at
my appearance, the smallness of which she had no idea of; and after
having asked me many questions concerning the King her father, Bebe,
and Poland, and our travels, she seemed pleased with my answers, and
did me so much honour as to add that I was a little prodigy; that
from what she had seen or been told, she had, till then, deemed the
individuals of my species to be ill-treated by nature, as much in
mind and intellectual faculties as in body, but that I had undeceived
her in a very advantageous and pleasing manner. After these obliging
words, the Queen, addressing the Countess Humiecka, was so kind as to
engage her often to repeat her visits, desiring that she would bring
me with her, and gave orders to admit us whenever we desired it.

On our return to Paris, the curiosity I excited drew many visitors to
my protectress, so that I became like Gulliver with his master the
farmer; for in less than a week every person of high rank at court,
and every person of fashion in town, waited upon her. I cannot help
expressing how infinitely I was flattered by this warm enthusiasm,
and by the numberless civilities with which I was honoured. The Duke
of Orleans, father to him who unfortunately lost his life, having
given my protectress the most elegant entertainments, evinced a
particular regard for me, and loaded me with caresses. I can even say
that, during our stay at Paris, this amiable Prince did not pass a
single day without giving me fresh testimonies of his politeness. The
ecstasy I excited, and the frequent conversations which passed about
my figure, gave rise to an incident which, had not the Queen
interposed, might have proved of disagreeable consequence to the
Polish ladies who travelled in France, as you will see.

It happened by chance that the Duchess of Modena, a Princess of the
blood royal of France, had not been at any of the entertainments to
which I had been invited. However, her Grace had heard much of me,
and all that she had been told excited a strong curiosity to see me.
Her rank not permitting her to pay the first visit to the Countess
Humiecka, she determined to write to her, and request her company at
a rout which she gave; and as I was the principal person she desired
to see, she added in the card, "especially, do not forget to bring
Joujou." The Countess Humiecka, who possessed all the sentiments
correspondent to her illustrious birth, and whose rank, beauty, and
wealth, had drawn on her, everywhere, the most flattering
distinctions, was greatly offended at such an invitation; and not
thinking proper to gratify a curiosity disclosed in so awkward and
impolite a manner, answered that she was very sorry she could not
comply with her Grace's commands: she was engaged on that day and the
following, so that she could not say when she might have the honour.
The Duchess of Modena, who understood perfectly the meaning of this
answer, was very much incensed, and complained of it to every one she
met. She even went so far as to carry her complaints to the Queen;
imagining that her Majesty, being a Polander, would blame my
benefactress for it. I am inclined to believe that the Queen, who had
a great regard for persons of her own nation, inwardly thought that
the Countess was right. However, wishing to settle this trifle, which
she was afraid might terminate in causing some uneasiness to my
benefactress, she sent for her, and engaged her to pay a visit to the
Duchess of Modena. The Duchess answered, that from respect for her
Majesty's orders, she would go, but certainly would not take Joujou
with her; upon which, the Queen, foreseeing that such a visit might
only widen the breach, dropped the conversation, and before they
parted invited the Countess to come and breakfast with her Majesty
two days after, and to bring me with her. She sent afterwards another
invitation to the Duchess, for the same day, without making known to
either of these ladies that they were to meet. On the appointed day
we waited upon the Queen, and arrived first. But what a surprise was
it to us, when some minutes after, we heard the name of the Duchess
of Modena announced! This Princess, who was at first no less
astonished than the Countess, came, however, to herself very soon;
and after she had paid her duty to the Queen, she and the Countess
saluted each other with the usual compliments, and, as if nothing had
happened, reciprocally declared the pleasure they had in seeing, and
the desire they felt to know, each other. The Duchess even went so
far as not to take notice of me for some minutes; but soon banishing
this constraint, the caresses, praises, and attentions of this
respectable old Princess proved how great was her enthusiasm.

We continued to be visited and entertained by the most considerable
amongst the nobility and financiers. The celebrated Mr. Bouret
especially, who was Farmer General, gave an entertainment, in which,
to show that it was given for my sake, he caused every thing, even
the plates, spoons, knives, and forks to be proportioned to my size;
and the eatables, consisting of ortolans, beccaficos, and other small
game of that kind, to be served upon dishes suitable to them. We
spent, in this agreeable manner, more than a year at Paris, enjoying
ail the pleasures which that capital offers to foreigners: and the
lively humour, the cheerfulness, and politeness Of its inhabitants,
made our stay delightful.



CHAP. II
Departure from Paris for Holland; description of that country.--
Arrival at the Hague; polite attention of the Stadtholder -- Journey
through Germany to Poland; arrival at Warsaw, and reception there --
Gracious offer of King Stanislaus II. to bestow an estate upon me --
My affection for Isalina; consequent displeasure of the Countess
Humiecka, who dismisses me -- Kindness of Prince Cassimir -- The King
grants me a pension -- My marriage with Isalina -- Pecuniary
difficulties oblige me to leave Warsaw -- Return to Vienna -- Journey
through Hungary and part of Turkey.

THE time at length came, when we were obliged to leave Paris, from
whence we set off for Holland. Every body knows how the soul of a
traveller is impressed by the novelty of the scenes which this
country affords. it was then the month of May, a season in which the
country presents the most agreeable appearance; and I was struck with
it in so lively a manner, that, notwithstanding the sameness so
justly complained of, I cannot recall to my mind, without emotion,
the sensations I then felt. Were I to enter into the particulars of
the polite reception we met with, I should but repeat what I have
said in my former book: I shall therefore only observe, that when we
arrived at the Hague, the Countess Humiecka was received in the most
affable and polite manner by his Highness the Prince Stadtholder and
his family, who did their utmost to make her stay agreeable. We,
however, formed but few acquaintances there; and not being able to
stay long in Holland, we employed ourselves in viewing the
curiosities with which this country abounds; and at last, after
having taken leave of the Stadtholder, my benefactress directed her
route through Germany, and we reached Warsaw. My return to my native
country made much noise. I had not yet been seen in the capital, but
was preceded by the reputation I had acquired in my travels, for
which I was indebted to the generous care of my benefactress.
Besides, I had improved much during my stay in foreign countries; and
as my residence at Paris had given me somewhat of that easy
politeness, and those graceful manners, which set off the most
trifling discourse, I was so happy as to perceive, that many persons,
by whom I was at first looked upon as an object of mere curiosity,
now wished for my society, because they took pleasure in my
conversation. Emboldened by this notice, I went oftener to assemblies
than I had hitherto done; and wishing to enlarge the circle of my
acquaintance, I cultivated an intimacy with some young gentlemen of
my own age, whose company seemed to me more gay and interesting than
that of those persons who were in the habit of frequenting the
Countess Humiecka's house. I had inspired my protectress with
confidence enough, to induce her to allow me a reasonable degree of
liberty; and I availed myself of it, by going frequently to the play,
of which I had always been an admirer. The new sensations which began
to rise in my breast, were now increased by the intemperate life of
my young friends, who, yielding to the dictates of that indiscretion
natural to their age, indulged without scruple the impulses of their
lively imaginations. But my benefactress, who was not ignorant of
this affair, sent to me a very wise and sensible man, in whom I had
the greatest confidence. He strongly remonstrated with me on the
irregularity of may behaviour, and set forth the fatal consequences
into which I was likely to be hurried. His observations affected me:
I promised never more to frequent the company of these young men,
whose bad example had seduced me; and by the regularity of my
conduct, I soon regained the kindness of the Countess, and the
pleasure of her society. I had no occasion to repent the change: my
life became quieter and more happy, and I now began to perceive the
emptiness of those pleasures, which I had enjoyed in the society of
my last companions.

At that time Warsaw was the scene of rejoicings and amusements.
Stanislaus the Second had lately ascended the throne of Poland. This
Prince (on whose virtues and accomplishments I need not expatiate, as
they are known to all who had the honour of approaching him, either
as a king or as a private man) was applying himself to retrieve those
innumerable calamities, which a series of troubles and agitations had
occasioned. By his patronage the arts and sciences were flourishing,
and he gained by his goodness the affections of his greatest Lords,
who flocked round his person, to evince their attachment. In the
midst of these rejoicings his Majesty came to supper on Twelfth
Night, with the Princess Lubomirska, where I was invited by the
Countess Humiecka. The cake being opened, I was chosen king, and had
the honour to enter into conversation with his Majesty, when I
entreated his permission to lay aside, in his presence, the
prerogative of my newly-attained royalty. This proposition from me
afforded great diversion to the King, who turned to the Countess, and
deigned to signify that my behaviour gave him much pleasure, and said
he was inclined, as a mark of his royal favour, to bestow an estate
upon me. But my protectress's countenance too plainly bespoke her
disapprobation of his generous offer, to admit of its being carried
into effect. In this state of tranquillity my days glided away, and I
thought that no kind of vexation could disturb so happy a life. I was
then very far from foreseeing, that those delicate and tender
sentiments, upon which was grounded my expectation of future
felicity, would one day be the cause of disquietude and bitterness of
heart, and would throw so heavy a cloud over my existence.

I am now entering into the particulars of those events, which I shall
always regard as the most interesting epoch of my life. Those
moments, which became fraught with new ideas, new desires, and
pleasures far different from those I had hitherto known, brought
likewise new troubles and new difficulties, to which I had never
thought I should be exposed. The Countess Humiecka's bounty seemed
likely for ever to secure me from want, as her Ladyship's favour had
drawn on me the consideration and regard, not only of every person in
her house, but even of all the people of quality that composed her
society. I did not foresee the probability of ever being deprived of
her friendship, nor did I feel in my heart the fear of ever becoming
unworthy of it. I was caressed, fondled, and cherished. Nothing was
wanting to my happiness; and I enjoyed it with so much the more
security, as I had experienced no reverses, and foolishly thought I
should never have any to endure; as reason and good advice had
brought me back to steady conduct and more quiet sentiments. But I
knew not my own heart, and all those fine expectations vanished, from
the moment I beheld a young female whom my benefactress had taken
into her house.

The Countess Humiecka had consulted only her own gratification when
she took Isalina, for that was her name; and this young lady
possessed all the requisites to interest and please. Let me be
excused from describing what she appeared in my eyes. Such as regard
only personal appearance in the choice of their wedded partners, know
very little of the human heart. To enable them to live happily
together, and to have for each other that mutual esteem which alone
can confer such happiness, more lasting qualities are requisite. I
still know how to set a proper value on those advantages so much
sought after, though they are only gifts which Nature blindly
distributes; and I must own, there is a personal beauty, which
discloses that of the soul; and when we meet with those tender,
sweet, and lively countenances, which, being strangers to
dissimulation and deceit, exhibit in their features the emotions they
feel, and the impressions they receive, we must acknowledge, at the
very first moment, that persons so happily endowed are worthy of all
our attachment. It is among women especially, that this inestimable
quality is to be found, which so advantageously sets off their
charms. They possess it, notwithstanding all the obstacles that are
opposed to it, though the aim of their education incessantly be to
instruct them how to dissemble their sentiments, and conceal their
natural affections. Perhaps at some future time, parents may have
resolution and wisdom enough to overcome this prejudice in training
up their children. I see the evil; but I know not the remedy, or
rather, have not the courage to suggest it.

Such as I have described, was the young Isalina's beauty; which
struck me at first sight, and subdued my heart. But if the impression
of the moment was deep and indelible, conceive what new force must
have been given to my feelings, when, by living in the same house, I
had daily opportunities of seeing her, and of enjoying the pleasure
of her lively conversation! I discovered in her a never-failing
vivacity, and those amiable dispositions which plainly bespoke a
feeling heart.

From this time my happiness was inseparably united with that of
Isalina. I perceived in her all the symptoms of a mutual affection;
and, proud of the love with which I was conscious she regarded me,
(though numberless obstacles to my happiness presented themselves to
my view,) I determined not to give up my enterprise. The ardour of my
affection was, however, tempered with the respect and diffidence
which are inseparable from a sincere attachment. I had made an
impression on the tender heart of Isalina: and indeed, how could I
fail, my love being guided by sincerity, and want of fortune in the
lady proving my disinterestedness? But these raptures were soon
interrupted by the Countess. She was fully informed of, and saw with
concern, my affection for Isalina, and was determined to use her 
utmost endeavours to frustrate our intentions. She sent Isalina
immediately to her parents, and at the same time kept me in my room
for a whole fortnight. Having thus confined me, she discharged my
footman, and put another in his place, on whom she thought she could
rely: but, contrary to her expectation, he was entirely at my
disposal; for by his means I established a correspondence with my
Isalina.

Cagliostro, at the instigation of the Countess, came to me a few days
after, and earnestly solicited me to appease my benefactress, by
renouncing Isalina. Without the least hesitation I boldly protested,
I would sooner part with my life. The Countess Humiecka, perceiving
me determined, became furious; and, setting me at liberty, declared I
had only to choose either to renounce my love for Isalina, or to quit
her house immediately. I preferred the latter alternative, as will be
seen in the two following letters to Isalina; and these are the only
ones of our whole correspondence, with which I shall trouble my
readers.

"JOUJOU TO ISALINA.
	"My captivity, my charming friend, is now at an end. I
have sacrificed all for your sake; and if I lose you, I will
renounce, yes, I will renounce life itself. This morning one of
the principal officers of the house came with a message from
the Countess, to inform me, that if I had not changed my
resolution, I must leave the house for ever. That is not
possible, I answered; but, reflecting on what conditions alone
I could remain, I calmly added, I was ready to depart; but I
entreated he would tell my benefactress, how sincerely I was
affected at incurring her resentment; and I besought her to
pardon my opposition to her will, to which nothing could have
urged me, but the dread of forfeiting all my happiness; and
that the kindness, with which she had formerly treated me,
should never be erased from may memory. I was now at large;
but, on beholding the house where I had so long been the
darling, I burst into tears. How painful a situation to a heart
like mine, which, while plunged in affliction, bore the
reproach of ingratitude for only obeying the impulse of true
love! I knew not whither to direct my course, penniless, a
forlorn wanderer: my situation was dreadful. Love alone could
support me under it. Yes, love inspired me to address myself to
Prince Casimir, the King's brother, whose affability and gentle
manners you are well acquainted with. You are not ignorant, how
much he interested himself in all that concerned me. I was not
deceived in my expectation; he knew every thing except my
departure, at which be was much surprised. Make yourself easy,
'Joujou,' said he, 'you shall not want, I will never forsake
you: come and see me soon: I will importune the King in your
behalf; you know he, loves you, and I am sure he will protect
you.' These kind expressions have animated my drooping spirits.
Dear Isalina, be kind, and we shall yet be happy, but permit me
to see you -- to speak to you -- and to repeat to you, a
thousand rind a thousand times, with my last breath, that you
are all my happiness, the delight of the faithful and tender
	JOUJOU."

Soon after I had thus addressed my dear Isalina, the Prince sent for
me, and in the most condescending manner gave me his advice. I wrote
as follows:--

JOUJOU TO ISALINA.
	"The Prince sent for me this morning, my charming friend.
How can I express to you my grateful sentiments for his
numerous favours! He asked me if I would return to the Countess
Humiecka, and he would use all his influence to soften her; or,
if I were resolved to marry my dear Isalina: so he expressed
himself. I answered him, that I was exceedingly sorry to have
forfeited the protection of the Countess, but that my heart
could never subscribe to her hard conditions. 'Obtain, then,
the mother's consent,' replied this amiable Prince, 'and all
will yet be well.' You see, my lovely friend, they think your
sentiments sympathize with mine. I durst not acknowledge I had
not your consent: that would have spoiled all. Can you refuse
it rue, my kind Isalina? Can you harbour a thought that would
destroy the man who adores you? I am to be presented to his
Majesty; he has promised his illustrious brother to provide for
me. Thus all our anxieties for subsistence cease. I expect a
pension. Now my charmer, Isalina, I go to kneel at your
mother's feet: she will yield to my supplication, seeing me so
well protected. All my happiness is concentrated in my
Isalina's tenderness: but consider, that the least
indifference, the least delay, may destroy for ever the
happiness of your tender and affectionate
	JOUJOU."

I waited upon Isalina's mother, whose consent I obtained. I saw my
fair friend again; a friend whose inexhaustible fund of gaiety formed
so happy a contrast to my present temper, that I soon buried in
oblivion all the vexations I had endured. The amiable Prince Casimir
kept his word: he was so kind as to present me to his brother the
King, who approved of my marriage, and granted me a pension of a
hundred ducats. The Nuncio, who had been misinformed, wanted to
prevent it by a ridiculous pretext of the Countess Humiecka. But the
King prevailed over this obstacle; and some time after, the
performance of the ceremony broke all the barriers that had been
opposed to my felicity. It is true, that I have sacrificed to this
happiness, ease and tranquillity; it has been to me the source of a
thousand inquietudes, respecting the subsistence of Isalina and
myself for the future. Yet the enjoyment that I have derived from it,
has taught me that nothing in this world is preferable to the
satisfaction of pouring our inquietudes, our distresses, and our
fears, into the bosom of a friend so true, so dear, and so closely
united; whose tender and feeling soul relieves our pains by sharing
them, and enlivens our pleasures with a far greater delight.

I should have been too happy in my new state, if it had been possible
that, minding only the present, I could have abstained from casting
an eye on the future. But man is not formed for a pure and perfect
felicity: disquietudes poison his enjoyments, and it but too often
happens, that from these very enjoyments arise his disquietudes.

Notwithstanding my inexperience, I soon perceived that the King's
favours would hardly be sufficient for our maintenance; and my
susceptible mind, severely anticipating the necessities to which my
Isalina must submit, the liveliness of my feeling towards her still
increased the bitterness and horror of my reflections. Although
accustomed to the luxury and magnificence, which had surrounded us in
the house of my benefactress, yet without grief, and even with a
degree of pleasure, we should have embraced a middle station of life;
the only one, perhaps, which gives to the tender and delicate
sentiments their full scope and energy. But the question was not
respecting a mode of living more or less expensive, as we were likely
to want even necessaries; and I confess, that the idea of seeing my
beloved Isalina involved in misery, did not permit me long to enjoy
the happiness of possessing her. It was necessary to take some step;
but my choice was so much the more difficult, in my having received
no other education than that which the Countess Humiecka had bestowed
on me. I possessed, at most, a few agreeable talents, which could not
now afford me any sufficient resource.

In this perplexity my protectors were the first who suggested to me
the idea of a second journey. Prince Casimir, especially, recommended
this project. He intimated to me, that, having been kindly received
in the principal Courts of Europe, when I accompanied the Countess
Humiecka, I should be again received with the same pleasure; and when
it should be known that I was without fortune, my situation would
increase the interest I had inspired, and in a creditable manner
procure me the means of leading, at my return, a peaceful and
tranquil life. I consented to this scheme; I spoke of it to the King,
who not only approved of my plan, but, wishing to grant me a
particular testimony of his bounty, ordered the Master of the Horse
to supply me with a convenient coach. Having, therefore, taken all
necessary measures, and being provided with letters of
recommendation, I left Warsaw, and reached Vienna.

Unluckily for me, death had, just before, deprived the world of the
illustrious Maria Theresa. Mourning and sorrow, in consequence,
pervaded this capital: the deepest grief was impressed upon all
hearts. Public entertainments, and even concerts, were suspended.
They talked of nothing, but of the loss that had befallen them: they
spoke of the magnanimity with which this heroine had supported
adversity. They recollected those disastrous times, when, forced to
leave her residence, and, holding her son in her arms, she had
excited amongst the Hungarians that patriotic ferment, which had
impelled them to do so much for her sake. Whilst they expatiated,
with complacency, upon the means she employed to re-establish her
affairs, and upon the glorious treaty which had put an end to a war,
threatening her, in its origin, with total destruction. On the other
hand, with new regret they enumerated the pains she had since taken,
and the care she had bestowed, to restore such of her provinces as
had been desolated by war, and to render most advantageous to her
subjects, the peace she had procured for them.

In the midst of this general mourning, I renewed my acquaintance with
most of the noblemen I had had the honour to see in my former
travels. I may even venture to say, that his Excellency the Prince de
Kaunitz received my visit with every mark of pleasure. As at that
time his Imperial Majesty, Joseph the Second, held no Court, all the
nobility assembled every evening in the Prince's hotel, where his
relation, the Countess Clarissa, received his guests. He did me so
much honour, as to present me to this assembly, and engage me to come
often and spend the evening. There I had the honour to become
acquainted with his Excellency Sir Robert Murray Keith, the British
Ambassador, who was afterwards the principal cause of my coming to
England. There also I had occasion to be convinced, that the manifold
occupations of the Prince de Kaunitz, (the burden of which was
lightened by his superior talent, so well known to every one, of
comprehending at one view the most extensive and complicated affairs) 
did not hinder him from looking on the minutest objects, the least
worthy affixing his attention. For, having sent for the measure of my
size, which he had taken care to procure when I was at Vienna in the
year 176i, with the Countess Humiecka, he shewed to us, that from
that time to 1781 I had grown upwards of ten inches; which appeared
as surprising to those who, not having seen me before, could not
conceive how I, being at that moment hardly in size like a child,
could have ever been ten inches shorter; as to those who having seen
me twenty years before, thought they observed in me as much
difference as there is between a youth of twelve and a grown mant of
thirty.

Notwithstanding these flattering appearances, and the professions of
friendship I received, my journey did not answer my intended purpose.
My chances of success were grounded upon a concert; and though I was
obliged to wait till the mourning was over, I had, in addition to
this, other difficulties to overcome. A number of performers were
inscribed on the catalogue at the Royal theatre; and if I had been
obliged to wait for my turn, I must have been kept a great while
back. Happily for me, my friend, Mr. Gunter, Secretary to his
Imperial Majesty, so earnestly pressed Mr. Dorval, the manager of the
house, that I was preferred before the others; and they were even so
kind, as to take the management for me, and to conduct the concert
and the expenses. I was so fortunate as to be honoured with a
numerous assembly, almost all the nobility being present. I
attempted, in a short speech, to express to them my gratitude: I
wished likewise to make an apology before those noblemen who, twenty
years ago, having seen me surrounded with the eclât of greatness, now
beheld me reduced to the sad necessity of appearing in public, and
exhibiting a reverse of fortune, in some degree resembling that of
Belisarius. I was at that time very far from thinking, that, through
a necessity of providing for the most essential wants of life, I
should ever be obliged to expose myself to public view for money.

Next day the Prince de Kaunitz spoke to me, in a most polite manner,
amidst a crowded levee. His Excellency, Sir Robert Murray Keith, was
present: he prevailed upon me to go over to England in preference to
France, wWhich was the country I intended first to have visited. The
Prince seconded this advice, and earnestly desired the Ambassador to
interest himself for me. His Excellency promised me letters of
recommendation to the greatest personages at the British court, for
which the Prince made him an acknowledgment, and assured him he would
seek every opportunity to shear him how sensible he was of all that
was done for his little friend.

If all those reasons did not entirely prevail, they had at least some
influence upon me; and I resolved to leave Vienna, being supplied
with letters of recommendation to many Princes of Germany, and to the
courts of other kingdoms. But I previously made a journey to
Pressburg in Hungary. To defray the expenses of this tour, I stayed
there only so long as was necessary, in order to give a concert; and
from thence I went to Bucharest, Wallachia, Bender, Belgrade,
Adrianople, and other places which I wished to see.

I must not forget to mention the kind welcome I met with in Turkish
countries; and from all the observations I could possibly make upon
the people, I remarked that they are not so bad in the principles of
their minds as has often been reported of them. In this respect
indeed, they seemed to me far superior to the Arabians, whose country
I also visited. These I found to be susceptible of passions no
otherwise than as brute animals. A traveller's life is in danger, in
passing through those countries, where the government is unsettled,
and the inhabitants are continually at war among themselves.

When I had nearly reached the Persian Gulf, I was attacked by
illness, which prevented me from pursuing my journey. I then
determined to return by the nearest way, and pass the deserts of
Arabia, not far from the famous river Euphrates. Having traversed
these and the deserts of Syria, I arrived, after a long and fatiguing
journey, at the city of Damascus, where illness increased so much as
to confine me for a month to my bed. I had the good fortune there to
meet with a Jew, a physician by profession, who kindly attended me,
and by his skill succeeded in restoring my health. He was a most
worthy man, and belonged to the sect of the Essenes, who formed a
respectable society, and avoided the dissolute morals and profane
principles of the Sadducees. The origin of the tenets maintained by
the latter, who, as is well known, reject the doctrine of the soul's
immortality, may, in my opinion, be with some degree of probability
referred to that remote period, when the Israelites set up and
worshipped the molten calf. Hence sprung the various weeds of heresy
and infidelity, which clung to the true religion as ivy clings to the
rock, without being able to destroy it. I shall pass over them
without further description, in order to afford space for enlarging
on subjects which merit more particular notice.



CHAP. III
Description of the city of Astrachan -- Journey through Oremburg and
Simbirsk to Kazan  Description of Kazan; kindness of the Governor
and his lady -- Journey to Lapland and Finland -- Arrival at and
description of Archangel -- Voyage to Nova Zembla; savage state of
the natives -- Journey to Berezowa; hospitality of its inhabitants --
Arrival at Tobolsk in Siberia, and reception there; generous
behaviour of the Governor.

AMONGST other places which I at this time visited, was Astrachan, the
principal city of Asiatic Russia, which is situated at the mouth of
the Volga. It has a fortress, and the city is surrounded with strong
walls. It contains, as far as I recollect, churches, as well of the
Russian as of other persuasions, of which my limits will not admit a
detailed account.

There are two commercial halls, for the reception and sale of
merchandise. Both these buildings are in a beautiful style of
architecture. But what I found most worthy of attention, was a large
botanical garden, and chemical laboratory, where they prepare salts
extracted from plants, as the bitter salt of Astrachan; also the
juice of liquorice, and distilled waters. I have been told, that
every apothecary's shop throughout the empire belongs to the Emperor;
and they get from this place every medicinal plant. The apothecaries
established here, supply all Russia with liquorice juice and
Glauber's salts; and being not far distant from Persia, they are of
course able to procure curious simples from thence, at a cheap rate.

I found the city of Astrachan, and the industry of its inhabitants,
so interesting, and so deserving the attention of a curious
traveller, that I was encouraged to take a trip further, both to
acquire a more extensive knowledge of the world; and, if possible, to
secure a little income for the enjoyment of a quiet life. Supported
under my unfortunate situation, by these objects which I had in view,
I willingly submitted myself to the caprice of fortune. Accordingly,
being provided with letters of recommendation, I set out for Kazan;
at which place I arrived, after passing through Oremburg and
Simbirsk. It is esteemed a rich and considerable city. But, to the
best of my recollection, the appearance of the houses, ramparts, and
towers, which are all built of wood, gave me the idea of its being a
poor town. It has, however, a castle built of stone, and is
excellently situated, being watered by the rivers Volga and Kama,
which make the land extremely fertile; so that it is enabled to
enrich all the provinces by means of its commerce. This metropolitan
city contains a great number of churches and monasteries.

Perceiving that the place afforded me the prospect of a good benefit,
I began to employ my time in arranging the preparation for a concert.
I consequently delivered my letters of recommendation, directed to
Basil Wasilowich, governor of Kazan. who received me with the
greatest politeness. His lady, Mrs. Wasilowich, being so kind as to
offer me apartments in their palace, I spent some weeks with that
amiable couple, in the most agreeable manner; being provided, by
their bounty, with all the pleasure and luxuries of life. My concert,
favoured with the patronage of such great and generous personages,
more than answered my most sanguine expectations. I perceived with
some surprise, that the amiable governor and his lady took the
warmest interest in my concerns; conjecturing, perhaps, from my
manners and conversation, that some accident had reduced me to the
necessity of travelling, and probably pleased to find my mind so
perfectly tranquil, and prepared to encounter all hazards, and to
endure whatever misfortunes might befall me.

The governor generously wishing to keep me out of the way of danger,
proposed to recommend me to the court of Petersburgh. His kind offer
brought to my recollection the gracious reception, and caresses, with
which I had been honoured by the illustrious Princess of Danhalt,
during my stay at Paris with the Countess Humiecka; and I was
sensible that I could not fail of being well received by an
introduction from this Princess, who was mother of Catherine the
Great, Empress of Russia. But I was not without apprehensions, that
Baron de Stachelberg, the Ambassador from the Court of Petersburgh,
who had been resident at Warsaw, whilst I was under the protection of
the Countess Humiecka, and through the influence of political affairs
had contracted a particular intimacy with herself and her family,
might, on account of circumstances which I have before related,
connected with the displeasure which that lady had conceived, create
some prejudice against me at the Russian court: I therefore judged it
most prudent to decline the governor's offer.

I now formed a project of visiting Finland, and the neighbouring
country, which the governor was far from approving, as he was
desirous that I should return to the more civilized parts of the
world. He gave me, however, a letter of recommendation to the
governor of Tobolsk, but would not second my design any further.
Notwithstanding this, I set out in the first place for Finland, and
after passing through Kostroma and Ousting, I arrived at Abo, the
metropolis of that country. This city could not have been more
advantageously situated in regard to commerce, being surrounded by
the gulfs of Bothnia and Finland, Which both form most commodious
harbours; and I have no doubt it carries on an extensive trade.

In every other respect it seemed to me a most miserable city,
exhibiting, with its wooden houses painted in imitation of brick, a
very beggarly appearance. Its inhabitants I found totally destitute
of spirit, and cold as the climate in which they live.

As there was no probability of my deriving any profit from this
place, I soon left it, and proceeded to Lapland, where I found my
situation by no means improved; but was convinced, that I could
expect no benefit from a people so destitute, and a country so wild
and remote from all intercourse with the rest of the world. I felt
myself, however, endued with courage, which bore me up against the
stream of misfortune, and was protected by a gracious Providence from
those dangers to which I had exposed myself, by imprudently
venturing, like an inexperienced traveller, among the savages who
inhabit this country.

I was far from meeting a rude reception from these people: on the
contrary, I perceived that they regarded me with mixed surprise and
pleasure, which induced them to pay me the most civil attentions.
They shewed great zeal, in procuring me the best table their country
could afford, with which I had every reason to be satisfied, as they
have abundance of excellent game, and fish of every description. This
last article their situation enables them to get with the greatest
ease, as they are almost surrounded by seas -- on the north by the
Arctic Ocean, and on the east and south by the White Sea:
accordingly, they have immense quantities of all kinds, and of the
best quality. The gulf of Bothnia abounds with salmon; and from their
mountains descend vast rivers of fresh water, in which I beheld those
fishes swimming against the stream. I also saw in their lakes, pikes
of a wonderful size: so that I could not avoid remarking how
plentifully all their wants were supplied, and how much more
bountiful nature had been to them than to those inhabitants of
Scandinavia, who are obliged to supply with a kind of sawdust, and
preparation of fish bones, their want of bread.

I now prepared to quit this part of the globe, to me so unproductive,
and reached Terrskoi, an inland town of Russian Lapland. Finding
myself now at no great distance from the celebrated city of
Archangel, I determined to visit it, which resolution I put in
practice.

Had I travelled only for the purpose of furnishing descriptions, I
should have thought myself bound to give my readers a particular
account of Archangel; but as that consideration did not enter into my
plan, I must content myself with merely noticing the neatness of the
houses, which are of modern architecture, and that noble edifice
called the Hall; this building, if my recollection be correct, is
divided into three parts, in one of which the Russian and foreign 
merchants have their apartments. I had the honour of an invitation to
dine with them; and was particularly noticed by Mr. Weldefriz, a
distant relation to the minister of the same name, from the Danish
Court at Paris, with whom I had been intimate during my stay at that
capital, with the Countess Humiecka. This gentleman, finding who I
was, paid me the kindest attention, and shewed me the whole of this
remarkable building, which is very beautiful and commodious, having a
square belonging to it, adjacent to the river, where vessels
approach, to load and unload their merchandise.

Archangel is admirably situated for trade, having on the east the
famous river Dwina, which falls into the White Sea. This advantageous
position has afforded its inhabitants an opportunity, by the exertion
of their industry, to enrich their country. Thus are a vast body of
men prevented from sinking into a torpid and indolent state of
existence, like that of the ignorant Laplanders, who can neither
benefit the world at large, nor even promote the interests of a
solitary traveller like myself. There I might soon have found myself
without a single resource to supply my wants, had I not been
fortunate enough to reach Archangel, where my happiness was increased
by my acquaintance with Mr. Weldefriz, who proved the benevolence of
his heart, by procuring me a lucrative concert. This put me in
excellent spirits, and I felt a desire to visit the desolate country
of Nova-Zembla, which is upwards of six hundred miles distant by sea
from Archangel. Mr. Weldefriz did not approve of this voyage, and
gave me to understand, that no concert could be given there; but
finding me quite determined, and having some business there himself,
he kindly offered to take charge of me.

We sailed together over the White Sea, and landed safely at Nova-
Zembla. I afterwards regretted that I had not listened to the advice
of my friend Mr. Weldefriz, as I found it was vain to expect any kind
of benefit, and perceived no objects that could gratify the eye of a
traveller. The whole country presented the appearance of desolation
and distress; for which, however, we ought not to blame nature, which
is always perfect in her operations, when not prevented by accident
from carrying them into effect. But here her noble principles had
been quite destroyed, and this unfortunate corner of the globe
presented the most dismal appearance. Indeed, it seems as if one
might justly conclude that an island so forlorn as Nova-Zembla, can
be but of little use to the world; especially when we remark that the
animal kingdom alone subsists in it, as neither vegetables nor
minerals are to be found. The natives are chiefly savages, and, as
might naturally be expected, rude as their native climate. Their size
is in general diminutive, and their strength may be easily managed.
The following circumstance introduced me to their acquaintance.

It happened that I was travelling with my friend Mr. Weldefriz, in a
sledge, to visit some mountains of a prodigious height, which seem to
hang in the air, and cannot be looked upon without horror; and which
are inhabited by beasts of a monstrous size. At this time the savages
were hunting these animals for the sake of their skins; with which,
as they have no money in that country, they pay their taxes to the
Emperor of Russia. I was perceived by some of them, who approached
and viewed me with such looks of surprise, that I doubt not I became
the principal topic of their conversation. The third day after this,
they surrounded our house in great numbers, and dispatched a
messenger to inform us, that if I did not come out and see them, they
would pull down the whole house.

The mode of their request was suitable enough to the disposition of
these savages; whose example serves to convince us, that nature on
her part has done every thing in producing the human body, giving it
a perfect shape, and endowing man with an understanding superior to
all other animals; but that, when education is not employed to
improve that understanding, the human race sinks nearly to a level
with the brute creation, being actuated by no principle but that of
satisfying its own desires.

In order to prevent the mischief these savages intended me, I made my
appearance before them. I was probably indebted for my safety to the
smallness of my size. As soon as their astonishment had ceased, I
observed that they assumed a singular posture, and lifted up their
hands and eyes to the sky, as if in worship of the sun. My curiosity
induced me to ask the reason of this behaviour. My question was put
in the Polish tongue, which is similar to the Russian; and they
answered me in the same language with great calmness, that they were
giving thanks to the sun for allowing them to find such a man as me,
as they had seen many people of various sizes, but never beheld any
thing like mine.

This flattering compliment well merited the return I hastened to make
them, of my kindest and most grateful thanks, for the civil reception
I had so unexpectedly met with. I at the same time proceeded, for
their amusement, to play some tunes on my guitar, with which they
were highly delighted, having never before heard or seen that
instrument. I pleased them so much, that I think I may flatter myself
I won their hearts, and inspired them with some degree of enthusiasm
towards me, which they expressed by desiring that I would not leave
them. Savages as they were, so feeling a heart atoned for many
defects.

As soon as my friend Weldefriz had settled his own affairs, we
prepared for our departure; when these generous savages presented us
with a most beautiful fur of sable, and we took leave of each other
in the most friendly manner possible. We set sail, and passed the
Straits of Nova-Zembla; by which name I shall call that narrow
passage, the proper appellation of which has escaped my memory, so
that my readers in this particular must not rely upon me. My
recollection, however, enables me to state that the traveller has on
one side the sea of Karskoe, and on the other the gulf of Lebeskaya.
We passed between those seas, and arrived on shore in a few hours.

Next day my friend set out with me, and conducted me as far as
Berezowa, where we had the pleasure to find the people much more
hospitable to strangers than we had expected. We stopped a few days
at their request, during which time we enjoyed every comfort: they
furnished our table with all sorts of game, and with young reindeer,
which make a delightful dish. They not only procured us an excellent
table, but were so kind as to entertain us with their pleasant
company, and to favour us with some music upon an instrument of their
own, called Bandura, a good deal like the guitar, with which we were
much gratified. I then surprised these good people, who were not
aware of my being able to perform, by ordering my servant to bring my
guitar. The whole company were astonished on my opening it; and I
began to play some of my own music, which having all the charms of
novelty, seemed to excite their admiration. The day after this we
took our departure, and I now experienced the double regret of
quitting these generous people, from whom I had received so many
civilities, and my kind friend Mr. Weldefriz.

On my arrival at Tobolsk, my first care was to deliver my letters of
recommendation to the Lord Chief Governor of Siberia, whose military
is equal to his civil authority. I found in this city, which is
amazingly well fortified, a powerful garrison. I concluded therefore,
that a concert among so great a number of officers would fully answer
my expectations. Upon the inhabitants of the city I could place but
little reliance, being composed chiefly of Mahometan Tartars, and
others, whom it will be no great loss to my readers to leave
unmentioned; whose sole pleasure consisted in trading up the river
Irtish, which they did to a considerable extent, and in conveying
merchandise through Great Tartary to China: so that the fruits of my
sowing on such a barren land, were likely to be little better than a
crop of nettles. I consequently directed my attentions to the
governor, who sent me a polite invitation to dine with him.

At this dinner I found a most brilliant company, and met many
distinguished officers. A great many ladies were present, who
supported the character of their amiable sex, by reviving the spirit
of the company, and giving new life to the agreeable conversation. I
soon found that I had become the leading topic of their discourse: my
small size had probably attracted their attention, and excited a
curiosity to hear me converse. They accordingly put several questions
to me, merely, as I imagine, with a view of learning what answer I
could make. Among my questioners was a lady, the most beautiful of
the whole assembly. She asked me what motives could have tempted me
to travel so far, and induced me to visit a country so desolate and
destitute of comfort as Siberia, where nothing was to be seen and
felt but snow and extreme frost. "Excuse me, Madam," I replied, "the
dangers and fatigues of my travels are amply rewarded, by what I now
behold; for even the frozen regions of Siberia have not prevented
nature from presenting to my view so elegant a specimen of her
workmanship as yourself." The governor, enchanted with my reply,
declared to me that she was his daughter; and this lucky little
incident increased the kindness of the reception I met with from the
whole company.

The next day I received from the governor's daughter an invitation to
dine with her and her father, which it was impossible for me to
refuse. The governor took this opportunity of inquiring very kindly
after my concerns. I frankly informed him, that having no settled
provision to which I could look forward, I was thrown upon the world,
and left entirely without any resources; and that such being my
disastrous situation, I begged that he would patronise my concert.
This he promised. to do; and through the warm interest and active
exertions of the governor, his lady, and his daughter, my concert was
attended by a most brilliant company, and as productive as I could
possibly desire from the city of Tobolsk.

As I had now settled all my affairs, and had nothing more to do in
that place, I was preparing to leave it. But my departure was delayed
for some time by a circumstance, of which, when my reader shall be
apprised, he will, I am sure, approve the conduct I adopted. That
amiable lady, the governor's daughter, considered, probably, that
performers in my way generally look only to their own interest; and
forgetting immediately the generous benefactors who have promoted
their advantage, leave them without concern in search of new ones. To
prevent, therefore, my following such examples, she sent me a note to
inform me, by desire of her father and mother, that they begged I
would not think of leaving the town so soon: at the end of the note
she added, that for her own part, she flattered herself, I would not
think of disobliging her by refusing to comply with the request. To
this I replied: "As I have already, Madam, experienced your goodness,
and witnessed the kind concern you take in my welfare, you could not
surely think that I would disobey your order. Sooner will I forget
myself. Severe as the misfortunes are which have befallen me, and
impelled me to seek my fortune in foreign climates, they can never
obliterate the feelings of gratitude which I cherish for your bounty,
and which I trust will accompany me to the grave."

This answer opened a door to their friendship: they immediately came,
and took me to dine with them. My time was most agreeably spent in
their society. After dinner, the governor's daughter, who was an
admirable performer, sent for my instrument, on which I accompanied
her. Soon after, a number of their friends came to spend the evening
with them. It began at last to grow late, and I preparing to go
home., but was prevented by the young lady, who desired me to wait
until the company should be gone, When all retired, she said: "Now,
allow me to accompany you to your lodging." "You are right," added
the governor and his lady, "and we will go together." I desired they
would not give themselves so needless a trouble; but the more I
entreated them, the more delighted were they to perceive that I had
not discovered their intention, of which I remained totally ignorant
until I found myself in a charming apartment of their noble mansion,
which they had destined for my abode. As soon as I had recovered from
the astonishment into which I was thrown by this most courteous
attention, which the politest nation could not have surpassed, I
returned them my warmest thanks for their kindness; which in my
present situation I had the less reason to expect, as I had
suppressed my real name, influenced by a feeling of pride which
forbade me to proclaim it under the humiliating circumstances in
which I was there placed. Thus did I suddenly find myself fixed in
their palace, where I was most kindly cherished; and I received every
attention from this respectable family, whose friendship each
succeeding day. seemed to increase. My joy was, however, embittered
by the thought, that the time was fast approaching when I must
depart, never again to behold them, and when I should have no other
consolation for their loss, but the recollection of the kindness they
had shown me.



CHAP. IV. 
Departure from Tobolsk -- Journey to Kamschatka; arrival at
Bolcheretskoi the capital -- Description of the Volcanoes -- Journey
to Behring's Straits; view of the Frozen Ocean -- Desolate state of
the country, and miserable existence of the natives -- Arrival at
Olensk; improved appearance of the country -- Visit to the city of
Catherineburg; politeness and liberality of the Director of the
Siberian mines -- Description of the country around -- Remarkable
incidents.

I WAS at length obliged to pursue my journey; and leaving Tobolsk, I
set out for Kamschatka, passing through Narym, Nasunowskoi, Hinskoi,
Witemk, Oloskoi, and Tewskoi, which are situated near the sea of the
peninsula of Kamschatka. On my arrival at Bolcheretskoi, the
metropolis of the whole country, I thought I had found a second Nova-
Zembla: but here I met with the additional evil of three volcanoes,
which I did not fail to visit. The first to the best of my
recollection, named Awatska, lies to the north of a bay of the same
name; the second rises from the mountains between the rivers of
Kamschatka and Tobolski. I here met with a gentleman who made
particular enquiries after me; but not being satisfied with the
information he received, he politely approached and thus accosted me:
"You are welcome to us, my little gentleman; you seem to be examining
this volcano very closely,-- pray let me know, have you found out its
cause?"

This was a question too deep for my understanding. But it immediately
struck me, that curiosity alone, and the expectation of hearing some
reply, had induced him to ask it; and as I happened to recollect the
literary boldness of my friend, Count de Tressan, the celebrated
writer, who in some of his works had introduced a most curious
circumstance of a tree having been found growing in the stomach of a
human body, I was emboldened to acquaint the stranger with my ideas
on the subject, which I did in the following manner:--"The most
eminent natural philosophers and learned men, whose works must be
read with admiration, for their proficiency in the most abstruse
sciences, and their wonderful knowledge of nature, have yet failed to
discover the origin and first principles of created things. They have
been lost in the wide field of conjecture, since the Great Creator
has reserved this knowledge for himself; and although they have
succeeded in discovering three principles, which are known by the
common names of salt, sulphur, and mercury, they are yet entirely
ignorant from what these are derived. All the account, therefore,
that I am able to give you is this:-- When I travelled through Italy,
I stopped at Naples, where I saw Mount Vesuvius, which is situated
five or six miles from the city, and near the sea, like this of
Awatska. I have been struck with the remarkable situation of
volcanoes in this respect, of being near the ocean; and my ideas upon
the subject lead me to conclude, that the sea, being a quick current
water, as well as a mineral body, in the course of the passage which
it works through the depths of this earth, may not improbably meet
with a number of caverns, in which is to be found matter of every
kind. These materials all repose, as it were, in a profound sleep,
waiting for some power to rouse them. Similar natures always attract
each other: the sea, therefore, meeting with these impure bodies,
fraught with its own sulphureous, mercurial, and saline principles,
operates actively upon creatures so like itself, revives and puts in
motion these sluggish and inert bodies, and thus increases their
spiritual essence; then working together in the bowels of the earth,
and sending forth noxious odours, arising from the infectious vapours
with which they are filled, they at length burst forth, blowing up
the ground with the greatest violence, and by the co-operation of the
air, discharge vast flames of fire."

When I had thus stated to him the cause of volcanoes, according to my
own ideas, founded merely upon the nature of the elements, I beheld
in his countenance marks of pleasure; and he seemed to be at once
surprised and gratified, by my singular description of these works of
nature. My ready answer to his question, procured me the favour of a
very polite offer to shew me the third volcano, which I readily
accepted: but as it grew rather late, this visit was deferred until
the next day; and in the mean time be gave me a pressing invitation
to dine with him, which I promised to do with great pleasure.

I now found, to my astonishment, that I was in company with the
governor, who conducted me to his palace, in the peninsula of
Botcharetsk, where he did me the honour to introduce me to his lady,
by whom I was received with the utmost politeness and attention. I
was much gratified by his company, finding him a man of knowledge.
His literary pursuits afforded him a very agreeable resource in his
present situation, where no society was to be found, and in a country
which presented the appearance of a complete desert. His habitation
was not far distant from the volcanoes, built on a low ground leading
to the sea of Oketsk, and on the north of the river Bolchoireka. I
was most agreeably entertained in his society, and on the next day
the governor honoured me with a call, and we proceeded to visit the
third or last volcano. It rises, if my remembrance be correct, from
the highest mountain in the peninsula of Kamschatka., and throws out
continually a variety of substances accompanied with smoke. We
remained there only a short time, as nothing met our eyes but horror:
the frightful appearance of those pits casting forth showers of
stones and ashes, presented to the imagination a picture of the
desolation of the world.

The view of these wonderful, but horrid phenomena, so forcibly
impressed me, that I determined to quit the country as soon as
possible, and consequently took measures to forward my concert,
before any additional explosion should happen. A lucky opportunity
presented itself, on my being invited to dine with the governor. I
seized the moment, to beg of him and his lady, that they would do me
the kindness to patronize my concert. They graciously acceded to my
request, and appointed a day, when a most elegant assembly attended
my concert, which was as productive as I could possibly expect from
such a city as Bolcheretsk.

I now took the liberty to pay my respects to my generous patrons, and
to bid them farewell. I was obliged to wait a long time for a
favourable season to take my departure. I must observe, that in this
country a deep snow falls in the beginning of May, which covers the
whole country. The traveller will then find it impossible to proceed,
as I can vouch from experience, having made the attempt, which nearly
cost me my life. About the middle of the month a thaw commences, the
snow then melts rapidly on the sides of the mountains, and in June
the low grounds are generally free from it. As, however, I did not
put much confidence in this season, I stopped till August, when the
vegetation appeared in its perfection. I was informed by the
inhabitants, that I might safely continue during the month of
September, as the weather would still be mild; but that if I should
stay until October, I would then behold a new fall of snow covering
the land and hills. As I had no wish to witness the return of such
inclement weather, I made preparation for setting out immediately.

A few days before my departure, a gentleman, who was a native of the
country, very kindly waited on me, and paid me the most polite
attention, inviting me to dine at his house. I gladly accepted his
invitation, was introduced to his family, and well received. I spent
a most agreeable day, and found this gentleman possessed of elegant
manners, and extensive information. He acquainted me with many
curious particulars concerning his country, which had struck me at
first as by no means flourishing. I learned from him, that though
apparently so poor, the inhabitants have, by means of their commerce,
which consists in furs and other articles of trade, a great quantity
of money circulating among them. I was glad to hear such a good
account of the country, which, I confessed, I had once thought a
miserable corner of the world, not capable, as I afterwards found, of
producing verdure, pasturage, vegetables, and grain. He concluded by
offering me his company and protection, through the whole of
Kamschatka; as I had informed him that I intended to visit those
wonderful Straits of the Frozen Sea, opposite to New Wales in
America, called Bhering's Straits.

In a few days we set out on our journey: many hot springs were to be
found on our road, and my companion amused me with the sight of two
most remarkable ones. The first is, to the best of my recollection,
not far from a village called Natchechin. There arises from it a
steam as from a boiling pot, which emits a smell of sulphurous and
other matters too strong to be supported. The other was in a
mountain, near the river called Paudja: from its top falls a cataract
of boiling water, with a most horrid and frightful noise; and,
proceeding a considerable length, bubbles up to the height of more
than eight feet, till it discharges itself into several of those
lakes, which are found in great abundance in this country. This
mountain produces some curious stones of variegated colours. After
viewing these wonderful springs, we pursued our journey, and passing
Aklansk, not far from the sea of Anadir, we arrived at Bhering's
Straits.

The emotions of awe and wonder which I felt on viewing the Frozen
Ocean, led me to reflect how many ingenious writers, who have
bestowed much pains in weaving intricate webs, and forming numerous
theories, to explain all things to the satisfaction of their readers,
have, like overloaded vessels, suffered shipwreck, and sank in the
depths of blindness and of error. This must ever be the case when our
wandering imaginations rashly attempt to penetrate the secret wonders
of nature, through that dark cloud with which the Almighty has
overspread our faculties. It seemed to me that it would not be proper
to speak too hastily of this Frozen Sea, in an unfavourable manner;
and I was led to amuse my fancy with conjectures, that as the great
Author of Nature has presented nothing to us without design, this
ocean was to be regarded in another light than as a direct barrier
and separation from the rest of the world; and that, if it were
possible for any mortal to pass over it, so wonderful a man would
perhaps deserve to meet with climates far superior to our own. This
imaginary voyage must not, however, make me forget to mention, that I
observed in the country, marmots and wild sheep, most beautiful and
curious little animals, such as I had not seen any where in my
travels, except in Corsica and Sardinia.

When I Was ready to return, I consulted my worthy friend, Mr. Prokop,
on the subject of the nearest road to my own country. From his
information, I found that there was little difference, in regard of
nearness, between the two routes that offered themselves.

He advised me, however, to pass through Siberia, rather than to coast
along the Frozen Sea by Somoyeda, as there was a probability of my
finding some towns which would contribute to defray my expenses. My
good friend seemed not much satisfied with the choice I made: we set
out, however, and he kindly conducted me as far, I think, as a place
called Kirlovo, opposite to the new coast discovered by navigators.
He there left me, and I proceeded to coast along the Frozen Sea. I
soon found that my friend would have good reason to laugh at my ex-
pence, as I met with nothing but miserable villages, in which no
comfortable provisions could be procured. The inhabitants, living
near the sea, subsist chiefly on dead animals thrown up by the waves,
and on the wild beasts which they shoot. If they can find nothing
better, they feed on snakes, dogs, cats, rats, mice, and vermin. It
was very fortunate for me, that I had been well supplied by my friend
with good provisions, otherwise my situation must have been most
wretched.

Persevering in this unpleasant journey, I at length reached Olensk,
where things began to assume rather a better appearance. I afterwards
passed through Borchatewa, and the lake Pyasina, Staroka, Kamionka,
Taurenkansk, till I approached the gulf of Obb. I had yet a long
journey to go; but on my arrival at Neiwanskoi, I was informed, that
I was then in the province of Tobolsk, remarkable for its curious
manufactures in brass, copper, and iron, and in the neighbourhood of
a city named Catherineburg, where the Director of the Siberian mines
resided.

I hastened to pay a visit to this city, which is situated on the
river Yet, and well fortified, having an arsenal, exchange, and
custom-house. In short, it appeared excellently calculated for my
purpose, of getting a good concert, to recruit my exhausted means,
and make good my losses. Unfortunately, however, I had not been
provided with letters of recommendation to the Director, a
circumstance which caused me some uneasiness; but relying on that
good Providence, which had conducted me so far, I ventured to
distribute concert bills in the city. One fortunately came into the
hands of the Director's daughter, and procured me admission to the
family: I immediately received from her father a polite note,
containing an invitation to dine with him, and to bring some
instruments to make a little concert. I gladly seized the opportunity
to secure his patronage, which would so materially advance my
interest, and I accepted his kind invitation. He received me with
such civility and attention, that I am at a loss to express how
greatly I feel indebted to him, and to the whole of his amiable
family, for their kindness. I had now a flattering prospect of a
lucrative concert, in which I was not disappointed; for this worthy
family took such an active part in my behalf, that I was honoured by
the attendance of a numerous assembly, and placed in a better
situation than I could boast of when I arrived at the town. I
remained for some time after my concert, enjoying the pleasant
society of the Director's family, and of a few select friends,
blessed with most excellent dispositions, and a charming affability.
I had no reason to regret the loss of the people whom I had left
behind, on the coast of the Frozen Sea, and who were scarcely worthy
of a single thought bestowed upon them.

I now began to reflect on my past fortunes and present situation, and
concluded, that the best thing I could do was to arm myself with
patience and prudence against the evils and changes of life, as I
must expect to meet with many reverses in the long journey which I
had still to go. My courage was strengthened by the recollection, how
providentially I had been preserved during my travels in Anatolia,
Syria, the Archipelago, and the rest of that empire, including
Smyrna, where I had escaped the dreadful plague, which raged in that
magnificent city. My narrative would be lengthened beyond due bounds,
were I to describe its buildings, the grandeur of which will never be
effaced from my memory. I might indeed urge, as an additional reason
for the omission, that those descriptions are better suited to such
ingenious persons as travel for amusement, and usefully employ their
leisure hours in describing the objects they have seen, than to me
who travelled for subsistence; who had no remittances to depend upon;
and who was often disappointed, even in my expectations of a
transient supply,-- as in the case of my arrival in Aladulia, which I
had visited with sanguine hopes, knowing the province to abound in
silver, copper, and many other mines, but was obliged to quit, on
finding it infested by troops of plundering banditti. I felt very
grateful for my good fortune, in having met with such a family as the
Director's, to which I was invited every day, and was entertained
with a variety of amusements, or was a party in some interesting
conversation. Among a variety of questions which he put to me, the
Director expressed a wish to be informed, if I thought the Russian
empire equal to those nations through which I had travelled. My
friend forgot that I had visited foreign countries, not with a view
to notice such matters, but to forward my own interest, and with an
intention, as soon as I should gain a sufficiency, of retiring to a
private life. But as I perceived that he was pleased with my
conversation, I endeavoured to satisfy him to the best of my ability,
and observed: "that the Russian empire was not so favourably situated
with regard to climate as that of Turkey; that foreigners must admire
the civilized manners of the Russians of higher rank, but that I
could find no improvement in those of the common people, and that
their savage dispositions seemed as incapable of correction, as those
of the Turkish commonalty; that when I considered the vast length and
breadth, and amazing extent of the empire of Russia, I could not help
comparing it to a giant,-- and Sweden, Denmark, and Norway, with its
mountains called Ardongen, to pigmies passing between his legs." My
friend, the Director, was pleased with this idea; and I then gave him
a little sketch of Copenhagen the metropolis of Denmark, and
Stockholm the metropolis of Sweden; which latter city seemed to me to
bear a great resemblance to Venice, in its situation, and in the
striking views which it presents to the eye of a traveller.

I shall not enter into any further details of this conversation. I
was next day honoured with a visit; and he took me to see some
villages, at a short distance, near the river Obb. I was delighted
with their beauty, and with the charming prospects beheld from the
neighbouring country, affording a very fine subject for landscape.
This romantic scenery reminded me of my travels in Norway, the most
mountainous of all the countries I passed through,, and particularly
of the Dofrefield mountains, which rise to such a monstrous height,--
and some others over which my road lay, abounding with cataracts and
dreadful precipices, which were passable only by wooden bridges, very
slightly built. On some of those mountains I met with water at the
top, which had a most striking effect.

After our return from these villages, I dined, as usual, at the
Director's house, and spent my time most pleasantly with his charming
family. His daughter was so accomplished a young lady, that I could
not wonder at her being so great a favourite with her parents. Nature
had endowed her with a disposition so amiable, that she attracted the
regard of all who knew her. She possessed a mind quick and
penetrating, and was most mild and affable in conversation. I
happened one day to be at the house, when she received some new
music, including a number of songs. As she sung admirably, and my
instrument was ready, being kept in her apartment, she was pleased
that I should come and try those songs with her, when there would be
no company to interrupt us, and none present but her father and
mother. I did so; and it happened, that after our musical
entertainment, her father and mother left us alone, when she took
this opportunity very anxiously to inquire if I had been at Warsaw at
the time my King was taken prisoner by the banditti of Kosinski. Not
apprehending that any particular consequences could result from my
answer, I replied, "that I was then at Warsaw." She next asked me if
I recollected who was Minister of the Court of Petersburg at that
period, and who was Commander in Chief of the Russian armies. I
answered, "that Baron de Stakelberg held the former post, and General
Romanious the latter." She seemed much pleased with this information,
and directly told me, that I must be the very person who had been
described by General Romanious in a letter. This commander, if I
recollect rightly, was her uncle. She hastened with great joy to
acquaint her father and mother with her discovery, and brought me the
letter alluded to, telling me that it was in vain to deny myself, as
she was convinced, from every circumstance, and not least from my
manners, conversation, and the polite attention I had paid them, that
I must be the very person. She then pressed me so earnestly to
declare my real name, that I could not resist her entreaties. Upon
this avowal, she immediately showed me my name in the letter, which
she had before concealed. .I explained to her my reasons for the
secrecy I had observed, which she approved, and promised that my
secret should not be betrayed.

The letter was read to me, in which I found myself mentioned in a
manner much more flattering than I deserved. I was forcibly struck
with the conclusion of his letter, in which he displayed the
character of a brave General. "I have no news," said he, "to send
you, except that we have been very troublesome to the Poles, our
neighbours, and have taken General Sawa prisoner. He was conducted to
Warsaw, where our minister, Baron de Stakelberg, received him in his
palace with all due honours; but, notwithstanding every possible care
was taken of him, this brave General died on the third day, of the
many wounds he had received." On hearing this, I observed, that I was
at Warsaw when this General died, and that I recollected very well
the circumstances of the sudden hostilities commenced against us by
our late pretended friends, in whom we had placed so much confidence,
and who seemed to have been long preparing, by slow and premeditated
motions, to become our enemies. I remarked, "that nothing seemed left 
for us, but to mourn our country, as a child would lament the loss of
its parent, and wait with melancholy patience for its resurrection."
The Director, who was then present, smiled, and told me, that we were
a powerful nation, and would bereave many other children of their
parent countries, and that we would become more terrible when we
should set our feet upon European ground. I thought it best to say
nothing further on this subject, as I did not feel myself qualified
for entering into political discussions with one to whom they were so
familiar. But his observation led me to think, that unless I be sadly
mistaken, there is a large apple dumpling made, and now boiling in
the pot, for certain Princes, which must in due time be ready for
their dinner.

In the course of our conversation, the Director introduced the name
of General Beniouski, who had the misfortune to lose a battle at the
time of the confederacy of Bar, and was conducted to Siberia as a
prisoner of war, whence he ingeniously contrived to escape. I was
reminded by the mention of this General, that before I visited the
empire of Russia, I had met him at Vienna, where be was busily
engaged in some chemical preparations with Count Rzewreski, General
of the Crown, and a relation of the Countess Humiecka; and that,
being intimate with the Count, and happening to have a good many
books on the subject, I became a member of their society. But finding
my attempts to procure the philosopher's stone unsuccessful, I took
leave of them, and making a tour through Italy, came at last into
Etruria. I then took shipping for Corsica, and from thence sailed to
Sardinia, where I was surprised by meeting with General Beniouski. He
was on his way to Barbary; and knowing my taste for chemistry, he
pressed me earnestly to go with him, telling me that he had found a
philosopher who could change metals into gold. The name of the
person, he informed me, was Abraham Caab. "This name of Caab,"
observed the General to me, "is an illustrious one; and the family of
the man I am now speaking of is a branch of that of the Jew Caab, who
was originally a Rabbi, but afterwards turned Mussulman, and assisted
Mahomet in composing the Koran." This information inspired me with
fresh confidence; as I imagined that the transmutation of metals must
be an easy task to him, who could overcome the much greater
difficulty, of changing his faith. Supposing it, therefore, very
probable, that he might be able to turn lead into gold, I readily
consented to accompany the General.

We sailed from the gulf of Palma, and landed at Tunis, with which we
were sadly disappointed, finding it a miserable, ill-built city,
possessing nothing worthy of notice, but its situation, which is on
an elevated ground on the west of the lake, with a prospect of
Carthage and Guletta. It is a very inconvenient place for strangers,
since there is no water to be met with, that has not a brackish
taste; but as we had not come to drink water, but to find out our
philosopher, on being told that his residence was at Biserta, about
ten miles from Tunis, we set out for that town.

We were next directed to Nabal, where on our arrival we found, not
this wonderful Caab, but a manufactory of pottery, which exceeded in
quality any that I beheld in that country. Here we met with a Turkish
dervish or priest, who treated us kindly, and directed us to Susa,
the capital of the province of the same name, where a Turkish Pacha
kept his residence. At this city we succeeded in finding the object
of our search, who was busily employed about the philosopher's stone.
I was not surprised that he should choose to fix his abode at Susa,
in preference to many other towns, as it is a considerable city. Its
inhabitants proved their civility towards strangers, by the great
attention they shewed in assisting us to find out our philosopher.
This worthy personage gate General Beniouski the most flattering
assurances, that he would find out the secret of the precious stone.
I was not introduced to him until he had finished a secret conference
with the General, and many days passed before my friend was favoured
with the receipt for this great work of nature.

We then proceeded in the following manner:-- We extracted sulphur
from mercury by separation, and took the mixed corporeal and
spiritual compound, the body of which is coagulated from the volatile
matters by digestion. We separated the mercury from its sulphur, by
means of a glass. We used white glass fixed, and resisting aqua
fortis, and heavier than common glass. When we had completed our
extraction, and mixed it with gold, we put our preparation into a
philosophical oval glass, which we placed in a furnace, built for the 
purpose, with geometrical proportion. We kept a constant fire with
sand heated to the highest degree, and our compound continued
circulating day and night without interruption, whilst we were
anxiously waiting for its elevation, and for the appearances of its
progress toward the desired end. But we were grievously disappointed,
its continued motion producing no improvement either as to quality or
quantity, but the dead mixture keeping in the oval glass. Thus we
remained without the least prospect of our ounces of gold ascending,
whilst we began to be sensible of a material descension in our
purses.

I was consoled under my disappointment, by the kindness of the Pacha,
who took the most friendly notice of me, and assisted me in getting a
little money by means of a concert (if it may be so called) performed
by Mr. Beniouski and myself. My friend played on the flute (on which
instrument he performed remarkably well), and I on the violin.-- To
return from my digression:-- I took leave of my friend the director,
and a short time after this I set out for Oufa.



CHAP. V.
Arrival at the city of Oufa; description of antique remains in the
neighbourhood of that place -- Second visit to Oremburg --
Digression; introduction to Voltaire -- reflections -- Visit to
Bokhara -- Arrival at Kislaer, the metropolis of the Circassian
Tartars; account of a hot spring there -- Journey through Croatia,
Dalmatia, and lower Arabia, to Kamienice, and thence to Buda -- Visit
to Lentz and Munich; introduction to the Elector; interview with the
Prince de la Tour and Taxis, also with the Prince de Wallerstein --
Arrival at Triersdorf; kind attentions of the Margrave and Margravine
of Anspach.

ON my approach to the city of Oufa, I observed that its environs were
surrounded with rising hills and woods. It does not present a very
splendid appearance, and has no particular claims to notice. But as I
was told, that above Oufa, on the other side of the Dicuma, and at no
great distance, many ancient monuments were to be found, I went on
purpose to see them. There are remaining numerous ruins of what may
be called sepulchral chapels, surrounded with Arabian tombstones,
bearing inscriptions. As these writings excited my curiosity, I
begged an explanation of them, but found no one who was able to
satisfy my inquiry.. My conjectures led me to conclude, that the
provinces had formerly belonged to the Arabian nation, until they
were admitted to the honour of becoming a part of the Russian empire.
The Russians, I presume, wished to enjoy some better climate and
milder air, than those of their own native Moscow and Frozen Ocean;
and in this they were perfectly right. Undoubtedly, the acquisition
also would give them a more imposing appearance, and a greater
probability of success. They were very lucky in meeting with friends
so well inclined to their welfare, as to assist them in putting their
feet upon a warmer and a better soil.

Among other nations, which they have since honoured in a similar
manner, my native country (Poland) has the happiness to be included.
It has contributed to the improvement of that great empire, by adding
considerably to its length and breadth, as well as by enabling it to
breathe a milder air, and cultivate a more fruitful land. Sensible of
the kindness that has been shewn them, the Polish people wait with
the greatest impatience for an opportunity to evince their gratitude
to those feeling hearts, who have helped to unite them to so great a
body as the Russian empire. The thought is most gratifying, that we
have been enabled to become useful subjects of so extensive and
mighty a nation. And they that united us to them, will no doubt have
reason to be gratified with the display which that nation will make,
and with the terror it will inspire in the day of battle, at any time
when a desire of tormenting other nations shall be felt: and such
desires must be expected now and then, as naturally as new fashions
in dress.

I returned to Oufa without gaining any instruction concerning those
antiquities; and after remaining a short time there, as I had no
prospect of succeeding in a concert, I set out for Oremburg. This is
an extremely opulent and commercial city, the appearance of which
persuaded me that I might set op my trade there with great
probability of success. I was further encouraged in my expectation of
a good concert, by the great civility which the inhabitants there to
all strangers, and by my good fortune in obtaining an introduction to
the family of Mr. Bialosinskoi, a gentleman engaged in a great
commercial concern, and also distinguished for his learning. In him I
met with a remarkable instance, in addition to those which my
travels, had already afforded me, of the double benefit which is
derived from an acquaintance with persons of this description. I not
only obtained a more enlarged knowledge of the world, but found my
little income materially improved. This worthy gentleman promoted my
interest with such unwearied zeal, that he procured me a more
lucrative concert than I could possibly have expected. I remained
some time longer in this city, the society of which I found very
agreeable. The greater part of my time was spent with the respectable
family of Mr. Bialosinskoi, who kindly introduced me into his
library, which excited my admiration, as it contained an excellent
selection of the works of the most approved authors, and a surprising
collection of ancient and modern philosophers. Here I met with the
Henriade of Voltaire, and several other interesting works of that
author; which reminded me of my interview with him in my younger
days, at the house of Madame de Jofruen, who was his intimate friend.
She Was a most respectable lady, and remarkable both for her
extensive knowledge, and her amiable disposition. Her chief society
was composed of literary men, who, to whatever profession they
belonged, or whatever arts they followed, became members of her
circles. My little person had excited in her breast a curiosity to
see me, which she was enabled to gratify without any difficulty.

It happened that I was often with Madame de Pompadour, at Versailles,
where I had the honour to pay my respects to the Queen, Madame de
Pompadour was sometimes visited by her brother, the Marquis de
Marini, with whom I was intimate, and who was nearly related to
Madame de Jofruen. They were both very desirous to introduce me to
that lady; and I the more readily consented, as I had before heard a
very pleasing account of her amiable disposition. I had the honour to
be introduced on the following day to Madame de Jofruen, and her
literary society. I exerted my best endeavours to make myself
agreeable to her; and had the happiness to be so far successful, that
I could perceive she was very much pleased with my replies to her
questions. She was so kind as to give me a general invitation to her
Monday dinners: the Abbé Raynal was present at this conversation, and
seemed to take pleasure in seizing every opportunity to shew me kind
attentions, and to improve my volatile mind. I was then very young.
But I was by no means insensible to the advantage I might derive from
being admitted to so learned a society: I was conscious that, if duly
improved;, it might make me, notwithstanding my diminutive, stature,
an object more deserving of notice in the rational creation than some
of a larger size; as in the natural world the humble reseda diffuses
a perfume, which does not belong to; the lofty chestnut: I
considered, that such society would give a polish to my manners,
improve my judgment, and impart a steadiness and firmness to my soul,
which would enable me to support such calamities as might hereafter
be my lot, and to preserve tranquillity under all the reverses of
fortune.

On the Monday following, when I was at Madame de Jofruen, she
received a letter from her friend, Mons. de Voltaire, which contained
nothing particular, unless I may mention a humorous account which he
gave of a gentleman who professed to be an antiquarian, and had
lately published five volumes, respecting a discovery which he had
made in the city of Paris and its environs. They contained an account 
of the temples of Isis and Osiris, built at Montmartre and St.
Germain, near Paris, in the time of the Druids, and many other
fantastic stories, with a number of engravings upon tombstones, and
figures, all of which, however, wanted some part, having either
broken hands, feet, noses, or heads. M. de Voltaire very politely
assured the gentleman, that he did not pretend to be an antiquarian;
that he had no doubt the figures must be those of some very elevated
personages; and that, excepting the little circumstance of their
wanting heads and feet, they appeared most singular in his eyes. His
letter concluded with expressing an earnest wish , to see me, on
account of the favourable description of me, received from Madame de
Jofruen. Accordingly, next Monday evening I was introduced by that
lady to this wonderful man. The first sight of the philosopher made
such an impression on my mind, that I became at once profoundly
silent. This circumstance was noticed by l'Abbé Raynal, and the rest
of the company, who were somewhat surprised, as they knew me to be in
general lively, noisy, and talkative. Madame de Jofruen asked me with
her accustomed sweetness, where I had lost my tongue. "Indeed,
Madam," I replied, "I have been reflecting, that the knowledge of the
mysterious sources of the works of nature, which is in fact so
difficult to acquire, has been obtained in inimitable perfection by
this gentleman. When I consider that he is already in full possession
of it, must I not look on his head as a wonderful reservoir of
wisdom, from which it is poured forth in copious streams around the
admiring world." At this avowal of the sentiments I felt, which that
respectable old philosopher so justly merited, I could perceive his 
eyes filled with an expression of surprise and interest. He instantly
approached me with enthusiastic joy, like one suddenly awakened.
from, a dream, snatched me up in his arms, and addressing himself to
the company, paid me this flattering compliment: "Here is a good
soil; where the best seeds may be sown with advantage:" "As you are a
good farmer," I immediately answered, "I beg you will clear it of
weeds." With this reply, Madame de Jofruen, l'Abbé Raynal, and the
rest of the company, were highly pleased.

To return from my digression, I must still remain of the same
sentiments with respect to those great empires and Asiatic kingdoms
into which I penetrated, during the three years of my travels; and it
is with sorrow I reflect, that those enchanting holy lands, blessed
with the most delightful climates, and abounding in every species of
enjoyment, are inhabited by nations so far behind us in civilization,
destitute of all the arts of cultivation, and little better than a
band of plunderers. In passing through such countries, a traveller
must unavoidably be exposed to danger. I reaped, however, this
advantage, from the hazards which I encountered, that they served to
strengthen in my breast that contempt of danger, and resolute
perseverance in the pursuit of independence, which I found very
necessary to support me under my struggles against an obstinate
world, and the caprice of fortune. My labours, however, were the
easier, as my views were bounded by the prospect of that competence,
beyond which I considered it as a foolish ambition to aspire.

I now prepared to quit those kingdoms, which I found not answerable
to my purposes. I must, notwithstanding, acknowledge the kind and
liberal hospitality I met with among the independent Tartars, the
goodness of whose dispositions I contemplated with the highest degree
of esteem. I stopped for some weeks at Bokhara, which is situate in a
delightful climate, suitable to the nature of its inhabitants: the
sky is beautifully clear, and the earth extremely fertile, and
covered with the most luxuriant verdure. I decline to swell my pages
with a particular account of those kingdoms, since it was not for the
purpose of description I travelled through them; and several
celebrated writers have already gratified the public with ample
information on this subject, and, as far as I have observed, with so
much accuracy, as would render any detailed account from me little
better than a mere repetition. My own particular acquaintance with
the manners of those people, obliged me to confirm the general
opinion of their rudeness and barbarity; but, since I have found
these savage creatures capable of receiving the principles of
morality, as well as civilized nations, I should be inclined to ask,
Who is to be blamed for this? they or their chiefs? who may, I think,
be compared to the father of a young family, who neglects to instil
the lessons of good morals into the breasts of his offspring; in
which case, even if no worse consequence ensue, they must of course
remain like stocks in a garden, which have not been grafted, and
which consequently grow up wild flowers, unpleasant to the eye.

We have abundant proof that all created things stand in need of
cultivation; and those amateurs, who are such ardent admirers of
simple nature, would never have become distinguished for their
eminent abilities and extensive knowledge, without diligent study and
cultivation of those natural powers, which, unassisted, would have
placed them far below the rank in society they have now attained, and
sunk them to a level with those savage nations I have just mentioned.
I began now to think that I had spent sufficient time amongst them,
and, being satisfied with the wonderful specimen of simplicity which
I had witnessed, I took leave of their dominions, and setting out
from Karsam, I arrived at last safely at Kislaer, the metropolis of
the Circassian Tartars. I here met with a native, named John Daros, a
good Christian, with whom I remained a month; and found him to be not
only a most worthy and agreeable man, but also an eminent chymist.
During my stay, he shewed me several curious experiments, which
excited my astonishment, and which chymists in general would esteem
surprising. He was a Grand Master in Masonry, and after a strict
exanimation introduced me to the Lodge, where I found five spacious
rooms richly decorated, for what purpose I am not at liberty to say.
I have remarked, that Masons on the Continent are not so
accommodating as the English Masons, who permit strangers to look
into their Lodges. I was also permitted to see four large
laboratories for the apprentices to work in; and was witness to some
experiments, which were made by the youngest, in the presence of the
Grand Master, who was highly pleased with his performance. He took
Antimonium Saturninum, and mixed it with some liquid matter of a most
pleasant perfume. He then put lead into a crucible, which anon
,became liquid, and, infusing something to take away the impure
scoria, he waited until it was clear. He then immediately introduced
the antimony, which had been prepared for the purpose, and after
keeping the mixture a short time upon the fire, he took it off: when
it became cold, it was removed from the crucible, and we found the
produce to be a pure crystal. Close to the Lodge is a large building,
on purpose for the brethren who have been reduced to poverty. They
receive liberal pensions, in return for which it is their duty to
take care that the Lodge be kept in order, and the iron door
regularly locked; a precaution which is very necessary, as the Lodge
is extremely rich. From their industry they carry on a very extensive
commerce; for which they are advantageously situated, as their
contiguity to the Black and farther Caspian Seas enables, them to
traffic both with Turkey and Persia.

As I recollected having read, in the works of some travellers, an
account of a curious hot spring near this city, I enquired of Mr.
Daros if such a curiosity really existed, and he convinced me of its
reality by taking me to see it. A stream of boiling water issued from
the spring, which had a strong smell of naphtha, and fell into a sort
of basin, 16 feet in circumference and 7 in depth. On the west there
were seven small wells of the same kind of water, and an acid spring
on the east. I had been told, that the water of the first well would
boil a fowl in a short time, and was the more readily disposed to
believe this account, by finding that I scalded my finger which I had
dipped into the spring.

After viewing this curiosity, which corresponded with the account I
had read, except a trifling difference with regard to the depth and
the circumference, which it is not necessary to particularize, we
returned to Mr. Daros. After dinner, my host conducted me to his
library, which contained a very large collection of books, comprising
the works of the best authors in the Arabic, Greek, Latin, and French
languages, all of which he spoke. He made me a present of a very
ancient French book of chemistry, which I have still in my
possession.

Next day I left Kislaer, and travelled rapidly, but unfortunately
happened to miss the straight road, and found myself in Croatia,
Dalmatia, and the Lower Arabia. I thought myself very lucky when I
arrived at Walachia and Hocime; as I then began to anticipate the
happiness, which I should so soon enjoy, of once more beholding my
native country, for which purpose I had only to pass the Dniester. I
stopped at Kamienice to see my friends, but I never told them for
what purpose I had travelled. Afterwards, I passed to Buda, the
metropolis of Lower Hungary; where I was handsomely received, and had
a concert, which succeeded extremely well. I was amply provided for
travelling, as, in ,addition to this, my worthy friend, Daros had not
sent me away with an empty purse. Accordingly, I next made my
appearance in Germany; for which country I was provided with letters
of recommendation to Count de Thierheim, Governor of Lower Austria,
and son-in-law of the Prince de Kaunitz, who loaded me with
kindnesses. He was so good as to lend me, for the concert, his band
of musicians, which was composed of fifteen young men, all good
performers, the eldest of whom was not seventeen. The concert being
very thinly attended, occasioned this remark to be made -- "Little
concert, little music, little players, and little receipt" In fact,
Lintz, the metropolis of Low Austria, is rather small.

After leaving Lintz, the next place I stopped at was Ratisbon; but
not finding the Prince de la Tour and Taxis, who was then at his
estate at Teschen, I went immediately to Munich, where her Royal
Highness the Electress Dowager resided, whom I had had the honour to
visit before, in my travels with the Countess Humiecka. She was very
glad to see me again, and shewed me the same kindness as at the time
of my former journey. She perfectly remembered the particular
pleasure her illustrious husband had felt in conversing with me, and
the special favour he had done me, by presenting me with a chased
gold box made by himself. She presented me to his most Serene
Highness the then reigning Elector. I was often invited to the
assemblies at Court, and every time I was the subject of general
conversation. They took great pleasure in tracing back many events
and circumstances of my former appearance in that town. His most 
Serene Highness was so good as to appoint a day for my concert, all
the expenses of which he desired to defray.

After having taken my leave of their Highnesses, I directed my route
to Teschen; where, being arrived, I sent to the Prince de la Tour and
Taxis to request that I might to permitted to pay my respects to him.
He answered, that he had often seen men of my species, and had no
curiosity to see any more, except one who had travelled with the
Countess Humiecka, whom he had always desired to see, without ever
having had it in his power. This reply from his Highness to my
request could not offend, but was highly flattering to me. When I was
told this, I immediately took the liberty to write to his Highness,
that I was not only the very same person he had desired to meet with,
but that I was the bearer of letters from the Princess his daughter,
and the Prince Radziurl his son-in-law, which would confirm the fact;
otherwise I should blame myself for taking such a liberty as to 
trouble his Highness. He then sent a carriage, with his chamberlain,
for me. After having bowed to the Prince and to his court, I
approached his Highness, and told him that one of the most charming
ladies in the world had charged me to embrace him with all my heart.
Without giving me time to finish my phrase, the Prince lifted me up
in his arms, and said, With great pleasure I give you leave." Then,
having put me on the ground again, he asked me, who had charged me
with so agreeable a commission. I immediately delivered to him the
letters of the Prince his son-in-law, and of the Princess his
daughter; and told him that, the day before my setting out from
Warsaw, having waited on the Princess to receive her orders, she had
been so kind as to embrace me, and said, it was on condition I should
return that kiss to her papa. She afterwards had enjoined me to press
him to take a trip to Poland, to see a daughter who loved him
tenderly, and to whose happiness his presence alone was wanting:
that, should he not consent to this, nothing could prevent her from
setting out immediately, as she was not able to live any longer
without the pleasure of seeing him. During the whole of this recital,
the Prince's sensibility was evidently displayed: his eyes sparkled
with tears, and, after having read the letters, he embraced me again,
and asked many questions respecting the manner in which I had parted
from the Countess Humiecka, and the motives that had induced me to
undertake new travels. He seemed satisfied with my answers, and
engaged me to stay for some time with him.

During my stay at Teschen, there was nothing but feasts and
entertainments. When I took my leave of his Highness, he engaged me
to pay a visit to the Prince de Wallerstein, his son-in-law, who at
that time resided at Honnaltheim, his country seat. This proposal was
too agreeable to be refused. Being arrived at Honnaltheim, I was
presented to the Prince de Wallerstein, by whom, considering the
recommendation I had from his father-in-law, I could not fail to be
kindly received. But, though he welcomed me with all politeness and
affability imaginable, I soon perceived that he was labouring under a
dark melancholy, and seemed to value life only from his extreme
attachment, to the Princess his daughter, then four years old. I was
soon informed of the cause of this sadness, in which all his court
took the greatest concern; and my astonishment ceased, when I was
told that the moment which made him a father, had deprived him of a
charming and adored wife, for whom he had mourned ever since. Thus,
she who was to have completed his happiness, had been the occasion of
plunging him into a state of apathy and insensibility, subsequent to
the most violent ravings, which had alarmed his court, first for his
life, and afterwards for his reason. I was, however, instrumental, in
removing, this sadness for a few moments, as my figure, and manners
seemed to amuse the young Princess; and nothing could make any
impression upon him, but what interested, this child.

Hitherto I had found every reason to applaud myself for the
expedient, I had taken of travelling: I had been every where
welcomed, with pleasure. and had met with much civility. But nothing
can be compared to the reception I found at the court of his most
Serene Highness the Margrave, and her Serene Highness the, Margravine
of Anspach, at Triersdorff; nor can I find expressions strong enough
to describe the sentiments of respectful gratitude I shall ever
entertain for that amiable Prince and her Highness, whose generous
treatment has made the deepest impression on my heart. I passed six
weeks in that delightful place, amidst pleasures and entertainments,
and enjoyed that friendly protection which is so flattering when it
comes from the great.

Some days after I had commenced my preparations for setting out, the
Margrave wrote several letters to his friends, particularly to the
Duke of Gloucester, and to his Royal Highness the Duke of Cumberland,
his brothers and pressed me very much to go to London, and deliver
his letters as soon as I should arrive. I then took my leave of their
Highnesses. On quitting Triersdorff, my only care was to hasten my
journey, that I might reach England as soon as possible, to keep my
promise to his Highness the Margrave of Anspach.



CHAP. VI.
Departure for England by Frankfort, Mayence, Manheim, and Strasburgh
-- Introduction to the Princess Christian, aunt to Louis XVIII.--
Arrival at Ostend -- Storm at sea -- Landing at Margate, and visit of
Custom House Officers -- Tale of a Tub -- Waiter's blunders --
Opinion of a stage coach -- Departure from Margate, and arrival in
London.

I HAVE already observed, that his Excellency Sir Robert Murray Keith
had prevailed upon me to visit England, by having assured me a
thousand times, that I could not fail of making a brilliant fortune
in a country where generosity and greatness of soul are reckoned
among the characteristic virtues of the nation. Therefore, after
having passed rapidly through Frankfort, Mayence, and Manheim, I went
to Strasburgh, where I had the honour to give a concert, under the
patronage of the Princess Christian, aunt of Louis XVIII. the present
King of France, to whom I had also the honour to present a letter of
recommendation from the Electress of Bavaria, her sister. She
politely engaged me to spend every evening at her court. This kind
engagement I considered as an extreme favour, since I was convinced
that she was actuated by far more noble views, than those of mere
curiosity, in taking so great an interest in my concerns. She not
only procured me a good benefit, but kindly advised me to pay my
visits to those persons who had favoured me with their attendance at
my concert, furnishing me at the same time with their names and
residence. I acted agreeably to her wishes; from which I derived a
great advantage, being received by the public with great attention
and politeness, and honoured with an abundance of invitations, so
that I found myself truly happy its the midst of so much kindness,
and of so agreeable a society. The Princess had a large party one
evening, to which she did me the honour of sending me an invitation,
and very graciously introduced me to the brilliant company I found
there assembled. She was in high spirits; and, in the course of
conversation, brought to my recollection many pleasing circumstances
which had occurred during my stay at the court of Munich, and her
visit to her sister the Electress of Bavaria. She particularly
mentioned my giving a preference to her sister the Princess
Elizabeth, above all the beauties of the court. To this observation,
I took the liberty of asking the Princess's permission to reply,
which she most readily granted, saying, "Speak, Joujou." "If you will
allow me, Princess," I answered, "with due respect to your
illustrious sister, to confess the truth, I must say, she was so
highly favoured by nature, that the charms of her noble and dignified
mind, and her numerous accomplishments, gave her an irresistible
power of attraction. Pardon my speaking so freely, but answer me
yourself, Princess: How many claims to favour did she not possess?"
The Princess was delighted with my reply, and all the company were so
well satisfied, that next day I received numerous invitations for
dinners, suppers, and, assemblies.

This amiable Princess wished to send me to Paris, or to Dresden,
assuring me that all my wants should be supplied. But I was obliged
to tell her, that I had pledged my promise to Prince Kaunitz, who had
so far honoured me with his friendship, as to give me a pressing
invitation to go to England, which if I neglected to fulfil, I should
be guilty of ingratitude. I added, that I had so much reason to be
well pleased with the letters of recommendation which he had procured
me to that kingdom, that, with their aid, it was impossible I should
fail of success, amongst so generous a people as the English. The
night before my departure, I received from her a handsome gold box,
of three different colours, which she had directed to be made on
purpose for me, but which cruel necessity afterwards compelled me to 
dispose of, during my residence in London.

I afterwards directed my course to the opulent city of Brussels,
where I remained two months; during which time I fortunately became
acquainted with a Mr. Mills, a native of Ireland, who, very prudently
considering that the circumstances of my being an entire stranger in
Lowden, and my ignorance of the English language, might subject me to
difficulties which I had not at all taken into my calculation, most
politely gave me a letter of introduction to his friend Mr. McMahon,
in London, with a request that I would deliver it immediately upon my
arrival there. And so scrupulously did I adhere to the directions of
my friend, that on reaching that metropolis, I drove directly to the
door of the worthy Mr. McMahon, by whom I was immediately received in
the politest manner imaginable; and thus, much trouble and
inconvenience were saved to me. And if ever this should fall into the
hands of my excellent friend, Mr. Mills, I hope it will convince him,
that I retain a grateful sense of all his kind attentions to me.

Having anticipated my subject, to discharge this debt of gratitude, I
proceed to state, that I embarked at Ostend; and here I must confess
my inability to describe the grandeur and solemnity of the scene,
with which my mind was at that moment impressed, on beholding again
so tremendous a spectacle as the sea -- such a depth and extent of
boisterous and tempestuous water, whereon I was so soon to expose my
life! I had a sort of foreboding, that it was to be my grave; which
was in truth nearly realized. For, during a difficult passage of six
days, we were continually tossed about by storms and tempests; the
masts were broken, the sails rent and carried away, and in short,
there was every appearance of approaching destruction. And,
notwithstanding my serious alarms for my own personal safety, I may,
I hope, be permitted to add, that my feelings were greatly increased
by my apprehensions for the companions of the voyage; many of whom
probably had large families, whose comforts wholly depended on their
lives and health. The storm, however, at length happily abated, and
then our attention was turned to the miserable state of the
passengers on board; all of whom were either affected by a violent
spitting of blood, or the most dreadful sea sickness, the general
consequence of a storm; so that the satisfaction which was felt by
all upon making the harbour, may more easily be conceived than
described.

It was night-fall ere we came in sight of Margate, and being also low
water, the Captain felt great difficulty in approaching with his
vessel; but, on my earnest entreaty to be set on shore, he most
politely directed his master to accompany me in the boat with my
luggage; giving him, at the same time, the strictest injunctions to
pay every possible attention to my safety and accommodation. The
master, therefore, together with myself and servant, bag and baggage,
now steered in the packet boat for the shore; on our reaching which a
difficulty arose, that almost led me to repent having left the
vessel, for we soon discovered, that we had not any person to take
care of the boat, whilst my luggage was conveyed to the inn, which
provoked me more than if I had remained on board; but, at length a
man passing by, we asked him, if he would procure a large stone, to
supply the want of an anchor, to moor the boat, offering at the same
time to make him a recompense for his trouble. This he readily
undertook, and accordingly, dispatched my man along with him; and
they having soon returned with a stone large enough for the purpose,
and a long rope for a temporary cable, we contrived to secure the
boat, and prepared to move our trunks, in a state of perfect
security, as we vainly imagined. For, what was my surprise, on
beholding six men, carrying lanthorns in their hands, and approaching
us from the harbour! At first I supposed them to be my old neighbours
the Tartars, near the Borysthenes, or a savage banditti from Zehdho,
who had landed in England, to which they bore an exact resemblance;
so that I, who had so lately congratulated myself upon a most
providential escape from the dangers of the sea, now again gave
myself up for lost, not doubting that my life must eventually be
sacrificed; an idea which was considerably strengthened by the cruel
and wanton manner in which I beheld these savages, forcing open the
locks of the packages, rummaging and searching the trunks for hidden
treasure, as I imagined; and, on their disappointment in not finding
any, I did not at all doubt that their vengeance would fall upon me,
so wild and infuriate were they in their manners, more resembling
wild beasts than men, and ready to knock out our brains on the least
show of resistance.

But my fears were speedily dissipated, and my mind relieved, on being
told, that these worthy gentlemen were Custom House Officers; and I
afterwards found, that their proceedings were fully sanctioned by the
laws of this land of boasted liberty. But, as I could not at that
time imagine, that any laws could countenance such wanton and
unnecessary proceedings; and as I thought that the utmost extent of
their duty was to prevent smuggling, and not to exercise their
prerogative to the dread of strangers, I began to remonstrate with
them on their conduct. I found, however, that I gained nothing for my
labour but a torrent of abuse, which was not little increased by
their mortification, at not having made any discoveries. Casting,
however, their eyes around, they soon perceived the rope plunged into
the water; at which I could observe a glance of satisfaction for a
moment enlighten the gloomy countenances of these worthy beings, upon
the prospect which they supposed presented itself, of promoting the
interests of government; for I cannot for a moment imagine, that they
had any views to their own personal advantage; and I could not
refrain from smiling at the alacrity with which they set about
dragging the rope to the surface; but the stone having sunk deeply in
the sand, increased their difficulties, and I desired my servant to
give them his assistance, by which means the mighty treasure was
brought to light. Upon which, with great gravity, I requested that
they would accept of so very valuable a pebble, as some reward for
their services; hoping, at the same time, that it might be considered
as an earnest of what their zeal and activity might expect from
government, to whom I could not fail to communicate every particular
of the transaction. On such an occasion, the privilege of a reply is
generally exercised, and accordingly, one of these gentry smartly
enough observed, "No, no! Sir, keep it to yourself, if you are going
to London, it may be the means of making your fortune-" To which I
replied, "that I was by no means disposed to rob him of the fair
perquisites of his office, but begged him to put it into the box,
which he had ready upon his back."

During my conversation with this man he wore an upper coat, which
concealed what I took for a box actually fastened to his back, but
which, in fact, turned out to be a natural hump; otherwise, nothing
could be more distant from my ideas, than to deride any human being,
on account of the infirmities of nature. My good friend, however,
appeared to be cruelly offended at my observation, and asked, if I
meant to insult him, by comparing him to Æsop: to which I very
readily answered, that such a comparison would not hold in any other
way than this, namely, I had always considered Æsop as a very eminent
and renowned character; in high esteem with his king, on account of
the beauties of his mind; and, although there was some trifling
difference between the two, yet I thought my friend, to whom I was
addressing myself, equally entitled to the confidence of his
sovereign, by reason of his personal exertions for the benefit of the
revenue. With this apology the gentleman acquiesced, and expressed
himself satisfied; but I could perceive, it was that sort of
satisfaction which we feel on taking wormwood drops: we taste a
little of the bitter along with the sweet. A mutual amnesty, however,
succeeded, and my friend took his leave with that degree of silent
humility which became his situation.

After the departure of these national protectors, I availed myself of
the opportunity to proceed to the inn, where I arrived late at night,
and, being very much fatigued and exhausted, from the roughness of
the voyage and the length of time that I had been detained in the
boat, I preferred bed to supper, and gave my directions accordingly.

During the first moments that I was in bed, before I experienced the
visitation of the drowsy god, I felt (as I have since understood is
generally the case after a sea voyage) motions similar to those of an
earthquake, which continued, without interruption, for some time, but
which I at first disregarded, and turned my head, which I had lifted
up, again to the pillow, seeking that repose so necessary for my
agitated mind and weary limbs; but, on a sudden, I was awakened from
my drowsiness, by a repetition of the same sensations more violent
than before: the bed shook under me, and I was seriously alarmed,
being in that state which may properly be called half asleep, and
recollecting that, in my former travels through Italy, I had visited
Aquila, the capital of Abruzzo, where I was informed that the earth
had opened, and discharged immense quantities of stones, which
covered the surface of the country for several miles round; and that,
afterwards, from the same volcanoes had issued water spouts, which
deluged the whole surrounding neighbourhood, as I myself beheld,--
all the horrors of that dreadful situation immediately crowded on my
mind; and, upon a third yet more violent agitation of the bed, in my
exertion to avoid the imagined danger, by a sudden attempt to leap to
the other side of the bed, found myself -- I give you leave to guess
where, but it will never occur to you. Judge, then, my astonishment,
to find myself up to the neck in a tub of salt water; a situation not
greatly improved by the total darkness of the room, and my utter
inability to form any correct judgment of my real situation.

Whilst immersed in this delightful pickle, my ears were saluted by a
noise, which I could not so aptly compare to any thing, as to a
volcanic eruption of the earth; and I gave myself up now as totally
lost:-- conceive, then, how I felt relieved from my anxiety, on
hearing the voices of the passengers from the packet, who had just
arrived at the inn, the flood tide having brought them into the
harbour. Amongst others, I had the satisfaction to distinguish a
French officer, M. Larmina, who was on his way to take a command in
the service of the Emperor of Morocco, and with whom I had formed an
acquaintance during the passage. He spoke the Turkish language very
fluently, and might have passed very well for a renegado.

No sooner was my friend Larmina arrived at the inn, than, having
expressed his apprehensions for my safety, and making anxious
inquiries after me, he was introduced into my room, where he found me
in the situation I have already described. I immediately stated to
him all the circumstances, and I soon discovered, that I owed great
part of my fright and alarm to a mastiff dog, which happened to be
above, in the place to which he usually made his retreat at night;
the house being slightly built, the noise he made shook my room, as
much as if it had been an earthquake. must, however, frankly confess,
that all the tragic powers of a Siddons and a Kemble combined, would
not have inspired my mind with more dreadful ideas than this mastiff
dog produced.

Order having been in some degree restored, and my friend Lamina
having communicated to our fellow passengers the particulars of my
disaster, which he did not fail to embellish with all the humour, of
which he possessed an abundant share, they immediately thronged into
my room, pouring upon me their most hearty congratulations, on my
deliverance from so critical and gloomy a situation, and wishing me
joy upon my independence, and restoration to liberty from the tub.
They told me, they would not fail to celebrate the anniversary of so
memorable a day, with as much solemnity as the Gunpowder Plot,
adding, that they would instantly proceed to offer a Te Deum. But to
this I answered, that as we were at a considerable distance from the
church, and as my imaginary travel last night to Abruzzo had procured
me an appetite, I should prefer a good breakfast, (which was
accordingly ordered) to all the thanksgivings in the world. "You
perhaps think, my friends," added I, "that this is a most unlucky
accident; but, I assure you, it does not disconcert me. I rather take
it as an omen, that though I may hereafter be a little tossed about
on the ocean of life, I shall be able to keep my head above water, 
and find friends at last to bring me safe to the shore of peace and
happiness. "You put a good face upon the matter," said they. To which
I replied, "I have always thought that the best way, since I read
what happened to the illustrious Julius Cæsar, on his landing in
Britain. He was the first who set foot upon the Island; and, in his
eagerness to land, he fell, and his hands stuck in the mud. On his
rising, he hold them out with a look of despair, considering this as
a most unfortunate omen; when immediately the presence of mind of his
soldiers gave that happy turn to the occurrence, which led to the
conquest of the Country. You ought, said they, to look on this as a
most fortunate event; for by it you have taken immediate possession
.of the Island.' You see here, my friends, the fruits of looking on
the best side of things; and I think you must allow, that the fall of
Julius was at first quite as unlucky, as this ducking of mine in the
tub." My friends applauded my philosophy, and we sat down very
cheerfully to breakfast.

Although money can in general procure most of the comforts of life,
yet I have never been able to discover, that it could subdue the
invincible obstinacy and stupidity of waiters at taverns; who, for
the most part, cannot be made to move out of their ordinary place,--
a circumstance which I have always found a considerable tax upon my
patience. During my stay at this inn, I was highly amused by the
careless blunders of the waiter who attended us; one of which I shall
just now mention. I took particular notice of the regular motion of
his feet, for it appeared to me, as if he had adopted the cotillion
step, or time of 6/8; and if ever he was stimulated to the exertion
of a quicker motion, it was ten to one but he made some gross mistake
in the orders given, as if he had really been deaf from his infancy,
which was fully exemplified in the following instance:-- Two
gentlemen came to the inn, whose names were, as it should seem,
somewhat uncommon, Mr. Mogg and Mr. Porter; and who, it appeared,
were members of the Poets' Club, some of whom were at that time at
our table. Upon these two gentlemen being introduced into the room,
Mr. Bottomlow, the landlord, very cordially addressed them thus:
"Come, Mogg and Porter, sit down and warm yourselves between us, near
the fire." The waiter, as usual, wholly inattentive to the business
requiring his care, and listening only to the conversation passing
between the two gentlemen and his master, according to the usual
system of this sort of people, answered directly three times, "Yes,
Sir!" (as I have since found it is the universal custom to answer),
and having caught only half the sound, instantly quitted the room
with unusual activity, and soon returned with a mug of warm porter,
which he presented to the company! At this gross mistake, poor
Bottomlow, the landlord, expressed great uneasiness; but Mr. Mogg and
Mr. Porter enjoyed the joke with abundance of good humour, and
entertained the company with several anecdotes of similar mistakes
with respect to names, enlivened with so much humour, that it was
impossible not to feel a more than ordinary degree of friendship for
them both; and, for my own part, I must candidly confess, that I
passed so very pleasant an evening in their society, that it was with
no small regret I found myself under the necessity of making
preparations the following day for my journey to London. I cannot
sufficiently express the astonishment which I felt, on first
beholding a stage coach; a machine which, according to my
conceptions, was adapted to any purpose rather than that for which it
was intended; having a short and narrow carriage, upon which was
suspended a most enormous body out of all proportion, and besides so
loaded on the top with passengers and luggage, as to give the whole
the resemblance of the Tower of Babel. It was not without very uneasy
sensations that I ventured into a carriage of this kind, in the
construction of which it appeared very clearly to me, that the safety
of the lives of his Majesty's liege subjects had been only a
secondary consideration; for, there being nothing to counter-balance
so unwieldy a body, the coach must be liable to be overturned by
slight accidents, to the very great risk of the passengers.
Fortunately, however, we arrived in London, without any material
accident; and, pursuing the directions given to me by Mr. Mills, I
drove immediately to the house of his friend, Mr. McMahon, adjoining
to the Opera House, in the Hay-Market; where I was received by him in
such a manner, as fully convinced .me, that I was not mistaken in the
account I had heard, and the notions I had myself formed, of Irish
hospitality.



CHAP. VII.
Descriptive account of medicinal springs and salt mines of Poland --
Wild men of the woods unknown in that country -- Laughable mistake
occasioned by the ringing of bells -- Introduction to the Duke and
Duchess of Devonshire; afterwards to the Prince of Wales -- Visit
from the Duke of Gloucester -- Admitted to the presence of the King
and Queen -- Attacked by dangerous illness -- Curious dream -- Visit
to Bath, Bristol, and Chester; duped by an impostor in the latter
city -- Arrival in Dublin; invitation from the Lord Lieutenant --
Return to England -- Concert at Leeds -- Visit to Oxford.

MR. McMAHON welcomed me with such marks of civility and friendship,
as excited in me an anxious wish to visit the country, of which he
was a native, and so excellent a specimen. I soon discovered, that
Mr. McMahon had passed considerable part of his time abroad; by which
he had acquired a general knowledge of the customs and manners of
many nations which he had visited. He possessed also a sweetness of
disposition, a readiness of communication, and a general pleasantry,
which are seldom to be attained by a constant residence at home; and
which, all combined, rendered him one of the most agreeable and
desirable companions imaginable.

Having expressed a wish to be informed of the curious productions of
my country, I readily communicated to .him ,whatever at first
presented itself to my recollection; and mentioned the astonishing
virtues of an ebbing and flowing spring, in the palatinate of
Cracow,-- similar, to that which, since I have been in England, I
have observed at Tideswell, near Buxton in Derbyshire,-- possessing
wonderful medicinal qualities, tending to the prolongation of life;
many of the inhabitants in the neighbourhood laving lived to the age
of 150 years and upwards, and in some instances to 200. This spring,
which may justly be stated one of the phenomena of nature, rises, to
the best of my recollection, not far distant from the Wielieska and
Bochnia, in the neighbourhood of the salt mines; which naturally led
me to speak of those most striking objects of natural curiosity, out
of whose wonderful caverns are dug four distinct kinds of salt; one
extremely hard resembling crystal, another soft and transparent, a
third white but brittle, and all of them brackish, but the fourth
considerably less pungent than the rest, These are all dug about six
miles from Cracow. On one side of the mines is a stream of salt
water; and on the other, one of fresh. My account of these and other
particulars led me, of course, into a much wider and more extended
field of description, than I will now trouble my readers with; and I
had the supreme felicity to find, that what I had said, gave some
satisfaction to my friend, who became more and more anxious to be
informed, as if his appetite increased by what it fed on. He was,
above all, particularly solicitous to be satisfied, as to the truth
of the several accounts which he had read and heard, respecting wild
men of the woods in Poland; and although I felt a certain degree of
unwillingness to enter into this detail, inasmuch as I must, of
necessity, palpably expose and contradict all that had been hitherto
written on the subject, and give the lie direct to numerous writers;
many of whom, for the mere purpose of makting a book, had invented
the most ridiculous and fabulous stories, in order to swell the
number of their pages; whilst others, affecting an air of greater
plausibility, had endeavoured to impress upon the minds of their
readers a belief, that the neighbouring barbarous nations frequently
bore off whole villages of people into slavery, compelling the women
to carry or leave behind in the woods, their children, to be nurtured
by the bears,-- yet a strict regard to truth compelled me to expose
the gross absurdity of all these stories. And I could not refrain
from observing, that the writers who had thus attempted to impose
upon the world, had either never considered the natural feeling of
the mothers of these poor infants; or they had ventured to write upon
the subject with that degree of confidence which they assumed,
because that part of the country, in which such things are stated to
have happened, lies in so remote a part of the globe, that they could
not, or would not, give themselves the trouble of inquiring into the
truth of their statements: but being desirous, at all events, to
relate some wonderful particulars respecting that corner of the
world, they had introduced into their works, miracles surpassing that
of the delivery of Daniel from the lions. I was, however, compelled
to assure Mr. McMahon, that I could not recollect a single instance
in which a Polish child was so happy as to be delivered from the paws
of the bears, as Daniel had been from the jaws of the lion; and that,
therefore, I should not have any very considerable degree of
confidence in committing my own children to so polished a mode of
education. Mr. McMahon, upon this, took notice of the disposition of
the parent bird. He observed, that, although, according to its nature
and habits, it was accustomed to leave its young when at a sufficient
age to be able to provide for themselves; yet he could by no means
from thence be led to infer, that a mother could, from any motive, be
induced to leave her child behind her in the wood; and therefore, we
both concluded, that the whole accounts were erroneously reported in
the Polish history.

From this, the conversation became general; and the astonishing fund
of anecdote and information possessed by my companion, pleasantly
beguiled the hours. I was proceeding, in answer to his questions, to
state, that my parents were born in the palatinate of Kiow, in
Ukraine, in the Lower Padolia, which lies east from the Upper
Volhinia, and not far distant from the river Borysthenes; when my
narrative was interrupted, by the servant introducing coffee. On my
taking the first cup, I heard a bell passing in the street, of which
I did not take any notice, till it approached the door of Mr.
McMahon; upon which I instantly made the sign of the cross, and bent
my knees; from which circumstance, he and his friend (a comedian who
was in company) immediately knowing me to be a stranger in the
country, determined to amuse themselves at my expense, and
accordingly, they began their devotions. The bells in the street
never ceasing, we of course continued our prayers, till at length I
observed the countenance of the comedian most wonderfully distorted,
as if he had received a paralytic stroke, or got some disorder in his
body, causing the most horrid grimaces. I endeavoured in vain to
resume my cup of coffee; for, no sooner had it reached my lips, than
tinkle tinkle again went the bell; down I dropt on my knees, and I
could not finish a single cup. At length, I was induced to enquire
into the reason why so many priests were employed in the streets; and
you will imagine, that the answer did not prove at all satisfactory
to me, when Mr. McMahon informed me, that I had arrived just at the
commencement of the plague, and that the whole town was in a state of
grievous desolation and trouble.

Whilst I was listening to this information, the comedian was
rehearsing his part of the joke in an adjoining room, and began to
cry out, in the most piteous tones, "Lord have mercy upon us, there
are four fallen down dead in the street;" and made the sign of the
cross with such contortions, that he appeared to me to be possessed
with a devil. But when I observed the wonderful change in his
countenance, concluded that he was affected by a spasmodic complaint,
and I repeatedly requested him to send for a doctor; but whilst I was
speaking, the bell again began; our prayers of course followed; and I
immediately declared my determination of quitting the town, since was
not yet in a hurry to join the dead. Upon which Mr. McMahon,
perceiving me serious, observed, that he found I had not acquired an
intimate knowledge of the history of England, or I should have known,
that, on the Reformation, in the time of King Henry VIII., that
monarch declared himself Supreme Head of the Church of England; that
one a his first acts, in the exercise of his spiritual jurisdiction,
was the total suppression of the existing priesthood, and an
abolition of the ceremonials of the church; and that, therefore,
since he had thus commenced Shepherd of the English flock, we no
longer behold the host, or priests in the streets; and, as liberty of
conscience was allowed, there was not any occasion for persons to
visit the dwellings of the people. He concluded with entreating me,
no more to regard the bells that I heard, which only served to
announce the postman's passing by. Although this information composed
my mind at the moment, yet it was a considerable time before I became
perfectly familiarized to the sound of the bells. At length, however,
by habit, and the well-timed raillery of my friend, I became as
reconciled to it as the English themselves.

After having for some time enjoyed the agreeable society and
instructive conversation of. my friend, I felt the necessity of
turning my attention to other considerations which more immediately
affected my own individual interest, and of preparing to act my part
upon another stage. As I possessed letters of recommendation to
several of the first nobility in the kingdom, I consulted Mr.
McMahon, on the propriety of making use of them; who readily agreed
with me, that no time was to be lost in making my application,
particularly to their Graces the Duke and Duchess of Devonshire; and
although I had every where heard them praised and extolled, in the
highest degree, for their politeness, affability, and desire to
please; yet their gracious reception of me so far exceeded my most
sanguine expectations, that any attempt, on my part, to describe it,
would fall very far short of the justice which I owe them. His Grace
the Duke did not join us in the conversation: I observed that he was
absorbed in thought. Very likely his Grace might be one of the
administration at this time, which was during the American war.

As I was going to take my leave of the Duke and Duchess, I was
presented to Lady Spencer, who was so kind as to appoint a day to
receive me. at her house. There I had the honour of seeing his Royal
Highness the Prince of Wales, to why Lady Spencer graciously
presented me; and the Prince received me with his usual affability,
which deservedly gains him universal esteem. I was, about this time,
honoured with a visit from his Royal Highness the Duke of Gloucester,
at whose door I had called, as soon as I arrived, to deliver a letter
which his Highness the Margrave of Anspach had favoured me with for
him. As I was not fortunate enough to find the Duke at home, he
thought proper to surprise me by a visit incognito. Mr. Cramer, first
violin performer at his Majesty's concerts, was then with me, who,
being known to the Royal Duke, disappointed his intention of being
unknown; and his Royal Highness assured me, that he would do every
thing in his power to oblige me. From that time, this amiable Prince
has not failed to favour me with proofs of his protection, of which I
shall speak more at large in the sequel.

The Duchess of Devonshire and her whole family still continued their
promise, to take the most lively interest in all that concerned me,
conscious that my situation was beneath my birth, education, and
sentiments. She kindly recommended me to all her acquaintance; in the
number of whom I must distinguish the Countess of Egremont, who,
being informed that mention had been made of me at court, stuffed one
of my shoes with cotton, and sent it to the Queen. This exciting
their curiosity, their Majesties condescended to appoint a day for me
to wait on them. It is to the Countess of Egremont that I am indebted
for this honour, who was so kind as to take me to her Majesty. The
King and all the Royal family were present His Majesty desired me to
sit down, and put several questions to me. The conversation was often
interrupted by the witty and agreeable sallies of his Royal Highness
the Prince of Wales. The young Princes and Princesses, having
recovered from the astonishment I had caused them, entered into those
familiarities with me, which were becoming youth of their high rank.
I had the honour of remaining four hours with their Majesties; who, I
flatter myself, were pleased with my efforts to entertain them. These
efforts were, however, nearly fatal to me; for I returned with a
fever, and the very next day I was dangerously ill. His Majesty was
so kind as to send me his physician, Sir Richard Jebb, by whose
attention, and that of my good friend Dr. Walker, I recovered in a
fortnight.

Various rumours were at that time circulated respecting my visit to
court; and it was mentioned in some newspapers, that I had received a
considerable sum of money from their Majesties. These reports were,
as usual, founded on conjecture only; for, had they the least
foundation in truth, I would not have omitted to mention the
particulars, as I consider it my duty to declare all the favours I
have been indulged with. The fact is, that his Majesty vouchsafed to
treat me as a Polish gentleman; and, though it be an honour to
receive favours from a king, these marks of Royal condescension
obliterated in me every idea of personal interest. I was compelled to
suppress the dictates of self-love, when the matter in question was
to provide for the subsistence of life. It could not be of any use to
apply to those, who had never experienced want, to feel for my
situation; nor could I expect any thing from national interest. Sir
Robert Murray Keith had given me many letters for his friends in
England; and assured me, a thousand times, that I could not fail to
make a splendid fortune there, so sanguine were his feelings for his
country. But he never declared to me, that I must exhibit myself. The
hopes, with which he had inspired me, I found an empty shadow; and I
was obliged, on my arrival in London, to adopt the plan suggested by
his friends to me, of exhibiting myself. These circumstances made
such an impression on my mind, that I dreamt the following dream:-- A
stupendous giant appeared before me: he had a pleasing countenance,
and strength in proportion to his bulk. At first, I was astonished
and remained for some time mute; when, perceiving that I was rather
uneasy, he said to me, "Do not fear me, I am your friend, and I will
introduce you to the knowledge of the world." Then, stooping very
low, he offered me his hand, and paid me a genteel compliment, drew
me near to him as close as possible, and lifted me up over a country,
where I saw the lake Asphaltites, which I had heard of before. He
then threw me down, and I fell into that dead sea. I began to float
upon the top, where I saw something rise up, resembling bulls without
heads: I continued swimming with difficulty, and at last reached the
bank, where I found trees that bear fruit of divers kinds, like
apples, which were fair and pleasant to the eye. After viewing them
very eagerly (for I was nearly exhausted with want), I pulled and
opened some, but found nothing but dust. I could find no Joseph to
explain this dream, nor did I experience the least change in my
situation. I was advised to give a concert, and afterwards, I was
prevailed upon to make an exhibition of myself.

The pressure of want, and hope of success, overcame all those
emotions in my heart, that made the expedient seem so shocking. I
gave my first concert by the advice of their Graces the Duke and
Duchess of Devonshire. In truth, I was frightened at the expense,
which amounted to a very considerable sum; but I was amply
indemnified, the assembly being both, brilliant and numerous. Had the
enthusiasm continued, some concerts given now and then, would have
placed me above want. This, however, was not the case; for, having
attempted to give another a few weeks after in the same place, the
receipts scarcely cleared my expenses. I was consequently obliged to
think of some new means to support myself.

At the beginning of the winter following, I went to Bath, where I met
with many persons who seemed to entertain a friendship for me. I had
not been long there, before the arrival of the learned pig was
announced in that city. The proprietor of that wonderful animal,
bringing with him from London strong recommendations of its
abilities, attracted crowded audiences of all the gentry; so that I
thought it most prudent to return to London. On my arrival, respect
led me to the door of Lady Clermont; who received me with her usual
politeness, and related to me the whole of her conversation with her
Grace the Duchess of Devonshire, who had expressed her concern at my
situation, and said I should soon be convinced of it. This
conversation brought to my mind a meeting of many lords in my
apartment, about six months before, the purport of which was, to open
a subscription, to secure me an easy and decent maintenance for the
remainder of my days. I flattered myself, the Duke and Duchess of
Devonshire would have been at the head of the subscription: they had
often questioned me respecting my situation, and the concern they
seemed to feel for it, was so striking, that, for a while, I really
flattered myself the intended subscription would take place. But it
failed, and I lost all hopes of an immediate amelioration of my
circumstances.

However gloomy may be the general aspect of winter, the sun sometimes
smiles in spite of the season -- resistless in the power of his
brightness, the least ray of which will melt the frozen snow. Equally
cheering to me, in this winter of my fate, was the appearance of the
Misses Metcalfe, whose names I am forbid to mention. Whilst kindly
meditating deeds of beneficence, they asked me many questions, with
that affability and feeling concern, which, far from denoting an
eager curiosity, only waited for an answer, that might give them an
opportunity of endeavouring to assist me. They did not approve of my
giving a concert, much less of my making an exhibition of myself.
Their noble souls; replete with elevated sentiments, looked upon this
exhibition with disdain, though they did not openly disclose their
mind on the occasion; and I was therefore compelled to try some other
plan, as the visits I received would by no means support my expenses.

I determined to renew my concerts, the profits of which afforded me a
temporary relief. With this determination I set out for Ireland; but,
foreseeing this trip would be longer than I expected, I stopped at
Bristol, intending to leave it in a week. I, however, remained there
two months, and had no reason to complain; for, though I did not
intend to stay so long, I enjoyed every satisfaction I could wish,
which I attribute, in part, to the marks of friendship shewn me by
Mr. Crespigny, and the generous disposition of the inhabitants of
this truly opulent city, who honoured me with many distinguished
testimonies of their benevolence, and proved themselves to be as
elevated in sentiment, as their city is in splendour.

From Bristol I went to Chester, where the civilities and kindness I
met with detained me some weeks. It was during my stay there I got
acquainted with one of those men, who, having received from nature
good abilities and a good appearance, think themselves exempt from
the trouble of being provided with principles of honour and
integrity; and who, compelled through their misconduct to leave their
own country, establish themselves in foreign lands, abusing the
credulity and good faith of those whom they find means to inspire
with confidence. This man assumed the name of the Marquis de
Montpellier, and for a while was very cautious not to come to my
apartments but among great people, with whom he strove to act an
officious part, in order to give me a good opinion of his connexions.
Nor did he fail in his design: for he artfully persuaded me, that he
was in habits of intimacy with the first nobility of Ireland; that,
if he would attempt it, nothing could be so easy as for him to
procure me there a subscription of two thousand guineas; and that,
for this purpose, he had only to set out before me, to secure a
house, and announce my coming, in order to prepare their minds for my
reception; so that I could not help giving credit to all the chimeras
he amused me with. Thus, the pretended Marquis set out, invested with
full power, and I followed him in a fortnight after.

I recollect, I had a fortunate passage, and as Lady Clermont had
condescended to give me a letter to the master of the packet, I had
much reason to be pleased with the attention and care of the Captain,
and all his crew; who, notwithstanding many pressing entreaties,
would not accept the smallest remuneration for their trouble. On my
arrival in Dublin, I hoped to find a house ready for me; but was
extremely surprised at meeting my pretended friend, at an inn near
the port, where he had announced me as a great lord. And, thanks to
his provident care, I fared very daintily, not yet perceiving that I
was his dupe. Nay, it was not till a fortnight after, that, being
informed by a respectable person, both of the pretended Marquis's
character, and the harm that such an acquaintance would do me, I had
wisdom enough to get rid of dais parasite, by giving him money to
cross the sea again.

When I set out from London, many of my acquaintances had been so
attentive as to supply me with letters of recommendation, as well to
his Grace the Lord Lieutenant, as to the chief lords and most of the
distinguished ladies in Ireland. My Lord Viceroy sent me an
invitation to his court on an assembly day; and, if I may judge from
the reception I met with, I afforded them much pleasure. Some time
after, he was succeeded by his Grace the Duke of Rutland, under whose
patronage and that of the Duchess, I had the honour to give the Irish
nobility a concert at the rotunda. The assembly was extremely
brilliant, and her Grace the Vice-Queen was the principal ornament of
it. The Duke, unfortunately, the very same night found himself
indisposed, on which account I was deprived of the honour of his
presence. His Grace's illness gave great uneasiness to the
inhabitants of Dublin; but, by the skill of his eminent physician,
who ordered him to take exercise in the open air, he speedily
recovered. His Grace hunted the next day in his park. His complaint
was the headache, which in general seized him in the afternoon. It
had been long observed that he had a bad digestion, and of that
complaint he died, greatly regretted by those who knew him.

After remaining two years in Ireland, which was longer than I
intended, in compliance with several pressing entreaties, I returned
to England; and, travelling rapidly through Liverpool, Manchester,
and Halifax, arrived at Leeds, where I intended to give a concert, to
defray my expenses on the road; but found it, upon trial, to be
impracticable, as a society of amateurs were there, who did not wish
to oblige performers that were strangers, and who would not allow any
of those who played with them, to be engaged on any account.
Fortunately, I had the patronage of Colonel Wood, who, by his great
exertion and kindness, procured from the neighbouring towns
performers, who attracted mle a most elegant, profitable, and
numerous assembly; for which the gallant Colonel deserves to be
mentioned in this page, and his name engraven on my heart.

This concert gained me some reputation; and, in consequence, the
inhabitants of the town ran eagerly to see me. Amongst my visitors, I
received into my apartments a lady, who might, in size, dispute the
palm with the celebrated Daniel Lambert. All present fixed their eyes
upon her, with surprise; but the laws of good breeding soon repressed
our astonishment. Colonel Wood, with his usual politeness, offered
her his seat upon the sofa; and we began a lively conversation, in
which the lady did not join, listening, however, with an air of
contempt. This behaviour displeased the whole company; upon which,
Colonel Wood winked at me, as much as to say, take no notice of her;
and I took this hint. But she seized the moment of silence, and asked
me what religion I professed? "Madam," I replied, "I am a Roman
Catholic." I saw her instantly turn her head, with a singular
grimace, saying, there was no hope for me to go to heaven. "Excuse
me, Madam," said I, "don't be so hasty in judging of such serious
matters; we find in holy writ, that narrow is the gate to heaven."
She said, the knew that. Then I replied, "I hope I have more chance
than you;" looking, at the same moment, at her broad bulky shape,
similar to that of Bacchus. The Colonel and the rest of the company
could not refrain from laughing; and the lady was obliged to bid me
adieu, and take her departure, with the idea I should never meet her
in heaven. Perhaps she forgot the difference of our size, and did not
consider how much she must be reduced, to be adapted to the measure
of the gate. However, some one present, pleased with our brisk
conversation, next day put it in the newspapers. But I was not
informed of the public opinion, what side they thought right or
wrong, being obliged immediately to set out.

I passed rapidly through Birmingham, in order to be, at the time
appointed, at Oxford, where I made it considerable stay; not losing
any time for my own affairs, but merely to examine this truly
wonderful University, which must be the admiration of all strangers,
such is the magnificent and noble architecture of its colleges and
halls. But there is no occasion for my being particular, as it has
already been amply described by the best writers. Nothing is left for
me, but to observe, that Britain must be a blessed nation, and the
admiration of the world; for she opens the door of all kinds of
knowledge to the children of her land, and is like a loving mother
preventing her breast, to feed her hungry infants.



CHAP. VIII.
Visit to Blenheim; polite reception from the Duke and . Duchess of
Marlborough -- Count Oginski patronizes a concert -- Interview with
his Royal Highness the Prince of Wales -- Introduction to the Prince
de Mecklenburgh -- Arrival at Norwich, and concert there --
Invitation to Braken, and kindness of Mrs. Brown -- Treacherous
conduct of a Frenchman -- Description of Cambridge -- Arrival at Bury
St. Edmunds; kindness of the family of Metcalfe -- Journey through
York to Edinburgh -- Eulogium on Scotland -- Departure through
England for France -- Arrival at Boulogne and Paris; departure thence
to Cherburg and Guernsey. Description of the island and its
inhabitants.

During the time I remained at Oxford, one day a gentleman came and
desired me to go and spend the evening, at about eight or nine miles
distance. He would not tell the place, but assured me, that a
carriage should take me thither, and I should not repent my visit. I
complied with his request; and how great was my surprise, when I
found myself conveyed to the splendid palace of Blenheim, where their
Graces the Duke and Duchess of Marlborough welcomed me in the most
affable manner! The Duchess herself vouchsafed to shew me the
apartments, and point out all the curiosities they contain.

On my return home from Blenheim, I was informed, that his Grace the
Duke of Marlborough wished to have one of my shoes, to place in his
cabinet among other rarities. I had too much reason to be flattered
with this nobleman's affability, not to send him a pair of them
immediately, to which I joined the only pair of boots I ever had made
for me, which I brought from Poland; and his Grace was very well
pleased, I heard, with this mark of attention.

At length I returned to London, after about three years' absence. I
met there the Grand General of Lithuania, Count Oginski, who had
shewn me so much kindness during my stay at Paris. He seemed to take
much pleasure in seeing me again, and promised to assist me on all
occasions with his name and credit. Therefore, this was a most
favourable opportunity for me to perform another concert, under the
patronage of this amiable Count, so approved for talents of every
kind, and who had deigned to teach me the first principles of music.

The day appointed was the 30th of June, to the best of my
recollection, and his Royal Highness the Prince of Wales promised, to
be present. He had at dinner with him, on that day, his Highness the
Prince de Mecklenburgh; and, wishing to introduce me to this Prince,
he sent his carriage for me. I found their Highnesses at table, with
whom I sat down a full hour, and from thence set out for the concert.
Though it was tolerably well attended, and the company very select,
yet I should have suffered a loss, if the generous Count Oginski had
not paid Mr. Galini all the charges of it.

An erroneous report had been propagated of the Count, that he was
king for three days; and there cannot be a doubt that, from his
abilities and virtue, he was entitled to the crown. However, the fact
is this,-- he was proposed as a candidate; but, according to my
recollection, the Court of Petersburgh, having a friendship of many
years' standing with Stanislaus Poniatowski, by whom Catherine
Empress of Russia, obtained her influence in the political affairs of
Poland, she appointed her friend Poniatowski to be King of Poland.
Therefore, Count Oginski was disappointed, by the opposition of this
strong party of 89,000 of the Russian army. I shall not enter into, a
particular account of this proceeding, since I keep a journal merely
of my own actions.

After the departure of Count Oginski, I set out for Norwich. On my
arrival there, I was informed of the grand Oratorios, about which the
whole town was in a state of rapture. Mrs. Siddons was also engaged
to perform every night at the theatre.

The week after the Oratorios were over, Mr. Cramer, having heard of
me, came to see me, and persuaded me to give a concert offering me
every assistance in his power, and telling me, if I could get Mrs.
Siddons to appear at the Assembly Rooms, I should have the whole
town. So my good friend Cramer consulted with me what was best to be
done. We applied to a lady of rank, and she wrote Mrs. Siddons a
letter, replete with the most tender expressions: in the conclusion,
she said, "I make no doubt, from your extreme fine feelings, of your
complying with my request, and I expect much pleasure in seeing you
at the concert." Mrs. S. returned an answer, that a previous
engagement prevented her having the pleasure of attending it.

I regretted extremely that I was thus deprived of the powerful aid,
which I should have received from the patronage of a lady, so
universally admired for her unrivalled talents, and numbering so many
persons of distinguished rank among her friends. Immediately after
Mrs. Siddons's departure, it happened that Mr. Mathews, one of the
most eminent comic actors of the age, arrived in Norwich and was
announced to perform on the same night for which my concert was
advertised. This gentleman, however, with his accustomed generosity
and politeness; put off his performance to a future time, rather than
I should suffer by the competition. I cannot omit this opportunity of
paying my humble tribute of friendship to that Worthy individual, in
whose society I have since passed many pleasant hours.

A few days after my concert, Mrs. B-- a lady of great consequence,
sent me an invitation to go to Braken, about six miles from the towns
This amiable lady gave me a gracious reception. By her greatness of
soul the public must know her; as she cannot disguise her bounty, it
being written with indelible characters in the hearts of many unhappy
creatures, whom she relieved from their calamities, both in town and
country, in a manner as judicious as charitable. Perceiving that I
had not been accustomed to dependence, even on the public, she
considered my situation as the more painful and humiliating to my
feelings. Her great goodness induced her to set forward a
subscription; and, from this, I perceived a good prospect of a decent
maintenance.

But here, may I be permitted to fix my reader's attention for a
moment, and beg him to take notice of the cruel event which took
place? Having soon afterwards visited Paris, a Frenchman, of the name
of Dertreval (who possessed an amazing stock of wickedness in his
mind), artfully laid a plan, which deprived me of the confidence of
my protectress.

This fellow, renouncing all pretensions to honour as well as to
virtue, and disgracing the name of his nation, like an evil spirit
concealed under a human shape, watched for an opportunity to deceive,
which he found the moment I arrived in the French metropolis. I fell 
dangerously ill; and when the physician gave little hopes of my
recovery, this villain forged a letter in my name, and demanded the
whole of the money from this benevolent, lady. My name was necessary
at the bottom of the letter, as I had desired him to write for the
sum of twenty pounds. He read to me a letter, which I thought a very
proper one; but he had another artfully concealed, which he slipped
into my hand, and I signed this treacherous letter, without
perceiving the deception. Thus I became a victim to the wiles of a
tempter, of whom I was totally ignorant; but if I have suffered in
the opinion of the amiable Mrs. B-- , this will not acquit me of the
gratitude I owe to her: the remembrance of her kindness must remain
with me, and be carried in my heart.

I had long intended to travel through Scotland, for which country the
same Mrs. B--, to whom I was under such obligations, gave me several
letters of recommendation, and I set out for Scotland. But this being
rather a long trip, I took, in my way, the University of Cambridge,
where I stopped; for which place my benefactress, Miss Metcalfe, sent
me a letter of introduction. This powerful letter opened me the door
of the whole University; and if it is allowed to me to give a little
sketch, I will try to describe some particulars which I recollect of
it. There are twelve colleges, and four halls. The Senate-House is a
most beautiful edifice. Trinity College, with its library is also a
grand and noble structure. In the library of Corpus Christi College
is a wonderful collection of manuscripts of the ancient writers,
which was preserved at the destruction of the monasteries, as the
master of the college informed me. This surprising University is not
so wonderful for its architectural splendour, as for its antiquity
and depth of science.

The town of Cambridge cannot be compared to Oxford, where the
colleges give such advantage, and so beautify the place. As far as I
recollect, Cambridge is not equal to it in that respect. But the
affability of the gownsmen, and the politeness of the inhabitants,
attract the attention of the stranger; and it is with regret he parts
from them. What made me leave Cambridge sooner than I had intended,
was this:-- I found that Bury St. Edmund's was not far off, where the
worthy family of Metcalfe had a residence; and I considered this the
best opportunity I could have to perform my duty, and pay my respects
to them. Consequently, the day after my concert, which was very
brilliant, I left Cambridge; and arrived in the evening at Bury St.
Edmund's, and found that the whole of this amiable family was at
their country seat, to the best of my recollection, about a mile from
the town. They received me with an affability, which I found even
much more gratifying, than the highest degree of their bounty. They
condescended to procure me a comfortable lodging in the town; and, to
prove the liberal sentiments of their mind, paid all expenses during
my stay. I esteem it not the smallest favour, that Miss Margaret
Metcalfe asked me many questions concerning the situation of my
present affairs, dictated not by curiosity, but purely by the
goodness of her mind, which took an entire interest in my welfare. I
concealed nothing, but took the liberty to inform her of all
particulars, and of the amiable Mrs. B-- having opened a subscription
at Norwich.

At hearing this last part of my affairs reported, my benefactress was
much gratified; and, soon after, honoured me with an additional proof
of her liberality, by raising a sum of money, and sending it to Mrs.
B--, at Norwich. I found my soul deeply impressed with admiration of
her kindness, conferred in so noble a way; and my heart was ready to
cry out with joy, when I reflected how carefully my welfare was
watched over by my protectress. For, as the sun peeps through the
gloomy sky, to ripen the little mustard seed; so did the brightness
of her eye, beaming with generosity, shine on my humble merits, and
disperse the dark cloud of my adversity. During my stay at Bury St.
Edmund's, this excellent family honoured me so far, as to interest
themselves in patronising my concert; and gave me an immediate proof
of their eagerness to serve me, by presiding at my benefit. The
company was brilliant and numerous: I cannot compare it to any thing
but a London audience. But this was not surprising, as all the town
and its environs waited for an opportunity to oblige them; so far had
they gained the affection of their friends, by a goodness which is
deserving every blessing.

After this profitable concert, which enabled me to pay all expenses,
more than what were incurred on my journey to Scotland, I in a few
days took leave of my benefactors, and set out for Edinburgh; but, as
Bury St. Edmund's was rather out of my road, I was obliged to cross
Cambridgeshire and Lincolnshire, and to come to York, where I found
the direct road to Edinburgh.

On my arrival in the Scottish metropolis, I paid my respects to Lord
Dumfries; and, having delivered a letter of recommendation, I was
made truly happy by the most gracious and cordial reception. This
illustrious house of Dumfries, comprehending the Countess of Loudon,
at present Lady Moira, deigned immediately to introduce me among the
circle of their first friends; where I had the honour to become
acquainted with the amiable Colonel Hope and his worthy brother, who
seemed to take the most lively interest and the greatest pleasure, in
all that related to me. The Colonel conferred on me the honour of his
patronage; and, finding that a concert would be more proper than any
thing that could be done, he took the management of it entirely into
his own hands, and conducted the business for my welfare. To give his
own endeavours additional strength, he moved the hearts of his
friends, among whom were their Graces the Duke and Duchess of
Buccleugh, the Countess of Loudon, and, through her influence, Lord
Moira, Commander in Chief in Scotland; therefore, it was impossible
for the concert to fail under such noble auspices. In fact, the
Colonel's powerful influence and exertions procured me a numerous and
brilliant assembly. For this generous conduct of Colonel Hope, I am
bound to entertain the most lively sentiments of gratitude. This
concert terminated with a ball; which procured me two advantages -- a
considerable sum of money, and the opportunity of forming an
acquaintance with the most respectable persons of that city. I passed
some weeks in Edinburgh most pleasantly, and was so fortunate as to
attract the particular attention of that generous and amiable people.

My sentiments by no means accord with those of the great Dr. Johnson,
from whom, I am afraid, the Scottish nation did not meet with an
equal return, for the kindness he received from their generous
hearts; for I have been told, he wrote a Journey, in which, thinking
it would be beneath him to acknowledge some obligations due to them, 
he employed his pen in a description of their manner of living,
education, and Universities, so low and so offensive, as to disoblige
the whole nation. But, for my part, I at first gave little credit to
this report, concerning a man of such knowledge, as I expected more
liberal sentiments from the high abilities, and strength of sense and
reason, which he was known to possess. Therefore, I could not help
taking his part, and I defended his cause with some degree of
enthusiasm; at which time, a gentleman, in whom I found a very
strenuous opponent, and who was a bitter enemy of Dr. Johnson,
obliged me to give up my defence; and proved to me, that the Doctor,
with all his scholastic learning, was a good deal similar to highly
polished steel at Sheffield: for when this beautiful work is divested
of its polish, we find only a rough and unsightly appearance. At
hearing this, I was put to silence, and was soon brought to
acknowledge my error; finding Scotland equal to any nation, both in
the richness of its soil, and beauty of its situation: their manner
of living is splendid and luxurious; and the candour, probity,
frankness, and affability, of this truly amiable and benevolent
nation, would render a desert delightful.

My mind differs in sentiment from this great writer, Dr. Johnson; and
how can I disguise the truth! for I feel myself full of gratitude,
when I reflect on the gracious reception I met with. If I am asked,
(as indeed I expect to be,) how I could boldly venture to compare the
richness of the soil of Scotland to that of other countries, I could
easily reply -- that they who are best acquainted with Scotland, very
well know that that nation never begs assistance of her neighbours,
to support her wants, either in agriculture or in science, as she has
both in the greatest perfection. Their Universities, however
ungenerously described, have, in fact, Professors of the greatest
knowledge. At the University of Edinburgh, Dr. Hope is particularly
eminent for his depth in science. It must be understood, too, that
the Scotch nation is as rich in agriculture as in science, having
very experienced farmers.

The south and west parts of Scotland abound in minerals, and are
extremely fertile, and the ground is well cultivated; but I observed,
not only this part of the country, but in general all the kingdom, to
be well provided with corn. I include the islands of Shetland, the
Orknies, and the Hebrides; the soil of which abundantly furnishes the
inhabitants with corn, and also with vegetables, and other
productions of the garden. There are likewise marle, slate, and
quarries of marble and of freestone, together with tin, lead, and
silver mines. The lakes and rivulets abound with excellent fish.
Gentlemen of property may live there with elegance, having good
things in profusion; and the common people, very comfortably. The
buildings in these islands are much superior to what Dr. Johnson has
described them to be; and the manners of the inhabitants, civil and
hospitable; -- but that is their national character. I recollect,
with pleasure, my first introduction to Scottish society, at Colonel
Hope's; where I found elegant apartments, adorned with beautiful
women, polite in their manners, and lively in their conversation. The
natural bloom of their complexions, their majestic air, and graceful
behaviour, must strike every foreigner with admiration: in short, in
my journey through Scotland and its islands, I found every thing to
my satisfaction.

I was now bound for France; and I resolved to stay at some town, with
a view to defray the expenses of so long and tedious a journey. I
succeeded pretty well at York, Bath, and some other places upon my
road; where I received both pleasure and profit, as I had done
before, in several parts of this kingdom.

I landed at Boulogne early in the spring, and succeeded in. forming
an acquaintance with some amateurs in music; who, among many favours,
procured me a concert, and very politely performed themselves, to
save my expenses. I then set out for Lisle, in Flanders, where I
formed an acquaintance with the manager of the playhouse, who offered
me his assistance, lent me his stage, and provided performers for my
concert; but he wished to go half and half in the expenses and
profits. I made no objection, but immediately agreed to his proposal.
Meantime, I could not have thought this gentleman so learned and deep
in his profession as I found him to be: indeed, so admirable a
proficient was he in the science of arithmetic, particularly in
division, that I could not find any thing for my share of this
benefit, but a cypher. Therefore, after this experience from my
master, whom I found rather dark in his method of teaching the art of
reckoning money, I made my stay short. It was just after the
commencement of the revolution, and that extraordinary event
engrossed the attention of all: I thought, therefore, I might succeed
better in going to Paris.

 I arrived in the capital, in June the same year, and had once more
the pleasure to see many noblemen, who knew me when I was there
before, and who now renewed their civilities. The Marquis D'Amazaga,
interested himself in my behalf. I then attempted a concert, which,
by no means, answered my expectation, though seconded by the Duchess
of Orleans, no less eminent for her benevolence than for her rank;
and on mature reflection, I clearly perceived, that all Paris, the
ladies not excepted, were absorbed in contemplating their new form of
constitution, and that this grand object banished every other idea. I
had little to expect from the accustomed urbanity of the French
nobility; and my purse, being very low since the twist given it by
Dertreval, must have been totally exhausted, had I remained much
longer there.

I found that I was swimming against the stream, and therefore
resolved to go to Cherburg, which is the nearest French port to
Guernsey, where I wished to be; and having made a bargain dear enough
with the master of a smack, I went on board the 24th of March; but,
meeting with bad weather, I did not arrive till the 29th at night.
Though many in my place would enumerate the imminent dangers they had
experienced in this voyage of fifty-four miles, I shall content
myself with just saying, I was not sorry when I got on shore. No
other loss was sustained, than that of a fowl, which finding itself
too closely pent up in the hold, jumped over board, to be more at
liberty. I had no room to lie down in this vessel, though only three
passengers were on board: however, I was never sea-sick. Our vessel
was worked by the Captain, without a sailor. It was called the Little
St. John; but the inhabitants of Guernsey gave it a more proper name,
and called it a hencoop.

When I arrived on the island, I delivered my letters of
recommendation, addressed to some of the principal inhabitants. I
remained there two months, and gave a concert. The number of handsome
ladies who attended it, made a beautiful appearance in the room. This
charming island is twenty-one miles in circumference, and the country
pleasant and fruitful; for, in so small a compass, they make yearly
two hundred and fifty barrels of cyder. The air is good, the water
excellent, and trade flourishing. There was a citadel, besides other
forts, with batteries of cannon, surrounding this island, though well
fortified by nature.

The Governor kindly gave me an invitation on St. George's day, to
meet all the officers of the garrison, who were invited to celebrate
the King's birthday. He shewed me every attention, and the rest of
the gentlemen were by no means deficient. The favourable reception I
met with from the inhabitants of Guernsey, and the pains they took to
serve me, particularly those to whom I was recommended, claim my
sincere and most respectful acknowledgments; and I esteem myself much
indebted to them.



CHAP. IX.
Return to England -- Visit to Hereford and Warwick -- Digression --
Singular demand at Coventry -- Birmingham -- Imposition of an
innkeeper -- Visit to Mr. Boulton's manufactory at Soho -- Eulogy on
Freemasonry -- Arrival at Derby; inundation there -- Voyage from
Liverpool to Dublin -- Noble conduct of the captain of the packet --
Serious reflections -- Melancholy history of a black cat -- Visit to
Cork; successful concert there -- The butcher's lady and the marrow
bone -- Excursion to Kinsale; productive and brilliant  concert --
Voyage to Cork, and turbulence of the sea -- Impression made upon me
by a lady's nose.

I SAILED from Guernsey in a larger vessel than that which conveyed me
to the island; and, on my return to England, visited some towns where
I had not been before, especially Hereford, where I gave a concert.
It was attended by the most distinguished families of the town and
neighbourhood, by whom I was loaded with kindness; and, in a more
peculiar manner, by the worthy family of Mr. Cam. I must say,
Herefordshire, in my opinion, is one of the most fertile counties in
England, and celebrated for its cyder. From thence I set out to
Coventry, passing through Warwick. The last-mentioned town I found a
curious place: I therefore stopped one day to examine it. I beheld a,
town, situated upon a rock, having the appearance of great antiquity.
It may be approached by four ways cut through the rock. All those
roads meet four streets, and I found myself conducted to the centre
of the town; the walls and houses of which have cellars in the rock,
as dry as possible, and surprisingly neat.

The town of Warwick makes me recollect, that, in my return from
Little Tartary, I took the road nearest adjoining my native country
of Kiow, and passed round a mountain in the deserts of Podolia, under
which I found some curious grottos. A little further on, a gentleman
stopped me, and politely requested me to take my dinner with him. I
accepted his obliging invitation with pleasure, and he kindly
conducted me to his house, through enchanting groves, and cut rocks,
which, throughout, were extraordinarily brilliant, displaying a
number of different colours, of the nature of crystallized mines. I
inquired, if metals were found there. He answered me, that those
rocks produced precious stones, such as crystal, topaz, jasper, opal,
onyx, sapphire, ruby, and spar.

Next, I found a variety of fruit trees planted like a forest, which
led to a beautiful cottage, with spacious gardens adjoining to it. At
the top of these was a monstrous rock, with a spring of good water,
which formed a gentle rivulet, and fell into the river Dniester, with
a noise that caused sensations which would be pleasing to such as
like solitude; or to writers of novels, fond of purling streams. On
the other side of the rock was a grand cave, dignified with a most
magnificent temple, having in altar richly adorned with wonderful and
beautiful stones; and round the sides and top of the temple were
spar, crystal, and stones of various kinds; so that, at the time of
divine service, when it was illuminated, the reflection of the light
upon those glittering stones, gave an air of magnificent splendour,
which, I confess, filled my heart with amazement; finding, in such a
place, so noble a house of God. My host said to me, "If those who are
warped in their reason from the truth of facts, could attend solemn
service in this temple, they would believe what they, have rejected,
and ripen in faith; and not let their ideas wander in clouds, like
the Mahometans and some other nations, unfit to be called Christians,
who pick up their system of morals, partly from the Pagan
philosophers, and partly from our Holy Book, the best of which they
reject, and adopt that which is most consistent with their own loose
principles. The monarchs and nobles of those unfortunate people, take
example from the pride and the mean sentiments of Holofernes, who
confirmed the errors of his master, saying, that there was no other
God but Nabuchodonosor."

Pursuing the religious subject into which he had entered, I replied
in the following manner: "It has, in general, been observed, that
there is much presumption in those whom the Supreme Being has allowed
to be above their fellow creatures. We frequently see them blinded by
ambition, which is next to folly: but we ought to admire, and should
take example from, such great men as David, and his son Solomon; both
of whom walked humbly in the sight of God, and were blessed with
victory, riches, and wisdom. There are, however, too many like
Nabuchodonosor, who adopt their own imaginary gods and fantastic
gospel; who have reason to blush at hearing the name of David,
because the Lord was with him, and he glorified his Maker." With
these words, I bid him farewell.

To return from my digression: No sooner had I arrived in the city of
Coventry, than a messenger from the Mayor appeared, with a demand for
me to pay five pounds, for granting permission to give a concert. By
this time I found my pocket rather begin to be low, and sent the
following answer by the Mayor's servant: "To-morrow, at one o'clock,
you may come, and I will comply with your request." I immediately
ordered a post chaise, to be ready at five o'clock next morning, and
set out for Birmingham, eighteen miles off, where the ,worshipful
Mayor might find me at the hour appointed.

On my arrival at Birmingham, not having a lodging provided, I was
obliged to drive to the inn. Mr. Sharp, the innkeeper, being a man in
the constant practice of receiving strangers, seemed to me to use no
ceremony with his newly-arrived friends, but kindly made his
appearance in my room, with a bill of his excellent ragouts for
dinner; but, to my great disappointment, it was the time of Lent, and
I made choice only of a bread pudding. This raised his curiosity, and
he asked me, if I were under the Holy Father. "Yes," said I to him.
He replied, "I am of the sect of John Wesley;" and at the same time
promised, that next day I should have a different kind of pudding. I
had now provided myself with lodgings, before I left his house, where
I had been five days. I received my bill, in which I found five
puddings charged five pounds. I must say, his bill stupefied me; but,
at last, I recovered from my astonishment, and asked him, if the new
gospel of this Apostle Wesley furnished him with this lucrative
inspiration; because, in our Sacred Books, we are prohibited from
making such an attack on the pockets of our fellow-creatures. But he
would not hear what I said, nor accept of any other terms; so I was
obliged to put my money upon the table, and very gladly took my leave
of this holy gentleman.

At my new lodgings, a few days after, I fortunately met with a
brother Mason, Mr. Bisset, a Scotch gentleman, of genuine politeness,
and an open heart. He was secretary and treasurer to the Debating
Society, and, through the interest of this worthy man, I was made a
member of the same, and honoured with a silver medal, with which Mr.
Baddoes, the president, was at that time the only gentleman
decorated. Some time after this I was invited to Mr. Boulton's, of
Soho, not far from the town, where I spent an agreeable day in his
company; during which time he was pleased to inform me, that
Birmingham was originally a village, belonging to a gentleman of the
same name, whose monument I saw next day, in the old church. He gave
me a still further account of this extraordinary village, the
extension and improvement of which were solely owing to the industry
of a man, who introduced the manufacture of gilt buttons. Such a
speculation certainly deserves our admiration; but I found Mr.
Boulton's machines for coining money, a still more wonderful
invention. each of which is capable of striking off one hundred
pieces per minute.

Birmingham has the appearance of the first town in Europe, for the
invention of every sort of mechanics. I observed, that the
inhabitants have no other amusement, but that of employing their
whole ingenuity in contriving new machinery. The population is very
numerous and opulent. I tried to give a concert, thinking I might
succeed; but it turned out like a frosty night upon the blossom of a
tree. So finding this was a bad climate to ripen my fruit, I prepared
to depart. But the next day, I had an invitation to go to Henley, to
attend the establishment and consecration of a new Free-Masons'
Lodge. The particulars of this I cannot give. Meantime, I may be
allowed to say, that there is nothing in the world can be compared to
the sublime law of Masonry. However its members may differ in their
religious professions, there is no dispute, no jealousy among them:
all are tolerated, and every thing governed with the greatest harmony
and love, no less beneficial to inward virtue, than to external
order. Upon such a basis of reason stands the noble law of Free-
Masonry. Further information on this subject it would be improper to
give; and those who pretend to publish our concerns, must not be
relied on, for certainly those authors never professed Masonry.

Writers have thought fit to exercise their wit upon this subject, as
they have been in the constant practice of doing upon all others, of
which we have many proofs. By this means, we find most profound
philosophers falling into errors; having merely written a heap of
conjectures, and obstinately endeavoured to establish their own
obscure ideas. As an example, we may take Epicurus's system of the
origin of man, and of all other animals, sprung, as he asserts, from
the vigorous seeds of the earth. It is a pity, that such a man had so
gloomy a prospect of the future state of the soul; but, to conclude
the matter in a word, Epicurus should have been sent to the Divine
Author of the world, and the Writer on Masonry, to the Master of the
Lodge. Then would they have been able to give a perfect account of
the facts: otherwise, we can find nothing in their works that can be
relied on; for, all truth being concealed from them, both authors
must remain full of perplexity and confusion.

I now took my road to Derby, and, on my arrival, procured lodgings on
the south side of the town, situated near the little rivulet called
Martin Brook. So far as I can recollect, the situation was pleasant,
and the house commodious, having a shop furnished with many good
things, luxurious enough to regale the greatest duke; therefore, I
determined to treat myself according to my circumstances. Next day,
just at the beginning of day-break, my illusion of a feast was turned
to a fast. I heard the cry of the watchmen, and found the whole town
in alarm and confusion, caused by the unexpected appearance of the
deceitful Martin Brook, from whose angry mouth gushed forth torrents
of water, which filled whole houses. You may guess the surprise I was
thrown into by this deluge, when I found our shop transformed into a
lake, in the middle of which was the master in a boat, fishing out 
isinglass, tea, and coffee. Upon my asking for sugar, they answered
me, there were no remains of it to be found. So completely did Martin
Brook defeat us, that every thing was destroyed in the shop; and we
remained in sorrow. I was obliged to be a partner in the business,
and lost jubilee. But the sensations of hunger prevailing over those
of fear, I requested some milk and bread, which was contrived to be
tied upon a long stick, and conveyed in a boat to the window, by the
street. By this means, I obtained a humble breakfast, for which I was
very thankful to the donor. After such a victory over the town of
Derby, obtained by Martin Brook, we must admire his spirit; but, at
the same time, lament his ambition in passing over his limits. I was
a witness, from my own window, of the great member of precious things
which he swept off in his retreat, and of the piteous lamentations of
the inhabitants; and, as I found that it would not repay my time to
remain in this distressed place, I determined not to wait for a
second visit of Martin Brook.

I now undertook a journey to Ireland, flying like a bird that looks
where he can build. his nest; and, passing through Cheshire to
Lancashire, I reached Liverpool, where I made a bargain with the
Captain of a ship, and next day sailed for Dublin. But, to avoid a
traveller's story, which often supplies the want of truth, I shall
merely relate this simple fact. The Captain, having rather an
unpleasant enemy in a contrary wind, and March assisting with his
waves, prevented our speedy landing. I saw, with a transport of joy,
the village called Black Rock, at a little distance from Dublin. But
here is a most dreadful bar, over which we were obliged to pass: we
beheld a vessel, that went before us, dashed on that rock, and a
woman on the deck, with an infant in her arms, crying to the Lord for
mercy. Her voice was beard: our Captain resisted the greatest fury of
the sea, approached the vessel, and saved her and the rest of the
people; but the vessel sunk to the bottom, and we, in our ship,
remained merely in a state of hope, which I called a poor chance.

After this scene of melancholy was over, and we were approaching the
harbour, the Captain, good soul, asked us if we were all well, and
recovered from our fear. "Fear!" said I, "how could you think we
could be affected with fear, when our minds were occupied with your
good action?" He appeared to understand my bad English; for what I
said seemed to make some impression upon him, as he expressed, with
the greatest zeal, his wish to serve me upon any occasion whatever,
and shewed himself worthy the name of a true Englishman, by the proof
he gave me of the sincerity of his professions. At our landing, he
conducted me to the Royal Marine Hotel, and strictly charged the
landlord to pay every attention to my person. The day following, he
engaged handsome lodgings near the College Green, and settled
everything, for fear the people should impose on me; and took me
there in such a cheerful manner, as announced the liberal sentiments
of his mind. This proceeding reminded me of his humane action above-
mentioned; which, no doubt, was heroic in its way, and convinced me,
that he deserved to be considered on an equality with those great
warriors, who, as soon as they have humbled their enemies, become
fathers to their people. In short, Captain Fairwood, after having
settled my little affairs, bade me farewell, and so disappeared.

Now, that I was left to my solitary reflections on the pilgrimage in
which I was engaged, so severely did I feel the disappointments I had
experienced, that I could not help thinking, it was well that
Providence had blessed me with such a firm determination to act like
an upright man; as the world, by the small estimation in which
honesty is often held, afforded so strong an inducement to
travellers, like myself, to better their circumstances, by acting
like a knave. In the midst of these conflicting thoughts and mournful
reflections, a black cat made his appearance, by entering my room.
This interruption to my reverie, gave me a new turn of thinking. I
could not help admiring the confidence of this creature, in putting
his trust in me. I next thought, it must be the principle of his
practice to pursue good living, having no other ambition in his
nature. On this account, I had no objection to appoint him Curé of my
parish, and by so doing, he became my constant visitor. About this
time, a lady of rank honoured me with a visit, who immediately
perceived the black cat sitting on the sofa. She strongly expressed
her admiration of his natural beauty; and, touching him with a hand
as white as snow, made him proudly stretch himself with joy. In this
position, he appeared two feet long, and proportionably fat, as he
enjoyed good living: in fact, she was delighted with him beyond
measure, and promised to procure me a number of customers to see him.
She kept her word, and in a few days I found my room rather too
small, to contain so numerous a company.

Amongst this crowd of amateurs, I met with a gentleman, who was
closely inquisitive about the place of his birth; and, although I
possessed no information on this point, I yet conferred on him the
honour of being a native of Prussia, born at Berlin, and son of the
favourite cat of Frederick the Great. I found this rod and artificial
fly catch fish from the deepest rivers: his reputation soon spread,
he derived an additional lustre from his noble origin, and rapidly
became a favourite of the whole town.

This favourable circumstance suggested to me a new project, and I
wished to seize the moment of this enthusiasm and rapture of the
public, and give him some lessons in tricks; for, said I, when I
consider the natural sharpness of such animals, and their docility
when young, I may expect that, with such advantages, he will become
as celebrated as the learned pig, so much admired in England. But,
however well digested this plan might be, I could not arrive at such
a degree of perfection in it, as to procure any amelioration of my
situation; for my pupil was found to be of a voracious disposition,
which these animals have not the sagacity to perceive, must, one day
or other, bring their lives to a tragic conclusion. With a
treacherous and ambitious design of improving his manner of living,
he slyly insinuated himself into the room where some canary birds
were kept, and committed murder, with such a cruel mind and
premeditated barbarity, that it was almost impossible to find any
remains of them. The cat, being found guilty of this heinous crime,
without respect to the merciful principles of wholesome law, had
sentence passed on him, by his own master, to be hanged; and which,
without delay, was put in execution.

After this unexpected event, it was not of any use for me to remain
longer where I was. I, therefore, took my route through the whole of
Ireland, beginning with Cork, which is reckoned the second city in
that kingdom, for its splendour, opulence, and trade. Small vessels
only can approach the city, which stands seven miles up the river
Lee. According to my recollection, this is the chief port of
merchants in Ireland; and, in truth, there is more beef, tallow, and
butter, shipped from hence, than from all the other ports of the
kingdom put together.

On my arrival, I found lodgings, most advantageously situated for my
purpose, upon the parade, which is a public walk, where are to be
seen thousands of the most beautiful women; a number of whom inspire
respect and love, equal to that with which Diotime, who taught
Socrates the principles of nature, inspired that philosopher.
Whatever may be said, this is indisputably true. Their appearance in
society forms a sort of heaven on earth. By them I was first noticed;
and their example and kindness to me, were followed by the noble
spirit of the citizens, who shewed their liberal mind and concern for
my welfare. Among other instances of their bounty, the gentlemen, who
were amateurs in music, graciously offered their assistance at my
concert; and, to prove the extent of their good dispositions,
performed themselves on that night. This act of generosity, which I
did not expect, rendered my benefit brilliant and numerous. Amongst
the company was observed a lady, that excited the curiosity of the
public to know who she was, by the elegance of her dress, and the
sweetness of her conversation, together with the quickness of her
repartee; but, unsuccessful in their attempt at a discovery, they
were obliged to remain satisfied with obscure conjectures, and the
late hour of the night forced them to depart.

This lady, of whom I speak, bade me farewell, with a promise to send
me a marrow bone. I confess, I understood English imperfectly at that
time, and, therefore, I thought she said Mirabeau, not the celebrated
one who died during my residence at Paris, but his brother;
consequently I gave orders to my servant, should he call, not to
admit him. At dinner-time, I heard a loud rap at the hall door, and
was eagerly anxious to know who it was; expecting Mirabeau's visit. I
opened the door, leading to the staircase, from whence I heard
mentioned the name of marrow bone; and, still listening, I heard my
servant coming up with another person; in consequence of which, I
slipped off to my room, cursing his imprudence, for not obeying the
orders of his master. I crept to the closet, peeping through the key-
hole, and perceiving a soup dish upon the table, and the master of
the house laughing, probably at my misunderstanding, I came out of my
hiding-place. On my appearance, he could not keep his countenance,
but said, "There" is your Frenchman put into a soup dish." "What is
it?" I asked." "They are bones with marrow in them," he replied. "Who
is the lady that sent them, and what is her name?" "Mrs. McLennel,"
he answered, "and she is a butcher's wife." Finding my mistake
cleared up with a good dinner, "Sit down," said I, and take some
marrow-bone with me;" but he politely refused, telling me, he was
obliged to go immediately with a wig, and dress a lady for a masked
ball. When I considered his occupation, in a moment it came into my
mind, that this man will no doubt discharge the duties of his
profession as a hairdresser; he will inform his customers what has
passed in his house, and I must expect some fun at my expense. So it
happened; for the next day the Worshipful the Mayor sent me a polite
invitation to dinner. In his card, he gave a witty turn to the
incident of the marrow-bone. This circumstance amused the public; and
they carried on the joke in a very agreeable manner, probably with a
view to afford me a good table: so that marrow-bone became my
constant food; and, if I had continued amongst those liberal and
generous people, I should not have been surprised, if I had become as
fat as marrow. But I was reluctantly obliged to change my place, in
compliance with the circumstances of my situation; so I made an
excursion to Kinsale, a place beautifully situated at the mouth of
the river Bandon, strongly fortified, the town neat and handsomely
built, well supplied with provisions, but rather inferior to Cork in
point of marrow-bones. I had the honour to be introduced to Lord and
Lady Kinsale, whose influence procured me a numerous and select party
of their friends to my concert, which terminated with a most
brilliant ball.

After a long stay in this opulent city, the inhabitants of which I
found amiable and polite, I set out for Youghall, where I met with a
friendly and warm reception from the inhabitants. I had an
overflowing concert of the best society, and their attention to me I
must ever remember with gratitude. But an unexpected business called
me to Cork; and, luckily for me, it was not more than twenty miles
distant for me to return. At this time, Captain Somerville of the
Navy, intending to sail, kindly proposed to me to take a voyage with
him, saying, There is no difference whether you go by sea or by land,
as we shall reach Cork by dinner-time. So I accepted his polite
offer, and we sailed; but we had no sooner quitted the harbour, than
we perceived a grumbling sea, and lowering sky, announcing a dirge to
be sung with a chorus. For my part, I had often met with those rough
receptions, and did not think any thing of it; but I really felt for
the situation of the ladies, who are sent to us as a blessing, and I
was uneasy on their account.

After all the painful reflections that tormented my mind, considering
that the greatest Monarch, had he been on board, would have been
treated with the same contempt, I determined to retire to my bed,
where I thought to be alone; but the Captain had taken the greatest
part of it to himself, and left only a small share to me. However, I
settled myself as well as I could, being obliged to keep him behind
me. But, to my still greater discomfort, we were both of us soon
driven from our quarters; for the fury of the angry sea besieged us
with its highest waves, and gave such a blow to the vessel, that the
Captain, tumbling me out of bed on the floor, fell upon me; so that I
should certainly have been smothered, had not another no less violent
motion of the vessel delivered me from him. I now thought myself
secure from any accident, not perceiving I was so near the ladies;
but the vessel at that moment gave such a jump, that the Captain, who
had just risen, was thrown down a second time, and in his fall
knocked down some of the ladies that were next him; one of whom
tumbling upon me, gave me, with her big nose, a monstrous black eye.
I must confess, I did not expect such a donation, which I was obliged
to keep for some time, having no chance of being soon at Cork, to
procure a plaster for it.

We now found ourselves on the coast of Giant's Causeway, and
afterwards at the Mull of Cantyre in Scotland, where the wind
changed, and drove us to Port Patrick. Meantime, our joy was
restored, by the expectation of seeing Cork; and, in the interval of
a calm, I proposed to give, a feast to my fellow-travellers, by
preparing them coffee. As soon as it was ready, we sat down round the
table, in great spirits, singing "Rule Britannia." I asked, who that
lady "Britannia" was? The Captain replied, "She is the favourite of
the whole nation;" and the lady next me observed, "This great lady is
fond of a little flattery like ourselves." During the time of my
inquiry, and while our cups were filled with coffee, Neptune, envious
of our joy, began groaning; and the insolent waves gave answer to our
song, forcing the vessel to bow down in a most humiliating manner,
and throwing us to the ground, with the table and its contents upon
our heads. To close this wonderful voyage of twelve days, I must be
allowed to declare, that it was chiefly owing to the imprudence of
the Captain, who had it in his power to land safe at Donaghadee, a
short distance from Port Patrick; but, boldly venturing to go to
Cork, he exposed his life, with that of many of his friends.
Fortunately, however, the wind conducted us close to Waterford, and,
with the help of ropes tied to boats, we were brought safe into port.
I shall only observe, with regard to this distress, that any man,
however great his courage may be, would, when in the midst of danger,
ardently wish to be out of it; and probably would have no hesitation
in declaring his wishes, did not his lofty mind direct him to conceal
that fear, which the natural love of life so powerfully excites.

I was not sorry to set my feet upon the ground; and, leaving the
Captain in his swimming coach, I took a more solid one, and arrived
safe at Cork, where they all thought I was drowned. However, the
people no sooner perceived me coming to the town, than their hearts
overflowed with joy they surrounded the coach, not with mere
curiosity, as I saw by their countenance, but with the rapture of
real friendship, and with the greatest care brought me to the hotel.
Indeed, I put my trust in them, as in their principles I found they
truly deserved the name of good Irish.



CHAP. X.
Visit to the lake of Killarney -- Kind reception at Limerick --
Friendly conduct of the Quakers at Clonmell -- Methodist Preacher
deserted by his flock -- Journey to Tuam and Galway; lucrative
benefits at these places -- Successful expedient to settle a dispute
with a landlord, or "A new way to pay old debts" -- Journey to Sligo
-- Doctrine of Rousseau -- Sudden transition from the meanest to the
most comfortable and splendid accommodations; and kind liberality of
an amiable family.

AFTER settling my affairs at Cork, as I had an opportunity to visit
the lake of Killarney, I set out immediately. In fact, I was not
disappointed, for I saw more than I expected. This lake is entirely
surrounded with mountains, rocks, and precipices, which are covered
with wood. There is on the top enclosed by mountains, a small lake,
called the Devil's Punch Bowl; the superfluous water of which,
falling through a chasm into the middle of the lake, forms one of the
most beautiful cascades: the echo of which, amongst the hills, is
equally wonderful. This lake, or rather phenomenon of nature, really
deserves to be seen. I found there a great number of every
description of people; amongst many others, was a gentleman, who
politely approached me, and offered me his hand, for fear any
accident should befall me. When we were going away, a lady, with a
loud voice, said, "Take care, that that little gentleman does not
fall." I turned round, and seeing a beautiful and lovely nymph,
replied, "Madam, I fall already." This answer procured me the
friendship of both: they were much delighted, and I found afterwards
that the lady was his wife. He instantly called her, and they both
proposed to me to visit Limerick, with a promise to procure me a good
concert. Her eloquent speech, joined with a graceful and persuasive
manner, and his Irish promise, which was more to be depended upon
than that of many countries that would confirm it with an oath,
prevailed with me. I made no resistance; but soon accepted their warm
invitation, with a promise to be there on the day appointed.

Before I drove into the town, this amiable couple met me, and
conducted me to a lodging, and would not allow me that day to take my
dinner at home, but insisted on my going to dine with them. I
considered it would be improper to refuse their kind invitation, and
therefore complied with their request. I spent a most agreeable day,
being introduced to many of their friends. I was surprised to see so
large a party; but soon found the reason of it, which was, by an
ingenious contrivance, to procure me a numerous concert. By this
means, my benefit succeeded wonderfully; for there was such a crowded
room, that many were obliged to return home; and, to prove the great
influence of Mr. and Mrs. Brown, all those persons the next day sent
their ticket-money, with interest. So that, not only the handsome
figure of Mrs. Brown, but also the beauty of her mind, must be
admired. I take this opportunity, with sincere emotions of gratitude,
to return my humble thanks to the inhabitants of Limerick for the
flattering attention they conferred upon me.

But, notwithstanding the kind reception I experienced, I was obliged
to quit their amiable and interesting society, to go to Clonmell, the
chief town of the county of Tipperary. I was mistaken in ranking
Clonmell amongst the splendid towns in this kingdom; for it appeared
to me deficient in brilliant society. I found the people, by their
peculiar mode of living, dwelling in a retreat, and as it were shut
out from the busy world. Yet I was not deprived of their society:
they were Quakers, to whom I was introduced; and I spent among them
many agreeable moments. I was never acquainted with those people's
principles, but learned, from their own account, that George Fox, who
was born at Drayton in Leicestershire, was endowed with such an
original fund of good sense, and such a flow of eloquence, that, by
his abilities, he became the Patriarch of Quakerism, and dictator of
their minds and consciences. But I shall not pursue my remarks on
their spiritual concerns, since their morals evidently appear humane,
and salutary, to the general interests of mankind. I found virtues in
those quiet and sociable people, superior to those of any other
religious sect; and I have remarked, that you seldom find a Quaker
committing a crime, the inhabitant of a gaol, or a beggar in the
street, which is certainly a great deal to say in their favour.
Whatever, therefore, their gospel may preach, their actions must be
an example. I confess, I took leave of them with regret; so much did
I admire their retired manner of living. Therefore, they are never in
want of society, and never looking out for new amusements; which idle
minds seem continually hunting after, while, by so doing, they sow
the seed of peevishness for old age. With regard to myself, they
understood what sort of life I pursued, which was in the busy world,
amidst a tumult of people, where every one is not master of his own
ideas; and which may be a good school to learn patience in. In
consequence of this, they provided me letters of introduction to
Ballinasloe, which I found of great service to me. Those to whom I
delivered them, procured me a crowded and select concert, attended by
a number of officers, who were quartered there during my stay.

There was a great wool fair in this place -- according to public
report, the first in the kingdom; which, from the description given
of it to me, excited my curiosity to go to see it. But a gentleman to
whom I was recommended, and from whom I received many kind
attentions, opposed an obstacle to my intention, fearing such a
number of people would be rather troublesome; so he postponed it till
the next day, which was Sunday, saying, all people would be at
prayers, and I could see the place at my leisure. Next morning, the
gentleman, not forgetting his engagement, came and took breakfast
with me, and when we were ready to set out, I heard a particular
voice, of a man in the street. I looked out at the window, and saw a
crowd of people at my door, and, in the middle, a man with a book in
his hand. At first, it appeared to me a comical business; but, at
last, I was astonished to see, that in a civilized country they
should allow such cruelty, as to make game of a poor unfortunate
creature, whom I took for a lunatic; and, if Mr. Crump had not
acquainted me with the contrary, I should have remained in the same
idea. He told me the man was a Methodist; and he spoke it in a sort
of discontent, as a reproach to the Church of England being defective
in delivering the Gospel; whence arise many errors, which furnish a
variety of sects, called Dissenters. This was the information I
received from Mr. Crump, who was not sparing in his objections to the
National Church; and he seemed to me, as one who had got the
visionary complaint of Swedenborg, or his madness for the new
Jerusalem. Consequently, I did not wait to hear the conclusion of his
chapter, but departed from him, and took my station in the street, to
listen to the Methodist preacher. But, as I happened to make my
appearance when they were singing a hymn, I caused a discord in their
tune, by giving a sudden turn to their inspiration. As soon as they
observed me, they all crowded to the place where I was, and left
their pastor, with his book in his hands, to conclude the duty by
himself. It was certainly a cruel circumstance for a shepherd to be
thus forsaken by his flock; and the last effort he made to recover
them, was to cry out, "Brethren, my dear brethren, return to your
duty, and don't follow this little red devil" (it happened I was
dressed that day in a red coat); but this effort of his anxious mind
made no impression upon them, and, the more to show their inattention
to his doctrine, they began to make such a noise, that it put the
whole town in alarm; and the garrison flew to arms, thinking that the
enemy was approaching. At this time, the whole nation, upon the
political stage, was performing a tragic scene. In consequence of
which, the Colonel ordered all the streets to he well guarded by the
troops; of which, one of horse found the preacher singing a hymn, No.
306, adapted to Handels March. The Captain bearing this. and having
no idea of a hymn, stopped him with a reprimand, thinking he was
singing a ballad; and though he gave a very long explanation, the
Captain would not understand his vindication, saying, he never heard
of a hymn to the tune of a march. At last, he declared he was a
Methodist preacher, and begged of him to allow him to wait for his
congregation who had deserted him, and gone with the red devil. The
Captain, finding out immediately that he alluded to me, asked where I
was gone. "Gone!" said he, "I suppose to the devil!" "Then you must
go there after him," replied the Captain, "and you will be sure to
"find your people." During this altercation, they began to hear their
voices so loud, that they could distinguish where they were; and when
tranquillity was restored, the garrison returned to the barracks: but
the Captain, anxious to give me assistance, for fear any accident
should happen to me, came with his dragoons, and escorted me home;
when I saw the countenance of the preacher pictured with anger.

But, leaving no time for his inspiration to work, I set out for Tuam,
where I found good sociable people; by whom I was well received, and
who were ready to render me any service in their power. I took this
opportunity, and gave a concert, to defray the expenses of my journey
to Galway. I was not disappointed in the idea I had conceived of
their generous dispositions; for their benevolence inducing them to
give me every facility to pursue my travels, they afforded me a most
lucrative benefit. Often have I gratified my feelings with a pleasing
remembrance of their kindness, which has left an indelible impression
on my mind. After having experienced so much goodness, it .was with
sorrow I was obliged to leave them, and find my way to Galway.

This city, as far as I can remember, is seated in a bay, and most
commodiously situated for trade. There is a considerable herring
fishery, and I understand it is the only place that has any foreign
trade. It is also prettily built, and has the appearance of a
flourishing city. The citizens receive strangers with great
civility,-- not with insignificant politeness, similar to a sponge
full of water, which when squeezed becomes dry; but the essence of 
true hospitality dwells in their hearts, and never can be eradicated
from them. At my introduction to their society, how kindly did they
receive me! Their attention was paid in a manner that makes a
foreigner easy, and which attracts respect and love. They had the
penetration to see I was not a hunter after fortune, but that the
manner of life which accident had forced me to adopt, was repugnant
to my feelings; so they consulted among themselves what was best to
be done; but it was decreed above, that not any thing was to be
settled at this time, but that a concert was as much as I could
expect, which was numerously attended. This brilliant assembly put me
in a cheerful situation, and I remained here some weeks longer. In
the course of the pleasant time I spent in this amiable society, I
often met General Hutchinson, whom I found a most amiable man, and.
his conversation interesting and agreeable. However, I should not
dare to trust myself opposite to him, to converse through a cannon,
as I have heard. he is rather a bold gentleman upon such occasions,
and gives no time for a reply.

After many agreeable moments passed in this polite city, I proposed
to pay a visit to Sligo; for, not only business called me thither,
but curiosity induced me to see this corner of the Island, as it had
the reputation of having savage inhabitants in it. I therefore made
preparations for my departure. On the day Appointed for my setting
off, my servant Noad, as usual on such occasions, went to pay the
landlord, Mr. McDule, two pounds, which was due that week for my
lodgings, and Mr. McDule made no objection to accept it; but, in his
memorandum book, he pretended to shew I owed him the sum of sixteen
pounds, and that he had only received one half; and, moreover, that
he was ready to take his oath, I had agreed to give him four pounds
per week. Noad firmly opposed him, and stood to the truth, saying, he
was a witness that the agreement was made for only two pounds per
week; so a warm dispute arose between them, which forced me to go
down stairs to see what was the matter. I found my Irish Paddy, Noad,
like an honest servant, eagerly interested in his master's business.
Finding, however, that his good arguments did not avail, he thought a
good blow on the head would be more comprehensible, and was
accordingly preparing to inflict it; but Mr. McDule, threatening he
would make him pay fifty pounds if he did so, stopped the intrepidity
of Noad, who then told him he would not touch a perjurer.

This gave great offence to Mr. McDule, who replied with fury, that
there was never a Methodist known to be a perjurer. Noad wanting to
argue on this subject, which in fact he did not understand, I put a
stop to the dispute, by saying, "Let his faith alone." "No, no,
master," he answered, "I only wanted to knock his head, not his
face." This blundering reply made me laugh, and I told him to come
along with me. When I was alone, I began to think, that such a man as
McDule could have no principle of honour, by his wanting to impose on
me in this way, and that, on such an occasion, it would be very
allowable, by some stratagem or other, to avoid injury or insult;
and, at the same time, if possible, to make game of him.
Consequently, I formed a project that he might quarrel with my
servant, which was more proper than with myself. I instructed Noad in
what manner to proceed: I gave him orders to go from home, and not to
appear till late at night, and at his return, to make a loud knocking
at the door, pretending to be drunk, and when let in, to ask for a
candle to go to bed, which I would contrive should be refused him; be
was then to say. some unpleasant thing to the landlord, as I have
experienced that those creatures who have not a spark of sense, are
soon put in a passion with the least trifle, having no bridle to
restrain their fury, which accordingly becomes their master. "It is
two to one," said I, "he will give you a blow: and in that case you
may cry out, 'Murder,' and say, you will make a complaint to the
Mayor, and make him pay forty pounds for his imprudence." So, after
this lesson given to Noad, I sent him away; and the evening
approaching, I went down to prepare McDule to meet Noad, when I found
him saying his prayers. "I beg pardon," said I to him, "if I intrude
upon your devotions, the pleasures arising from which, are certainly
greatly preferable to, and much more sublime than, any other what-
ever." "You are welcome, Sir," he replied, "I am meditating on the
instruction contained in this Holy Book, wherein we are taught to be
careful of doing nothing wrong, if we wish to save our souls." "You
are right, Sir," said I, "to meditate on so important a subject;
which, I trust, will so far influence your mind as to make you detest
a bad action; and therefore I conclude you will not take an oath
concerning the money in dispute between us." But I found his
principles as dry as a stick for the fire, and that he was still
determined to take his oath before the Mayor. I called for Noad,
though I knew he was not there. Mr. McDule said, "Your witness will
be of no use, and he is not at home." "He is," said I, "probably gone
out to drink: many times he has done me this mischief before I left
town. At Tuam he came home drunk, got a candle, went to his room, and
set fire to the curtains of his bed; and if the servant girl had not
perceived it, the whole house would have been in a flame, and very
probably the whole neighbourhood would have shared the same fate."
"My dear Sir," replied he, "for your sake and my own, I will sit up
for him, and will not allow him to take a candle." "I wish you
would," said I, "and to prevent any mischief, open the door yourself
and we will be safe."

Having so well laid my plan for putting this cat into the sack, that
I was confident of success, I, therefore, wished him good night,
pretending to go to bed. About the time appointed, I heard a knocking
at the door, which not only raised McDule, but the whole street. Mr.
McDule opening the door, beheld Noad drunk, who desired a candle to
go to bed. Mr. McDule, as was expected, refused to give him a candle.
Noad finding an opportunity, seized the candlestick, and both holding
it fast, one pulled against the other. But Noad proving the strongest
brought him to my parlour, and there took possession a both candle
and candlestick; and, without any thought of malice (I presume), told
him he was a great Geographer. It must he remarked, that a person in
a passion, as nearly as possible resembles a mad man, and seldom
takes time to consider what his adversely may say; therefore McDule,
in a flame of passion, replied, "None of my family were Geographers,
but all the McDules were honest people." Noad, perceiving his
ignorance, began to repeat the same words, to induce him to strike.
He was not disappointed in his views; for McDule approaching with
fury, gave him a blow. Noad, pretending to fall to the ground, cried
out, "Murder," which raised all the people that lodged in the house,
who came down to prevent mischief They found him with his nose
apparently bleeding, which in his fall wader the table he had rubbed
with some red stuff having the appearance of blood. Every one was
against McDule, saying, if they had not come, Noad would have been
killed. Noad, from under the table returned them thanks, and begged
them to be witnesses how he was bruised, as he intended to go to the
Mayor, to get forty pounds to defray the doctor's expenses; and they
all promised to support him upon this occasion. Mr. McDule, finding
himself in an awkward situation, became a little milder; and, his
insolence beginning to abate, he slowly rapped at my bedroom door.
Pretending to be suddenly awaked, I asked, who was there. He said, I
am a friend come to beg a favour." I opened the door and asked, in
what respect I could be useful. to him. "I beg of you," he said, "to
set out before sun-rise, to prevent your servant going to the Mayor,
as I have bruised his nose by accident; therefore, allow me, Sir, to
order the Chaise at four o'clock in the morning." "Then," said I, "do
you give up your claim to the sum you demanded of me?" "My dear Sir,"
he replied, "there has been some error about the money indeed, you do
not owe me any thing." "Well, well," said I, "I forgive a fault when
it is involuntary; I only request you to give me a receipt in full
for the sum I have paid, as I do not owe you any thing, and I consent
to set out at any time to oblige you, as all my things are ready." In
short, McDule went to order the chaise, Noad having only time to wash
his face, and apologize to McDule for the deception he had put upon
him, at his altered appearance. McDule found himself rather
stupefied, and was persuaded Noad had taken a lesson from the stage
at Drury-Lane, in London.

After this manner of contriving to save my money, I set out for
Sligo; but the journey was tedious and uncomfortable, it being
winter. I recollect, the second night the driver could not find the
road, for the darkness of the sky, and deepness of the snow; and
missing his way, we were obliged to stop at an obscure village, where
the people have the reputation of being savage. We drove to a cabin,
and called a man. When he appeared, I asked him, if it was convenient
for him to receive us. "Yes," said he, "with pleasure, but I have no
bed, or other place than where I sleep myself, and if you will accept
clean straw to lie upon, you are welcome." The darkness of the night,
and storminess of the weather, induced me to accept his rustic, but
hearty invitation, and completely reconciled me to his straw bed. In
his cabin, I found a dozen such creatures, left to the care of
nature, who had taught them to pay every attention, unaccompanied by
any empty forms, to their guests, each being employed in giving new
proofs of service, and of zealous benevolence; not having borrowed
their principles from schools, and much less from Universities, where
we learn to disguise our passions and the weakness of our mind,
which, notwithstanding all our care, may yet be discovered. But this
good innocent people deserve to be admired for their humane
dispositions, said I to myself; -- this rude state of society, which
I now behold, proves to me how little advantage those gain, who wish
to be above simple nature. I found in the breast of those people the
true repository of happiness; indeed, their minds were perfectly
content, thinking their cabin as comfortable as the first lord's
palace, without any hazard of their being victims of slavish
ambition, which often produces the worst consequences.

Whilst, with these interesting thoughts in my mind, I was examining
their cheerful countenances, I was interrupted by an unexpected
message from a gentleman, inviting me to take a bed at his house, and
announcing that supper was waiting for me, and his coach ready at the
door of the cabin. To be thus transported from straw, as it were by
some fairy trick, to a feather bed, produced a sudden change in my
situation, and perhaps in my sentiments too, I took my leave of these
worthy people, and proceeded to an enchanting house, the entrance to
which was through a park, planted with trees on each side, and
between rivulets, with an artificial water-fall, ornamented with
bright lamps. In front of this beautiful mansion was a lake, upon
which the light from the windows was reflected, and gave it the
appearance of the enchanted temple of Apollo, in which Pagans
performed the absurd ceremonies of their religion. In short, on my
arrival at this delightful house, the charms of which were heightened
by the graciousness and affability with which I was received, I
thought myself in Paradise.

At supper we enjoyed a very pleasant conversation the. whole family
appeared to me entirely free from reserve. My straw bed afforded them
good materials for a joke, which the young lady introduced, by
declaring she was the author of my feather bed, for which she
expected a reward, and begged me to give her a tune upon the guitar,
knowing I performed on that instrument. It would have been a crime to
refuse so obliging an invitation: I gave orders to bring it, and in
the interval she got up and began to play on the piano-forte. Her
taste and execution astonished me, and I found her a proficient, both
in music and in painting. She admired my instrument, and was so much
pleased with my music, that she requested me to set it for the piano-
forte. This flattering demand I promised to comply with, and to send
the music from Sligo, the distance not being great.

After this conversation, and after spending a very pleasant evening,
I was conducted to my bed-room, which, I must observe, was fitted up
for a king, rather than for such a humble traveller as myself. I was
treated in every respect with the greatest hospitality and
politeness. On the following morning I took leave of this amiable
family, who loaded me with their kind attentions



CHAP. XI.
Return to Sligo; relieved from the annoyance of vulgar curiosity by
the opportune frolic of a run-away pig -- Loss and recovery of Miss
Janson's ass, the advertising of which aided my concert -- Arrival at
Londonderry, and description of that city; Count de Tantene and his
book -- Visit to Belfast; kindness of Generals Drummond and Seddon --
Arrival at Portarlington; advantages of equanimity and cheerfulness
of disposition -- Black powder and fasting a sovereign remedy for
lowness of spirits and loss of appetite, exemplified in the case of a
lady -- Arrival at Armagh; introduction to General and Mrs Nugent;
lucrative benefit.

IN my journey back to Sligo, I did not meet with any thing but bad
roads; and it was with great difficulty I got on, for the horses,
striking their feet into the ice to keep themselves from falling,
could not draw them out again; therefore, to prevent any accident
happening to me, I was resolved to walk as well as I could; but in
the newly fallen snow I found it a work of great labour for my feet.

During this violent exercise, I perceived at some distance a man
riding upon an ass, who seemed to have no less trouble in his
travelling than myself; but the ass getting better over the ground
than the horses with the chaise after them, he soon reached me, and
delivered me a letter from his mistress, Miss Janson, with a request
to send her the music abovementioned. "This request has rather come
at an unfortunate time," said I to the messenger, "return home and
assure your mistress, on my arrival at Sligo, it will be my first
care to send it to her." But he replied, he had orders not to return
without the music, and if I would allow him he would accompany me to
the town, which was not far off; consequently he went before my
chaise till we arrived at the inn, where people began gathering more
and more; and when we appeared in the Market-Place, I remember there
was a great pig fair. On this occasion, many idle people joined those
who followed me, and made an immense crowd and disorder in the fair,
which set at defiance all the authority of the Mayor. In this
confusion, the pigs contrived to deliver themselves from their
confinement, and, breaking from their prison, ran about in several
directions. The master of one of those rebels attempted to catch him,
being afraid to lose his property; when the terrified animal, in the
hurry of his flight, happening to encounter a woman selling eggs in a
basket, ran between her legs, and carried her to the Mayor, at whose
feet she fell down and broke her basket of eggs. This new object
amused the eyes of the tumultuous spectators, and they soon
disappeared' from me. This was the very thing I wanted, in order to
give me an opportunity of driving to my lodgings, which were ready
prepared for my reception. I no sooner got out of the chaise than I
found some officers in my room, with whom I was acquainted. They had
learnt the day of my arrival, and wanted me to dine with them; to
which proposal I made no objection, but went immediately.

But to return to the man and his ass:-- He called upon me the next
day, when I confessed I had not yet done any thing concerning the
music, but promised, the day after he should be dispatched with it.
So, to fulfil my word, on the following morning I got the music ready
and delivered it to him; when he announced to me an accident he had
met with, namely, that he had lost Miss Janson's ass. He told me, he
had made every enquiry after her, but in vain; and, therefore, he
begged me to put her in the newspapers, with a ,particular account of
her natural beauties, which he gave me. So I sent to the paper the.
advertisement, with the description, which was a true one, for she
was very handsome; and I was fortunate enough to succeed in restoring
her to the man, and without delay sent him home. Now, in speaking of
the success which attended my splendid conceit, I must attribute it
greatly to the account in the papers of this elegant ass, which I
must declare was not my own doing, but which gave rise to so much
lively conversation and inquiry on the subject, that the inhabitants
wanted to be particularly acquainted with me, and gave me a general
invitation to their houses, where spent a pleasant time in their
society. They sent me with a heavy purse to Londonderry, which city
lies in a pleasant situation near the head of Lough Foyle: it has a
very good port, into which ships of any size have a commodious
access, and consequently a considerable trade. According to the
historical account of it, it is well fortified; but to my
recollection, only strong enough for those ancient warriors, who were
not acquainted with the use of gunpowder: the city is well built, and
the inhabitants, I can justly say, good Irish people. The gentlemen
from their country seats joined with those of the city, who formed a
great and respectable body in my concert room, and procured me a most
fertile harvest for the winter season.

During the time of my stay in this city, arrived a gentleman on his
way from Scotland, who called himself Count de la Tantene; but his
income appeared to me to be left behind, to support in France the
title of his family, which I have no doubt is great. But, to maintain
his situation, he .brought with him a good portion of industry, and a
small one of ingenuity, by the help of which he got introduced into
the first company, where he so far succeeded as to enjoy in profusion
every luxury of an epicurean ,life, with the benefit of a liberal
subscription, for publishing his remarks on his journey through
Ireland and Scotland: therefore, it was expected this work would have
been true, and favourable in its description to both nations. But the
report I had of it from Mr. Maghee, was, that all the subscribers
were so displeased with his book, that they put it into the flames,
and made it vanish in smoke, finding it indigestible, and his account
untrue. "Stop, Sir," said I to him, "and do not condemn the author;
perhaps he means to write his confession, and declare his infancy in
a manner similar to that of J. A. Rousseau." "Oh!" said he to me, "we
may wait a long time, for you may be sure his materials are not yet
ready for the press." "Then," I replied, "it will be too long for me
to remain to read this new author's confession; for I have heard, a
long time, that Belfast is the most considerable town of this part of
the kingdom for its trade, and number of inhabitants, and I apprehend
it will be commodious for carrying on my own affairs;" so I bid him
adieu, and set out.

On my arrival at Belfast, I soon found a good reception. I had the
honour of meeting with General Drummond and General Seddon, who were
both engaged with the trust of the national security. It has always
been remarked of great men, that they never reject any thing proposed
to them, as beneath their notice, where they perceive the motives to
be good. On the contrary, they take the opportunity to show their
elevated minds in the least, as well as in the greatest things.

On my arrival, General Seddon, no doubt, heard I was a man that had
to make my way round the world, to support my existence, and study
the human mind; therefore, he honoured me with his visits, and I was
glad to discover that he was active in many good things; for there is
a pleasure in knowing each man's particular virtues, with whom we
have to converse. While he was examining me, I admired the prudence
of his questions. General Drummond soon joined his friend Seddon with
his patronage, and they gave so powerful a support to my concert,
that it would be ungrateful in me to omit mentioning their
generosity. In the midst of settling public affairs, these great
Generals found a moment to attend to mine; by which they indulged
their noble dispositions, and called to my mind the story of
Antisthenes. This Philosopher was, one day, bringing home, in his
hand, fish from the market, at which many expressed their surprise.
"It is for myself I carry this fish," said he, "but when I am
calculating a quantity of stones or mortar, it is for my country." So
General Drummond contributed to the welfare of his country, and was,
at the same time, the bestower of happiness on many individuals who
were honoured with his kindness.

I afforded a very favourable specimen of the effects arising from the
patronage of General Drummond and General Seddon; for I became like a
lady of fashion, on whom all eyes are turned, for the surprising
taste of her dress. My fame spread so widely, from the kindness of
their patronage, that it reached to some prisoners of a particular
description, from whom I received an invitation to dine. I did not
reject their civil attention, but only made a polite retreat, and
gave nay answer in the following manner: I told them that in
consulting my wishes, my inclination directed me to accept the kind
offer of their pleasant society; but there was one obstacle which
presented itself, and I was with sorrow obliged to postpone my visit
till I procured the consent of General Drummond, which I would
endeavour, as far as was in my power, to obtain. This answered quite
à propos; for, the very same day, the General sent me a card to dine
with him that day, when I was glad to have the opportunity of showing
the unfortunate people's note. The General read it, smiling at their
request, and, as soon as he had finished, asked me, if I had been
instructed in my youth in political or ministerial affairs. This
sudden demand made me immediately conjecture that, perhaps, those
people were prisoners of state. "No," said I, "General, my master
instructed me in what belonged to my comfort in life -- in the
principles and practice of virtue, whence follows quietness of mind;
and in aiming at being a good man: which is as simple an education as
I could receive from a school." This reply pleased the General, and
he desired me to dine with them, with an order to the Governor of the
place to show me every civility. The next day, when I appeared, the
prisoners were all well disposed to receive me heartily, and
expressed their joy more than I could have expected, and forgot, for
a while, that their liberty was lost. In this confusion, the
sentinels left their posts to see me, at which time one of the
prisoners set himself at large, perhaps to save the trouble of being
judged by a Court Martial. This accident produced some kind of alarm,
which could not fail to be reported to the General; so the officer
with fear was obliged to declare what had happened. The General, with
his usual good nature, said, "Have you seen my little friend lately, 
because I heard the man who had fled had put him in his pocket; if he
has not, you know, my brother soldier, we are allowed to conquer, but
not to be cruel, so let him go home to his children, and he will stop
their crying." Such an unexpected answer astonished the officer, who
was equally struck with the greatness of his mind. I never made the
discovery of the cause for which these people were imprisoned, nor
can it be of material consequence to the reader.

I left Belfast, and passed quick as a shadow through Monaghan, Cavan,
Mullingar, and Killbeggan, and stopped at Portarlington, where I
found most of the inhabitants speaking a foreign language; and, what
is more surprising, they had the manners and customs of Continental
people. But I was soon informed by some of them, that they were
French Huguenots; a set of people remarkable for their opinions, who
made in France so great a change by their contests with a rival
party, and who were at last compelled to take their departure from
the kingdom. After their fall, having no prospect of any change in
their favour, they all preferred to settle under the protection of
liberal nations, who agree with their own sentiments in the modern
doctrine of faith. Therefore, some of those good families took refuge
in Ireland; and, to be useful to the kingdom, established a French
academy, conducted by worthy and respectable members amongst
themselves; which produced many learned pupils, and rendered great
service to the nation. In short, I thought myself in the middle of
France, from their politeness and attention, which are qualities
familiar to the French nation.

Those refugees inherited from their forefathers great animation of
soul, and quick intellectual powers. They soon perceived the motive
of my arrival in town, and gave a good help to my concert, which I
found most lucrative from their patronage. The interest they were so
kind as to take in my behalf; they declared, was owing to my cheerful
disposition, which induced them to serve me. 'Tis true, it is
unpleasant in society to meet with persons too reserved: it gives
rise to many conjectures about them, and, after all, we find
ourselves not at ease in their company. My gaiety and good spirits
are fortunately always equal. I sometimes happen to meet with
disappointments, which I take as a storm, and console myself with
thinking that next day I shall have fine weather: therefore, it is
not of any use to alarm my mind, since adversity must have an end as
well as prosperity. I am perfectly astonished when I behold persons,
whose situation would make life delightful, plunged into the deepest
distress, because they want to stretch out their arms more than their
coat will allow them, and, through false pride and a discontented
mind, take a pleasure in tormenting themselves. My landlady at
Portarlington will furnish an example:-- She enjoyed three hundred
pounds a year, after the death of her husband; the rest of his
effects her son took into his possession, but gave a most elegantly
furnished house to his mother, where I lodged. This lady one morning
graciously paid me a visit, when, indeed, I was not ready to receive
her, having my night-cap on. The dishabille in which she found me,
contrary to my wish, did not make her retire. She sat down: "Take
your breakfast, Sir," she said to me, "I come to consult you on a
very interesting affair." "What business could this be," I answered.
Upon this, she explained to me the cause of her solicitude, and said:
"Since my husband's death, I have been reduced to three hundred
pounds a year, upon which it is impossible for me to live now, having
been used to so much more, and this puts me into a miserable state of
low spirits, and loss of appetite." I began to talk to her very
gravely upon this comical illness; observing how many accidents
happen from want, and mixing a little moral sentiment in my
discourse, to prevent her perceiving I made game of her. "I cannot
think," said I, "there is any great danger in your complaint, and I
flatter myself I can restore your good spirits." "Oh!" she replied,
"I will look upon such a cure as a miracle! I have applied to
doctors, and not one could succeed, but your own gaiety convinces me
that you are in possession of some mysterious secret, which you
employ to have such wonderful spirits." "Yes, Madam," I replied, "I
will not deny I take some black powders, given to me by a great
philosopher." She answered, "Blessed be his name! I have been right
when thought you had some help for your uncommon cheerfulness, and
desire and beg of you to have mercy on my afflicted mind, and give me
this powder." I was now sufficiently acquainted with her whimsical
illness; therefore I said to her, by way of a joke, "Go to your
tabernacle (for she was a strong Methodist), and give thanks for
having discovered a secret for the cure of low spirits;" adding, that
when she returned I would give her a black powder. She went, in fact,
to her meeting-house, and Noad, having listened to her conversation,
and adopting the principle of Socrates, that God ought to be
worshipped according to the law of the society in which we live,
accompanied her; he and she groaning and singing mournful hymns.

But, now that I had seriously embarked in this arduous undertaking, I
confess I beganto consult with myself, for some tine, what to do;
and, at last, after ruminating a good while, I took some bread, which
was lift on my table, and immediately secured the door, to prevent
any body troubling me in my laborious work. I next put in order what
was required for my chymical preparations, having tongs, fire, and
shovel, upon which I put bread, and began a process, similar to that
of making the tincture of antimony. First of all, the saline matter I
found close to a very hot fire after the operation, in the form of a
scoria, or combination of fixed salt, perhaps confounded with the
crust, which partly calcined the bread by means of the acid, and
altogether formed a neutral salt, which gave me a beautiful shining
black powder, and I found it very good for my purpose. When I
employed it for her use, I pulverized it, in which state it bore the
name of Dasuma Metallorum: but, for want of a mortar, I was obliged
to substitute my cup and saucer, with which I contrived to press it.
It answered as well as possible, and gave a most excellent black
powder, ready to be taken in some liquid. For her complaint I
preferred water gruel, which I administered according to ,the rules
of an eminent doctor. At first, looking at my watch, I felt her
pulse, which I found irregular; though I cannot in conscience say,
whether the irregularity lay in her pulse, or in my watch. I sent her
to bed with orders to take, three times a day, the black powder in
water gruel, most strictly prohibiting her from taking any
nourishment whatever, because I recollected she told me she had not
any appetite, therefore I did not want to go contrary to the wish of
nature, but to perform my doctorship with knowledge, as far as I
could understand. I thought it proper to put her in a good feather-
bed, to make her perspire; a design which the weather (it being
summer-time) helped me to put in execution. Her servant girl swore at
me, and told .me that I would be the cause of her mistress's
dissolution, she was in such, a violent perspiration, which I
attributed to the virtue of the black powder, and assured her it was
a symptom of her speedy recovery: Of this I entertained no doubt from
my attention, and the merits of this noble powder; for at the end of
three days she had got a wolf's appetite, and sent to me to give her
leave to eat a beefsteak. But, as the general practice of doctors led
me, from many considerations, not to allow my patient to have any
thing that came under the name of solid food, till she was reduced in
strength, and as I had yet in my possession ten more of the medicinal
powders to administer (though she had already consumed a number of
them); I sent her those to mix in water gruel; but, in order to be
more merciful than, the rest of the faculty, in prescribing jalap,
rhubarb, and laudanum; I permitted her, in case her appetite
increased; to take one egg for her dinner. But she soon took
advantage of me, and exceeded her allowance; for the next day, not
waiting any longer, she eat half a yard of sausages, to the surprise
of every one in the house, and her spirits were so much improved,
that it was impossible to stop her prattle.

I must say she was of a generous disposition; for she did not forget
to ask me for my bill, wanting to pay me for my labour: in truth, she
was not wrong in heridea, for how can doctors and apothecaries live
without being rewarded? and if I had calculated my time in making the
black powder, with attendance, feeling her pulse, and looking in her
eyes, (which is the hereditary practice amongst the doctors, in order
to find something, though I found in her large blue eyes nothing but
a good deal of conversation),-- for the whole of my trouble on this
occasion, if I had charged her twenty pounds, I should have thought
myself as honest a man as possible. However, I was well rewarded by
accepting of a writing-box from her son, as a memorandum that I cured
his mother with a black powder, that could not do harm to anybody;
and, to my satisfaction, I found myself a doctor, without being at
the trouble of taking a degree for this sublime knowledge, not having 
any ambition to aspire to the height of this noble speculation.

I therefore set out for Waterford, through which town I once passed
rapidly, if my reader recollects my shipwreck with Captain
Somerville. Here is the finest harbour I could find in Europe, and
ships come up close to the quay. If I am correct in my recollection,
this city carries on a great trade with many kingdoms, and more
particularly with England: There are no low spirits to be found
amongst the inhabitants of Waterford: quite the reverse, their minds
are occupied in looking after pleasures, and in shewing kindness to
strangers. I had the happiness of being introduced to their society;
and their attentions and eagerness to find out amusements for me,
give them a claim to be mentioned with the profoundest gratitude.

After a few weeks spent in jollity amongst them, I changed my
climate, and appeared at Armagh, where I had the honour to meet
General Nugent, who was at that time Commander in Chief in Ireland.
This amiable General, who, in whatever troublesome station he might
be placed, was indefatigable in his duty, united, with a depth of
understanding in his public, such dignity of sentiment in his private
character, as to place his whole delight, in captivating the hearts
of the nation. How simple a process it seemed to such a man as him,
to inspire amazing reputation by his bounty; but, in truth, every
thing 'he did was dictated by the same virtuous principle which he
displayed, when he addressed the Judges of the Court-martial, and
became the admiration of the whole kingdom. His high reputation led
me to think, if such an illustrious man takes me under his patronage,
it will procure good success to my benefit; but, unfortunately, I had
no prospect of getting introduced to him. I therefore ordered my
concert bills to be distributed at any rate, lose or win: but, as
good luck would have it, the General got a bill; and, as great minds
never sleep, but are watchful to do good, he sent me a card to invite
me to dine with him, with express orders to bring an account of my
politics. This gave me some uneasiness; and, said I to myself, "It is
true, politics are in great vogue at present, but for my part I am
not acquainted with them, neither have I any letters to show him
concerning political affairs, or any desire to enter into such
concerns;" wondering, at the same time, who could give such an unjust
report of me, as to occasion such a demand. Knowing his upright mind,
I considered that I might go without fear, ,as he would soon discover
my innocence, and set me free from calumny. I then began to take a
review Of my late and present actions, which suggested to my mind,
what sort of report to give to the General; which was this:-- One
morning a number of gentlemen came into my room, and were pleased to
exhibit, extempore, a political drama, to exercise their wit. This
strolling company of political players began with misrepresenting
Pitt,, Fox, and Camden, and then amused themselves with giving their
representations of other men in power. But I remarked that not one of
them acted the part of the Lord Lieutenant Cornwallis, Which I
concluded must be too difficult a task for them. During their
performance, I could not help thinking these gentlemen stood in need
of a surgeon or physician, to cure the disorder which had. possessed
their brains with the imagination that all Europe ought to be changed
according to their own fancy. Hearing such absurd dialogues, I
thought it most prudent to keep a profound silence; but, at last
having exhausted all their sense, they became quiet, and asked me for
my decision of these matters. I excused myself, by saying, "I am not
acquainted with any kind of politics, except one, which, from its
advantage to me, I prefer above all others; and that is, the tickets
in my pocket. May I venture to recommend my own plan? I look upon it
as the first political doctrine, to look at home, to observe
propriety of conduct, attend to your domestic affairs, and to direct
your family in a peaceable and orderly manner: the nation, if you act
thus, will look upon you as a true son of the mother kingdom."

This account, which was not improbable, contributed greatly to my
introduction to the General and Mrs Nugent, from whom I had a kind
reception, with such polite and friendly manners, that I might have
thought myself at home, had it not been for the deep sense I
entertained of, the respect due to them. Their method of conducting
the conversation was easy: every one was allowed a perfect freedom of
reply, without the fear of being interrupted, which is a defect we
often find in persons of little knowledge. In fact, I spent my time
very pleasantly, talking on a variety of subjects, which General and
Mrs Nugent supplied, and by degrees Mrs N. introduced those politics
of my tickets, wishing me to repeat my account, which I did, having
no objection to deliver them. The General took particular notice of
what I said and from what I could observe in his countenance, it was
to his satisfaction. At last, with some degree of precipitation, he
asked me for my tickets; and I had the honours of presenting them to
him. On receiving them, he said to me, "Your politics are truly
pleasant, having the power to unite all parties in good harmony, and
to inspire general pleasure; the rest are merely the effects of
perverseness and. pride in a great part of mankind, which prevent
them from ever experiencing such happiness as your own;-- a very just
observation indeed! The next day was my concert, and I found the
General's opinion of politics fully confirmed, when with astonishment
I beheld a most brilliant society in my room. But this numerous
company must be attributed to the patronage of Mrs Nugent, to whose
powerful name the public wished to pay respect. The bounty of this
amiable lady was already enough exerted to call for my warmest
thanks; yet not satisfied with bringing me such a numerous assembly
as would have defrayed every expense, she sent me money to defray the
whole amount, as if she had thought I had not before sufficient cause
to recollect her; though in truth, gratitude had impressed her image
too strongly on my heart, ever to be obliterated.



CHAP. XII.
Visit to Kilkenny -- Invitation to dine with Lord Ormond, who kindly
patronizes a concert; an unexpected discovery or "agreeable
surprise"-- Introduction to Colonel Chapman and other military
officers -- Disappointment in consequence of the arrival of a French
fleet, and the landing of General Hoche at Bantry Bay -- Arrival at
Longford -- Journey to Drogheda -- Advance and surrender of  General
Humbert -- Passage from Ireland to the Isle of Man -- Hospitable
reception at Douglas -- A strange dinner party, and whimsical duel.

AFTER my lucrative benefit at Armagh, I prepared to visit Kilkenny.
This excursion I took from the advice of an officer, whom I had met
with at his quarters in several towns, and who by his kindness had
evinced a great regard for me. This interesting gentleman was highly
favoured by nature, being adorned with a most elegant figure, and
having an excellent disposition, together with other estimable
qualities in great perfection; so that he not only attracted the
friendship of the men, but was much admired by the fair sex. In
short, I never experienced more attention, he being a constant
visitor at my house: as for his name, I never made inquiry about it;
for, being a traveller, I thought it no material object, as I had no
certainty of ever meeting him again. Before my departure I missed
him, and found myself uneasy, wondering what had become of him. My
inquiries after him put off my journey for some days. At last I found
he had leave from the Colonel for a few days, but no one could inform
me whither he was gone, therefore I set out and arrived at Kilkenny.

On the following morning, at breakfast, the Captain made his
appearance. I cannot describe how much I was gratified by his
presence. He called Noad to make some buttered. toast, having not yet
breakfasted, and being accustomed to take that meal with me. While we
were drinking our coffee with good cream, and fresh butter upon the
toast, Noad brought me a card of invitation from Lord Ormond to dine
with him. I was rather inclined to refuse, and said to my friend, I
was tired with my journey but he telling me he was invited there
himself, and that it would be more pleasant for him to meet me, I 
could not refuse, and wrote an answer, that I would be there. After
breakfast, he left me with a promise to return and accompany me to
his Lordship, which he did. On my introduction to his Lordship, an
unexpected scene presented itself to my view, I found in my unknown.
friend the Captain, the son of the illustrious Lord Ormond. This
spectacle was indeed curious, for at my surprise both were delighted,
and his Lordship could not conceive how I could be unacquainted with
his son's name. I replied, that a name did not give title to
friendship; and besides, I never inquired, more or less, concerning
the affairs of a friend who wished to put trust in me; so that, as
the Captain thought proper not to mention his name, I had not thought
right to ask it. However, it seems the Captain had only wished to
keep me in the dark till he found a time to introduce me to his
amiable father, who did me the honour to receive me, not as a
stranger, but as the distinguished friend of his son. In consequence,
I was treated with great attention, and he patronized my concert,
which succeeded admirably well.

Notwithstanding the good benefits and generous reception I met with
in many towns, finding the times in some degree unfavourable, and the
public in general to be occupied rather with political affairs than
with pleasure, I determined, without delay, to carry my speculation,
of making an alliance with the military, into execution.

Though I had heard that Athlone itself was but an indifferent town,
my project was to meet a great many military gentlemen, who had
something to spare out of their income received from the national
purse. Consequently, I set out to make experiments; and on nay
arrival at Athlone, my first occupation was to provide myself a
lodging. Among all that offered themselves to my choice, I could not
find a better than a small thatched house, belonging to the first
Apothecary of the place, where I found the walls of my room bent on
one side, so as to threaten an immediate fall; but in some respects
they were very convenient, as the door shut of itself , without the
assistance of the hand. When I found that the whole town consisted of
such description of buildings, I became reconciled to my own, and
employed my time in making a large acquaintance amongst the officers.
Colonel Chapman took particular notice of me, and kindly gave me a
general invitation to dine with him at the barracks; I did not refuse
his polite offer, but accepted it with the warmest thanks. There I
spent my time in the greatest luxury, turning day into night, and
night into day; in fact, I became an imitator of their dissipated
life, and found, by this contrivance, I should have a famous Concert,
as I saw the ladies of the neighbourhood ordering new gowns for that
evening, when I had no doubt the attention and politeness of my
friends the officers would attract a great company.

Colonel Chapman appointed the night for my concert, and all was fixed
according to his pleasure; but after we had been enjoying ourselves
the evening and part of the night preceding my benefit, an express
arrived, at three o'clock in the morning, that the French Fleet with
General Hoche, had taken advantage of the opportunity afforded by a
thick fog,. and landed at Bantry Bay. Consequently the whole garrison
was obliged to march to meet the enemy; and left me alone with my
bills in my hand, like the Methodist preacher, whom I robbed of his
flock. General Hoche's impolitic act swept off at once all the fine
harvest I had expected to reap from my benefit night. On hearing this
dreadful news, I had the pleasure to see that the whole town
professed great loyalty, as all the inhabitants shut their houses,
and their favourite dish of bread pudding was not to be seen in the
street, on its way to the baker's oven, for fear of meeting a
Frenchman. As to my landlord, he was making great preparation,
expecting to have much practice among the wounded soldiers. This put
the in mind to make enquiry about a number of articles, whether his
shop was provided with them, as cream of tartar, flour of sulphur,
plaster of betony, distillation of soot, sal volatile of vipers, sal
ammoniac, and many other things that came into my head. The answer he
delivered was extremely proper, and contained a good deal more
information than I expected. As I had not the knowledge of sal
ammoniac, he instructed me in this manner:-- "Now, Sir," he said to
me, "there has a remarkable surname been given to this salt, that is,
ammoniac. Some centuries ago the authors of chemistry were pleased to
invent a variety of names, which there is no need for me to acquaint
you with; only I must tell you of the origin of this, which is as
follows: There was a temple of Jupiter Ammon, situated in the middle
of the deserts of Lybia; and a number of caravans, passing over those
sands, in their pilgrimage to that temple, we are indebted. to the
urine of the camels for this precious salt of nature. But at present
we are quite at a loss, as pilgrimages have ceased, .and we have
nothing but an imitation from the manufactory of Venice or Anvers,
where they prepare it with five parts of some stronger salts, and one
part of sal marine, with one-half part of soot, baked together to
reduce it into a mass, and make it appear like the original from our
good friends the camels."

When he had finished his relation of sal ammoniacs, he asked me if I
understood what he said: "Partly," said I. "If not entirely," said
he, "it is because you are a stranger to Our tongue, for it is
impossible to give you a clearer account." But, in truth, I paid
little attention during the whole time he related the generation of
his ammoniacs, having been occupied with thinking of my departure
from Athlone; but that I might not give him cause to think me
unpolite, I bade him shew me the sal ammoniac. "I have not any," he
replied, "I keep only James's salt, which is more beneficial than any
of those you have mentioned." I then said to him, "Let me see this
excellent salt." "You cannot get better," said he; "to cure beef or
pork, it is from the manufactory Of Mr James at Ballast." I replied,
"I admire your ability in curing beef and pork; how proud must the
University be to produce such a clever scholar!" I would not enter
farther into conversation, finding all his knowledge consisted in the
art of pickling beef.

To save time in my own concerns, I examined my map, to find which was
the nearest town for me to go to, as I perceived my income beginning
to be rather low. This I found to be Longford, the chief town of the
county of that name, which, I had also heard, was a pleasant city; so
I set out immediately. On my arrival, I did not fail to meet with a
good reception, though, in, some degree, depressed by the gloom upon
their countenances, arising from the false alarm the French General
had given them. Notwithstanding this, however, I became as
fashionable as a new dress just arrived for the ladies. The novelty
of my person prevailed over everything else; no more was mentioned of
General Hoche. Their houses were hospitably opened to receive me, and
my name spread so far, that it reached the whole neighbourhood. I
soon received a polite invitation to dine with a gentleman in the
country; and finding the distance to his house no more than one mile,
I accepted it with pleasure. Some of the gentleman's friends came for
me in a chaise, and we set out together. We soon arrived, and met a
pleasant society, who were by no means remiss in circulating merry
conversation. The lively repartee and sensible remarks of an
enchanting circle of ladies, induced us to forget home, and we did
not think of the late hour, till the ladies put us in mind of our
departure. We then all got ready to go; but it was in vain, for the
servant informed us, that a message had come from the master of the
inn to say, there was not a chaise to be got in the town, they being
all engaged with passengers; therefore, some of the party wanted to
walk, but the darkness of the night and the heavy rain prevented
this: so a good. deal of confusion ensued amongst us, which at last
put the master of the house in a state of uneasiness, and he declared
his best jaunting car was broken, and the one he had at home he was
ashamed to offer, but they begged of him to make it ready.

Mr Macguire, the master of the house, then provided from his
neighbours pelisses for his friends the ladies, also great coats for
the gentlemen, and for me his own spencer, in which my little figure
cut so droll an appearance, that no one could stand for laughing;
but, in spite of this caricature, I was very well pleased with being
so snug. When all was ready and disposed to move, Mr Macguire gave
orders to put his favourite mare to the cart, which had the
reputation of being a quiet beast: so at last we went with lanthorns
to take possession of our seats. I was favoured with being near the
driver, and close behind the mare. I admired her long tail, and it
seemed to me, her keepers had not been at all sparing of their oats.
But when we began our trip, I found myself in an awkward situation;
and, being without experience in such expeditions, I confess, I could
not find any method to keep myself steady; and I received such
violent shakes, sudden tosses, and pulls, that I was near falling to
the ground. Obliged, therefore, to lie down, I accidentally found
something to keep hold of with my hand, and thus secured myself; but
another inconvenience arose; for, if I moved in the least, I was in
danger of losing my life. Whilst I was in this very awkward
situation, the mare, giving full scope to her natural disposition,
kept beating my face with her tail, which prevented me from opening
my eyes, for fear of being blinded; for this exercise of patience, I
was amply rewarded by bringing upon my head great plenty of such
materials as are Useful to improve mushrooms, turnips, and cabbage.
However, the ladies and gentlemen had their share of the dirty road;
for, their appearance at home, the servants did not know their
masters, and were obliged to prepare baths for them, as Noad had done
for me. After our purification from this dirty condition, I next day
found the ladies in my concert room, the beautiful bloom of whose
faces had sustained no injury, and who did me the honour to be the
ornaments of the last night I spent in that good city.

Next day I took my departure for Drogheda. My principal object was to
reach good winter quarters, as I considered that the bad season was
advancing: therefore, I passed through many places where I only
changed horses, and at last came to Slone. According to my
recollection, it was a dark night, and bitterly cold. At a distance
from the town I perceived an Aurora Borealis, or flame in the sky,
with which my eyes were so delighted, that I could not withdraw them
from it,. Whilst my mind was completely buried in humbly reflecting 
on the works of our great Creator, I did not notice where I was, and
found myself close to the flame, when a guard stopped the chaise with
an order to go no further. An officer on duty soon appeared,
inquiring who was in the chaise, and finding from his language he was
no common man, I took the opportunity of begging to speak to him. On
hearing my voice, he approached the chaise; and, opening the door,
very friendly shook hands with me, saying, in French, he was
acquainted with my name, and immediately wrote a note, with a request
that I would deliver it to the Colonel, and gave directions to the
driver, in English, where to go. During this conversation, we were
provided with a light; and, from the appearance which this gentleman
made, I took him for a Russian officer, as he had on a green uniform.
At this time his Russian Majesty was upon friendly terms with Great
Britain, and I imagined that his troops had landed to prevent an
invasion from the enemy, who had been again expected. With this
strange idea I was persuaded that I should find some uncultivated
Kalmucks; but my false notion was soon removed, when I met with the
essence of Irish politeness, and such sweetness of manners and
attention as are far beyond my ability to describe.

We supped very late; and after that, my eyes becoming rather heavy
from the fatigue of my journey, the Colonel ordered my bed to be made
ready, and in a few minutes, with the rest of the officers, conducted
me to it, desiring me not to put off my clothes, that I might be
ready to set out at five o'clock. Of the reasons for this, I am not
able to give an explanation; but it is certain, the Colonel with some
of the officers came at the hour appointed, and made me rise, and
conducted me to a room where breakfast was waiting for me, and
immediately after, put me into a chaise, when I took my last
farewell, for I have never met with them again.

On my arrival at Drogheda, I did not find any thing worthy of remark,
but the handsome harbour, which I compared to the Liffey in the bay
of Dublin. My stay in these winter quarters was but short, as I
perceived the citizens involved in deep gloom, rejecting all kind of
amusements, and without any sign of recovering their good spirits,
the minds of the whole town being in a state of alarm, with the idea
of a second visit from the French. Whatever their uneasiness might
be, it did not make any impression on my mind; for when I reflected
on the refined knowledge and politeness of the French nation, I
considered that if it were possible they should become masters of the
kingdom, when they felt their own superiority, it would be their
interest not to oppress the people, or be savage; otherwise, they
would show how ill-founded and hollow was the reputation they enjoyed
of being a civilized nation. I thus persuaded myself, to indulge a
good opinion of them; otherwise, perhaps, I should have shrunk into a
corner like the inhabitants of Drogheda, but I would not allow their
spreading fears to influence me, and boldly changed my asylum.

Fickle fortune now frustrated all the exertions I made for my
welfare; for when I visited Enniskillen, Kerry, Bandon, and
Fermanagh, the benefit I received was precisely such as if I had sown
peas, and the caterpillars had destroyed them. The French General
Humbert landing at Killalla, became master of the town, and of Tuam
which lay in his route. Elated by his rapid progress, he rashly
advanced to Castlebar, where he met General Lake, a man of great
understanding in the art of war, and whose measures were no doubt
wisely taken; but the battle which ensued, made no impression upon
Humbert, and he directed his way to Dublin. But the Marquis
Cornwallis, a man of great natural sweetness Of disposition, and much
knowledge, coming up, eight hundred French laid down their arms to
him without resistance.

The motives which occasioned this invasion of General Humbert, are to
me unknown; but such actions, however they may be in request with the
lovers a war, and admirers of heroic exploits, are nevertheless
odious to a quiet and feeling mind. But who is to be blamed, Humbert
or his master, by whose orders he acted? -- that master whom I may
perhaps be allowed to compare to Nebuchadnezzar, ordained from above
as a powerful instrument to carry into captivity the whole of the
Israelites.

I confess I have no great knowledge in these matters, and shall
therefore content myself with mentioning what I can remember of a
story of the King of the Mice, whose rapacious disposition induced
him to plunder many things from the farmer's stores, the acquisition
of the booty increased his covetousness, and the fullness of his
pride still tempted him to grasp at more of his neighbour's goods, he
therefore committed fresh depredations; and assembled, from the
remotest provinces, his wise subjects, and disclosed his eager desire
to take into his possession a delightful place, and make himself
absolute master of it. The whole council not only approved, but
highly admired his Majesty's project, and agreed to send ambassadors
to the rats and weasels, inviting their Monarchs to join his tribe,
with a promise to divide the spoil, and to immortalize their race. An
alliance soon took place between them, and the war ended in their
taking possession of the rich granaries of the mole, putting to
desolation whatever they could find, and dividing the cheese amongst
themselves. These animals, whose natures were corrupted by ambition,
spreading as fast as possible, increased their insolence so far, that
they became insupportable, oppressing numbers of the commonwealth,
though they could have no just title to claim possession of another's
right. But this success, the baneful fruit of their false glory,
impelled the King of the Ichneumons, who perceived their rapacious
inclination, and their endeavours to devour his property, to rise
against them. This Monarch accordingly declared war against them, and
coming into the field, proved himself a most formidable enemy. His
proclamation was treated by those little animals with contempt, and
all their combined force rushed furiously from their holes to swallow
him. But, notwithstanding this, they could make no impression on the
Ichneumon, as that Prince was continually upon his watch, and ready
to receive them, carrying on his attacks without dread, and in
remarkably good order, falling on the back of the enemy's army with
amazing swiftness, seizing with the greatest dexterity all their
chief commanders, and pressing closely to regain the cheese which had
been taken from his friend the mole; a part of which, that had not
been consumed, he succeeded in recovering.

The rest of this little story, I am sorry to say, has escaped my
memory. I must therefore return to General Humbert, who made such an
impression on the whole Irish nation, as proved particularly
distressing to my strong box: so that I retreated as quickly as my
horses could carry me to Newtown, where I could not find a ship, and
was obliged to take a fishing boat, in which I went to the Isle of
Man, and landed without accident at Peele. I did not think it worth
my while to make any stay in this little naked town, nor did
curiosity induce me to examine the castle and monastery near the sea,
which had been destroyed by some renowned warrior, as I had seen in
Great Britain more remarkable ancient ruins.

Castletown I understood to be the chief place of the island, and the
seat of the governor's residence; notwithstanding which, it is far
from being so populous as Douglas, on account of its harbour. I
thought it would answer my purpose better to visit Douglas, and quit
Castletown, which I accordingly did, and arrived at Douglas, where I
was received with the utmost hospitality by the worthy inhabitants;
and I can never forget my obligations to them, nor the powerful claim
which they have upon my warmest gratitude.

This island attracts a number of strangers of every kind, who resort
to it on account of debts contracted in their own country, as this is
a general refuge for such persons as are not disposed to pay a visit
to a gaol. Those people seemed to me to have neglected the principles
of good management at home, and to have acquired a habit of living
upon the public industry.

A performer from the Dublin stage arrived soon after me, who made an
addition to the number of those who professed themselves enemies to
the cares and labours of life. I have often seen those people form a
cheerful society, and have beheld their tables furnished with
luxuries. The last-mentioned gentleman, being well known in public,
wanted to prove his abilities in private, by collecting those gentry
who professed the same principles as himself; amongst whom he thought
me of the number, and honoured me with an invitation to dine. I was
at first inclined not to accept this favour, thinking he might employ
his money to a better purpose, namely, to pay his creditors; but the
Mayor of the town, who was present when I received this invitation,
prevented my sending a message to that effect, by the introduction of
some remarks on the imprudence of those persons, who having the
enjoyment of many thousands per annum, and being sufficiently
entitled to be called rich, act contrary to the rules of good order,
and contract such enormous debts, that it is impossible to think on
their conduct without laughing at their folly. In his observations,
however, the worthy Mayor had forgotten to distinguish the case of
those who are dissolute, idle, and extravagant, from that of those
rich persons who are often to be found gifted by nature with
brilliant powers and extraordinary talents; but, living in kingdoms
governed nearly on principles of equality, are consequently obliged
to expose their fortune amongst the general mass of the people, in
order to become useful members of their nation; so that before they
are brought forward to shew their zeal in serving the kingdom, they
find themselves deprived of their income.

On further consideration, the situation of this performer of the
stage excited my curiosity, and I accepted his invitation, merely to
see what sort of persons he and his friends were; and, to my
astonishment, I found his table covered with delicacies: his manners,
I could perceive, were such as did not betoken a solid mind; nor was
his situation calculated to afflict a man of sensibility. I enjoyed a
sort of gratification, in being admitted to a close inspection of
persons who led a dissipated life, yet preserved a specious shew of
honesty, the reality of which only belongs to a good roan, in the
continual exercise of virtue. My performer celebrated his birthday in
so splendid a manner, and assumed such personal dignity, that you
would have supposed him a Prince of the greatest fortune. He was
reported to be a learned man; and possibly he might be so. There was,
however, an air of melancholy in his countenance, which might be
perceived even in the midst of his gaiety, and which, like soap in
hard water, could never be thoroughly blended with that sprightly
quality.

The unfortunate situation of this man brought to my recollection an
observation of our eminent writer, Kobylanski, that he had found many
learned in different branches of science, yet unsteady in their
actions, which wise from the defects of their natural dispositions
having been overlooked, and from their giving way to hurtful
inclinations, which administered constant fuel to a corrupt life, and
subdued all the active principles of their mind. Experience has
taught me the correctness of this author's ideas.

I was highly disgusted with listening to a variety of empty
conversation, which at last terminated with the greatest spirit,
produced by the influence of the bottle. I bade them good night, and
very gladly retreated to my quiet room. I was very well satisfied
that was not present at a tragic scene, which I since learned was
performed by the master of the feast, after my departure, in the part
of the cruel Tyrrel, when he announced to Richard the Third, that he
had executed his orders, and put to death both the young Princes. It
happened at that time, that one of the company, being much in liquor,
took it in earnest, and thinking he had killed those innocent
infants, without further explanation, approached him with fury, and
gave him a blow, which produced a black eye, hallooing at the same
time out of the window, for a constable to take him into custody. The
people in the street hearing the alarm, and not knowing the real
state of the affair, procured a constable, who finding nothing but a
drunken man, left the room with contempt. Next day, one of those
fellows did not fail to bring me the news, with all the particulars
of the affront received by this actor; in consequence of which, he
was determined to fight a duel, as soon as he could find a second,
but he found it difficult to obtain one.

In the course of this conversation, we were interrupted by two
officers of my acquaintance, with whom I have often spent a pleasant
day. After the usual ceremony of shaking hands, I made an apology to
the man for the interruption which had been given to his interesting
and serious narrative, and begged of him to continue his story, which
he very politely did; and the officers, on hearing the insult which
had been offered to the performer, engaged themselves to be seconds
to the parties. Meantime, I used my endeavours to reconcile, if
possible, both parties; but the officers obstinately rejected my
proposal. I was surprised at their inhumanity, until, at the
departure of the man, they declared to me the trick they intended to 
play upon them. They soon found out their lodgings, which were in
appearance tolerably neat rooms, and might be distinguished by the
nose as well as by the eye; for the one was at a butcher's, the other
at a fishmonger's, house. My performer did not refuse to behave like
a man of courage; but his adversary, on the proposal being made to
him, appeared not at all to relish it, as he replied, with a hollow
voice, that he was an emigrant, a French master, from Dieppe; that he
understood drawing a little, and had already made a map of England,
with all the country seats of the great lords, accompanied with
remarks, so that no traveller could mistake them; from which work he
expected to gain considerable profit. But, as to fighting, he had a 
very slight knowledge of it; and it was not at all convenient to him
to exhibit talents which he had cultivated so little: besides this,
there was another obstacle; for his feelings would not allow him to
fight against a man belonging to a nation from which he received a
pension as an emigrant.

This excuse, according to my judgment, was sufficient; but my friends
the officers, wishing to enjoy some fun, persuaded him to appear in
the field of battle. But when he was near the appointed spot, we
perceived no small terror in his countenance, while with a confused
voice he said, "That unfortunate evening there must have been a
malicious and evil spirit in the wine, which introduced madness and
mischief, whose effects are too visible in the eyes of my adversary:
if I only escape from this disaster, it shall be a warning to me to
keep my hands and tongue quiet ever after, and to retire to a
solitary state of life, where I may find peace of mind, and a freedom
from such snares as this in which am now caught." No doubt he was so
far right: retirement has a variety of resources, and affords a
perfect security for study and meditation, and a harbour from those
tremendous storms of the passions which often overwhelm minds un-able
to bear them.

One of the greatest advantages arising from a retired life I may
illustrate, by comparing it to the inoculation of infants, to prevent
in a future age the many serious disorders which arise from the
small-pox. It will be seen from this comparison, that I mean the care
of children's education, which I think is the first duty of parents,
and no difficult matter to be put into execution. Of course,
religious principles of any kind may easily be instilled into, and
strongly impressed upon, their minds. We have an example in the case
of Perigune, the daughter of Sinnis, the famous pine-bender, who,
after her father was killed, took refuge in a remote place, where she
was found in a spot overgrown with shrubs; and, according to the
author's account who relates the story, she addressed her prayers to
the wild asparagus and other plants: and her descendants, in process
of time, venerated and worshipped the plants which had afforded an
asylum to their ancient mother. When once a religious persuasion is
fixed by education, it strenuously resists every other form of
belief, as if custom were the criterion of the true faith. Similar
pains and trouble in other branches of education, will, where the
understanding is naturally good, produce a great fund of knowledge
but the main object must always be, to instil the principles of
virtue, and teach scholars to know themselves and the world, which
will afford them the means of enjoying a happy life: thus instructed,
they will always have materials ready to engage their attention,
which is of great benefit; and they may therefore, at any time, enjoy
a perfect independence, and the opportunity of improving their minds
in a happy retirement.

But to return to my Frenchman: Who could possibly expect that he
would adopt such a quiet life as this, for himself as well as for his
companions, as professors of a dissipated life? And, very probably,
he had arrived at the degree of doctor in that profession of
dissipation. Such a man would find himself in a deplorable situation
in the solitude he talked of, stretching his inactive limbs in his
arm chair, and anxiously wishing for the time when he might retire to
his bed, which is the grand luxury of such insignificant beings. So
that, when I consider his speech more closely, the anxiety which he
expressed for such a tranquil life, seems to me to have been merely
the effects of his fright and cowardly disposition, which manifested
itself by very strong symptoms at the place appointed for the duel;
for he trembled like the leaf of a tree in a high wind, and his head
shook like its branches, whilst he declared, that he wished he could
guess what would be the consequence, before he gave the blow, and
that this was a more painful tribute to pay than the income tax,
looking all the time he spoke, to see if he could make a safe
retreat.

We found no less consternation in the face of the player, who would
have drawn back from the combat, had not the officers insisted on his
going through the business without delay. They then presented to them
balls, which in fact were large pills ingeniously prepared, so that
no one could discover they were artificial, and a small quantity of
powder, and obliged them both to fire. At the discharge of the
pistols, their ideas became confused, so that they ran from each
other in different directions: one fell into a hole full of water,
the other against a stone, which bruised his nose in such a manner,
that Lavater, the great observer of that organ, could have made
nothing of it. When he perceived the blood, he was in despair,
thinking it was occasioned by the ball passing through his head. In
fact, both the champions were terribly alarmed; whilst the officers
employed themselves in acquainting the public with the joke, and in
shewing the pretended balls; which excited great merriment among the
spectators. The appearance of the combatants was truly ludicrous, and
afforded a fine subject for mirth, when the one was drawn out from
the hole, with his clothes covered with dirt, his face besmeared, and
his head like one of the mops they wash rooms with; and the other
with his eyes patched, and his nose bruised, looked like a beggar
scraping ballad tunes on the violin.

Both those worthy gentlemen, whose abilities only served them to
pamper their bodies with good living, and who might justly be
considered a discredit to their own country, and not fit to be
admitted into a foreign kingdom, were driven with disgrace and with
the hootings of the mob to their lodgings.



CHAP.XIII.
A more respectable dinner party than that described in the last
Chapter -- Cautions and advice respecting our conduct, and those we
choose for companions -- The towns of Douglas and Whitehaven
contrasted -- Journey from the latter place to Newcastle upon Tyne;
kind reception and lucrative concert there -- Arrival in Durham;
description of its romantic situation and charming scenery --
Humanity and active benevolence of the Clergy -- Character of Dr.
Barrington, the present Bishop -- Introduction to Mr. Smelt, and
visit to that gentleman -- Proceeds to Hull -- Series of distressing
events -- Quits Hull for London, intending to proceed to America; is
prevailed upon to remain in England; receives great kindness from the
Archbishop of Dublin, the Misses Metcalfe, Lady Hawarden, and Mr
Burdon Hartford.

AFTER the extraordinary duel related in the preceding chapter, I went
to dine with the officers at the barracks, where I met my worthy
friend the Mayor, who acquainted the Colonel, that I had spent the
preceding evening with the emigrants. I perceived the Colonel was not
very well pleased with my visiting them, the motive for which was his
kind attention to my welfare; and I have experienced in my travels,
that not only he, but the public in general, looked sharp upon my
movements, and generously directed my conduct, considering that I had
little experience, and that accident had thrown me into the bustling
world, which made them take a more than fatherly interest, to give me
good morals for my future welfare. When the amiable Mayor explained
to him, for what purpose .I had gone, the Colonel was soon satisfied,
and expressed his conviction, that no harm was done; but that it
would serve to show me the varied shades of human life, and their ill
example would give light to my mind, how to avoid bad principles. I
could not be more overjoyed than at that moment, in witnessing the
interest he took for my person, but was a little afraid my visit
might injure my reputation. It seems, he was aware of the authority
of public opinion, and that there is no appeal from their judgment,
even for the greatest Monarchs, who, great as they are, are often not
exempt from bowing before their tribunal.

In the course of my apprenticeship to the world, during which I have
been obliged closely to study the immensity of objects which present
themselves to our notice, I have found, that as it is mere accident
to be born of poor or of rich parents,. so this accident does not
allow arrogance to one, nor meanness to another, but both should keep
an even balance in their station. Reflecting also on the singular
corruption of our nature, I strove to banish all ridiculous chimeras
of fancy, and to curb the unruly passions of envy, and of others
which I shall not describe, and which we often see presented to our
eyes, like so many strange pictures disguised with all the art of the
painter, in order to deceive the public eye, which is ever watchful
over our actions. But we must not forget, that the public will
continue to exercise their privilege, and nothing can prevent their
looking at the concerns of men. A quiet man may sleep secure under
the inspection of such legislators: and although this turbulent
society often exercises its unlimited power amiss, yet it is good
daily to attend its lectures. I have been in the midst of those good
conductors and debating advocates, and have heard sentence pronounced
on imprudent members, and have remarked, that no respect was paid to
their rank or their high abilities. This opened my mind to the nature
of their judgments, and I could not adopt their practice; but it
served me for a lesson, how to find the true method, by which I might
not only avoid the censure of their high tribunal, but so far become
their master, as to dispose of them as far as the limited nature of
my own affairs would admit, and as far as my political interest could
extend. As to this contrivance which I have so boldly exposed, and
which, if it will not serve for example, may remain with me; it is
not to be supposed a science, but the simple dictate of nature,
without the labour of study, and such as does not stand in need of
any laboured explanation. I may explain it by this similitude: The
smith can without fear touch cold metals, and examine their
qualities, which differ greatly one from another; then, understanding
the nature of his metal, he is aware that keeping it in such a state
of hardness will not give him any profit, and that it must be
prepared in a furnace and made flexible, for which purpose these
three articles are useful -- fire to make it manageable, pincers to
prevent accident, and the hammer to shape it to his fancy. So I think
that if we know well their nature, we may by a proper process manage
the public, which, to say the truth, is pleased with greater ease,
than soups are skimmed and made clear.

Those who have seen as many nations and remote kingdoms as I have
passed through, will agree, that not only empires, but particular
towns offer to us various natures of men, which ought to be
consulted. The event of this method was visible in Turkey, where the
invention of the Koran produced a multitude of sects, as numerous as
maggots in a rotten cheese, and government was in no better
condition, but nearly in a state of anarchy; therefore, to avoid such
errors, the law should be adapted as closely as possible to the
nature of the people's disposition, otherwise the government is in
danger.

What I have said of the different natures of mankind, may be
illustrated by the remarkable contrast I observed between the town of
Douglas and the rich Whitehaven.

Douglas inspired me with respect and love, and taught me to remember
its kind reception; the town of Whitehaven seemed like a hive of
industrious bees, with watchful care, forbidding the butterfly to
taste their honey. I therefore took leave, and crossed the county of
Cumberland, which abounding in barren mountains cannot boast of the
fertility of her soil. I went into the country no further than
Carlisle, finding nothing to attract my attention, and from thence
proceeded to Newcastle-upon-Tyne. I had no reason to repent my visit
to that town, the inhabitants of which generously took notice of me,
and by their kindness changed the gloomy aspect of my affairs,
putting me in a state of defence, which enabled me briskly to repulse
the attacks of want. General Dickson, Mr Abbs, and Mr Gibson, gave me
proofs of their good dispositions, and of the national benevolence,
which was exerted, not less nobly in improving the situation of an
individual like myself, than in supporting considerable kingdoms by
their liberality; not only loading them with immense sums of money,
but clothing the nakedness of their faithful subjects. And as they
must have enjoyed the fruits of this bounty with additional pleasure,
from receiving it at the hands of so generous a nation; so in my case
I felt proud of the exertions of my protectors, who procured me a
lucrative concert, in addition to many other kindnesses conferred on
me. Two celebrated performers, Mr. Wright and Mr. Monro, both
generously offered me their assistance, and performed that evening
with many other gentlemen their friends: so that the concert room was
not only well filled, through the interest of my benefactors, but
graced by many of the most beautiful ladies, who appeared to enchant
every eye, and inspire universal admiration, by the gracefulness of
their persons, and the lovely complexions they had inherited from
nature.

The circumstances of my situation soon compelled me to quit
Newcastle, which the generous reception I had experienced, and
charming society I had met there, made me leave with great regret. I
cannot speak of Newcastle without mentioning my obligations to Mr.
Walker, from the very active interest he took in promoting my
benefit. He ordered many thousands of bills to be delivered from his
printing-office; and, in addition to this, inserted the advertisement
of my concert in several newspapers. These articles must have
amounted to a considerable expence; but he refused to accept any
other compensation than my gratitude, which, warm as it is, can never
sufficiently repay his generosity.

General Dickson kindly advised me to visit the City of Durham, and
thus dispersed the darkness and gloomy uncertainty of my prospects.
He put me into the hands of his friend Mr. Ebdon, to whom, on my
arrival, I presented his letter. This introduction to such a worthy
man, afforded me not only the advantage of a generous reception from
himself, and friendly admittance to his house, but also of being made
acquainted with a select society. The pleasure I enjoyed in his
company and interesting conversation, and that of his amiable family,
made such an impression on my mind, that I said to myself: "Though
travelling is a troublesome life, yet its fatigues are repaid by
meeting with such friends as these." I was not only delighted with
the liveliness of his discourse and quickness of his repartee, but
had the still greater happiness of being the intimate friend of a man
richly endued from above with virtuous principles. The merit of the
Misses Ebdon is equally to be admired, who are the very same picture,
in respect to character, as their father: the same good qualities are
to be found in their dispositions, exciting them to acts of
benevolence as far as their power extends. Their feelings leave no
room to doubt the goodness of their hearts, and purity of their
sentiments which, it must be no less gratifying to them to possess,
than it was flattering to me to be introduced to such a worthy
family.

My time was spent most pleasantly in the society. of my friends, or
in examining the wonderful situation of the City of Durham. I was
much struck with the river Wear, which runs round it in the shape of
a horseshoe: it might with little trouble be made an island, but in
its present state it bears the name of a peninsula. Close to the neck
of land, are the remains of a tower, surrounded by the handsome
garden of the Bishop's palace, and beautifying the point of the
peninsula. The Cathedral is a most ancient and grand edifice, in a
picturesque situation, with an extreme declivity on the south and
west sides down to the river, the banks of which are wooded in
profusion, and present that appearance of romantic wildness which is
among the greatest beauties of nature. Great improvements have been
made in them by the Dean and Chapter, who give them up to the
enjoyment of the public.

I was surprised to hear of such a liberal disposition; and my
curiosity inducing me to make further inquiry, I was highly gratified
by the information I received. A friend, whom I highly respect,
acquainted me that they are a body distinguished for their
munificence, employing their revenue chiefly in the practice of good
actions, and in repairing the Cathedral, or their splendid houses, as
has been done by the Rev. Dr. Haggitt, and Rev. Dr. Prosser, and the
Hon. and Rev. Mr. Grey, with a view to circulate money among the poor
working people; expending also large sums in subscription to
hospitals, and in other public undertakings for the good of the
nation: all which expenses occupy much of their revenues. Indeed,
their keeping the romantic and beautiful banks of Durham in repair,
on purpose to please the inhabitants, must require a considerable sum
yearly. Yet I find from my worthy friend, that their benevolence
makes them forget all these heavy expenses. I cannot forbear to add,
that Lord and Lady Barrington, at Sedgefield, are looked upon as the
parents of the distressed, and that their charitable attention to the
poor is as remarkable as the distinguished title they have attained.
My friend informed me, that his Lordship the Bishop of St. David's,
whose bishopric is well known to be of small emolument, and whose
dignified rank must necessarily require much to support it, when the
living of Northallerton some time ago became vacant, and his
Lordship's seniority in the Chapter, afforded him a desirable
opportunity of improving his income, by merely taking possession of
that to which the law gave him an undoubted right, he refused this
living on its being offered to him, with the reply, that as he should
not be able personally to discharge its duties, his conscience would
not allow him to accept it. "This noble act," I observed, "surpasses
all my conceptions of virtue." "I am afraid," answered my friend,
"that the great Doctors now assembled in Congress at Vienna, will not
be able to produce from their University, such distinguished masters
as they are, so striking an example of virtue."

At Sunderland, I found that the Rev. Dr. Gray, Rector of
Bishopwearmouth, generously dedicated his time to the advantage of
the inhabitants, by promoting several schools for the poor children
of that place; and that Mrs. Gray has the benevolence personally to
attend to two hundred girls. This respectable Divine, I understand,
does not confine his charity merely to the poor children of his own
parish, but with universal benevolence and smiling benignity, calls
around him the needy and distressed of all descriptions, and gives
them every facility of emerging from their wretchedness. Among
others, my friend related to me an anecdote of this body, which I
noted in my memorandum book, as travellers are accustomed to do when
they meet with any thing particularly worthy of observation. An
officer and his wife came from Newcastle, on a visit to their friend
in. Durham: the officer being a gentleman of considerable
information, and possessing great wit, had the power of making
himself agreeable to company with very little trouble. One evening,
at a party, he was amusing his' auditors with serious and jocose
conversation, when his lady interrupted him in rather an unpleasant
way, describing to her neighbour the new fashions, which had come out
that year. Those two ladies now engrossed the conversation so
completely to themselves, and entered into such a detailed account of
fashionable dresses, that every one had given up all hopes of getting
in a single word, when at last the Captain, without ceremony, cut
short the dialogue, by begging his wife not to exhaust herself, for
fear she should get a brain fever, but to let him give an account of
the battle of Salamanca, which he accordingly began. If this
narration may be relied on, his company displayed such gallantry in
this engagement, that they destroyed 800 French, in killed, wounded,
and missing; and that the French standard was taken by his
lieutenant. His lady, who found silence a very grievous penance, here
observed, "My dear, this very same lieutenant is now a prisoner in
Durham gaol for debt." A respectable clergyman, the Rev. W.
Baverstock, who was present in the company, on heating this, was so
much surprised, and his feelings were so much affected, that he went
to inquire whether he deserved assistance, and if it should be found
he did, to set him at liberty. He found, to his satisfaction, that
this gentleman had contracted his debts merely from his desire to
maintain a respectable appearance as an officer, and not, as we often
find is the case, from dissipated conduct. The worthy Baverstock then
endeavoured to deliver him from his captivity, but in vain; as he
found that he could not, at the lowest estimation, supply from his
own income the demand of the creditors. Happily, however, knowing
where to find those whose merciful dispositions would make them
gladly step forward to relieve such unmerited distress, he went
without delay to that amiable man, the Rev. R. G. Bouyer, and
explained to him all the particulars concerning this unfortunate
officer. Mr. Bouyer immediately took him under his protection, and
engaged that he should be relieved from his distressful situation.
Baverstock, in the fullness of his joy, could not help relating the
affair to the rest of that worthy body I have mentioned before, the
Bishop of Lichfield, Dr. Price, Dr. Zouch, the Rev. H. Phillpotts,
and the Rev. D. Durell; whose virtues and humanity inspiring them
with the same feelings, they joined the Rev. Mr. Bouyer in providing
a sum of money to satisfy the troublesome creditors, and the officer
was immediately set at liberty.

I cannot help mentioning, before I conclude, that a School on the
Madras System has, for these several years, been established in this
city, for the purpose of educating the children of the poor, in order
to improve their morals, and enlarge their minds. The author of this
benevolent Institution is the Rev. R. G. Bouyer. I have been told,
that this extraordinary and venerable Prebendary exercises, with
unwearied industry, his mental powers in new inventions to serve his
fellow-creatures. Such a man is a greater benefit to his nation than
the treasures of kings.

The Bishop is a descendant of the ancient family of the Barringtons;
and, as Count Palatine of Durham, enjoys privileges equal to those
formerly possessed by the Prince bishop of Warmia, who was invested
with a power which the Polish nation could not prevent him from
exercising. I have learned from the information of my friends, and
from the history of this Palatinate, that the Lord Bishop, in his
principality of Durham, (placed as he is in the midst of a generous
nation, who give him little trouble compared with that which Bishops
on the Continent often experience, as in the principalities of Warmia
and Courland, and others that have expired, and are now no more to be
found), can make choice, according to his own pleasure, of his
Chancellor, High Sheriff, Attorney General, Solicitor General, and
many other respectable officers, who attend their duties in his
courts of justice. As to the personal character of the Lord Bishop, I
was highly gratified to hear from strangers, as wall as from the
natives of his Palatinate, that he is distinguished for the practice
of good and generous actions. and looks minutely after those who may
stand in need of his assistance, and that he has improved with the
greatest care a disposition naturally amiable. A store of honey is to
be found in his polite conversation, and his appearance in public
exhibits none of that stiffness which too often accompanies elevated 
stations.

The City of Durham, which is the metropolis of the Palatinate, has
not an imposing appearance, as it contains not many buildings of fine
architecture: but this disadvantage is abundantly compensated by the
hospitality and kindness of its amiable inhabitants, and
occasionally, by their brilliant assemblies which give us so
favourable an opportunity to admire the elegant and beautiful
features of the ladies.

Amongst variety of respectable persons, I met here a gentleman of
high rank, of the name of Smelt, who not only possessed elevated
sentiments, but (as I discovered from his conversation) great
knowledge, and a sound understanding. He honoured me with an
invitation to stay at his country-house, near Northallerton, on my
road to Hull, whither I expected to go soon, which I accepted, and
met with a most kind reception. I remained there some time, where I
had the pleasure of witnessing the affects of his bountiful heart in
relieving the distresses of his fellow-creatures, and maintaining
many families reduced from affluence to a state of poverty. He was
pleased with my conversation, as all travellers have something to
tell, finding in their road many new subjects of remark, and begged
me to stay with him till he should receive a letter from London, as
he expected he should have something to communicate which concerned
my interest. This declaration greatly surprised me, as I had not an
idea what he could mean. I remained for some time in uncertainty,
wondering who could take so much concern in my future destiny; for
continued adversity had impressed me with an idea, that nothing but
misery was left in store for me. At last, he received a letter from
his friend, the Duke of Gloucester, brother to the King, who sent a
sum of money for me, with a promise that his Majesty would put down
his name for a hundred pounds, and waited only for the arrival of his
dear friend Mr. Smelt, to give it into his hand. So flattering an
expression from a Monarch gave me reason to think, my amiable
benefactor would hasten to London immediately; but, to give me still
further proofs of his generosity, he spent some time in collecting a
subscription, having .a powerful friend in Lord Mulgrave (who was his
relation, and a Member of Parliament distinguished for his wisdom and
virtue); he soon raised a considerable sum, and saying to me, "Since
you are unfortunately destitute of natural protectors, allow me, as a
father, to direct your future welfare." fie sent that money to his
worthy friend the, Rev. R. G. Bouyer, to dispose of for my interest.
I willingly gave up, not only my concerns, but my whole heart to his
disposal: he made no objections to my going to Hull, when he knew I
had a concert to give there; hut he expressed his particular wish,
that I would wait in that town till his return from London. After his
departure, the aspect of my affairs was dismally changed. The first
news I heard was the death of the Duke of Gloucester, and soon after,
that of the King's illness, without any hope of his recovery; and to
complete my grievances, my dear Mr. smelt, on his arrival at home,
dropped down and expired, so that I never beheld him more. The loss
of such a patron afflicted sty heart with cruel pangs; and my sudden
downfall from the height of prosperity to the abyss of despair
overwhelmed my faculties, and left me in such a state, as if I had
suddenly awaked from a delirious dream. When the transports of my
grief were abated, a train of melancholy reflections succeeded,
against the attack of which I had no consolation wherein I could take
refuge, but what I might derive from the consideration, that the fate
imposed upon mortality is fixed by laws irrevocable, and severs
without distinction the closest ties which bind us to each other.
When I looked back upon the scenes of my past life, through the dark
medium in which I viewed them, they presented nothing but a gloomy
and cheerless picture; and I felt almost tempted to regard myself, as
marked out by fortune to be the victim of grief and sorrow. Despair
inspired me with a degree of fortitude. "Now," I exclaimed, "when I
have lost in my dear friend the most valuable treasure, and the
greatest happiness this world can furnish, I need not greatly fear
the worst my future lot may have in store for me: I, that have
weathered some of life's roughest storms, need not shrink from
venturing myself once more on the tempestuous ocean."

Impelled by such reflections, I immediately left Hull, and set off
for London in order to embark for America. But, as soon as I arrived
there, I had the happiness to find the aspect of my fortune much
improved. My kind benefactresses, the Misses Metcalfe, perceiving me
to be deprived of every support, and plunged in the deepest misery,
compassionated my distress; and, actuated by the most generous
concern for my future welfare, vouchsafed to honour me with their
protection, and to supply me with a sum or money, which has enabled
me to enjoy the comforts of life. The only return which I am able to
make for such benevolence is to describe it, and to make known to my
readers the source of my independence. But how can I find words to
express my gratitude for their unrequited bounty conferred upon me,
from the very moment of my arrival in England! Conscious, however, as
I am, how inadequate must be all language to describe my feelings, I
shall attempt to manifest to the world my deep sense of that
beneficence which was so kindly exerted to relieve me from misery and
want, and of the goodness of those blessed beings, who appeared like
the rainbow in the storm, to disperse the dark clouds which had so
long hung over my fortunes, and to announce to me the dawn of
brighter prospects. How flattering was it to find myself honoured
with the notice and protection of a family, endowed with such
elevated sentiments of mind as that of Metcalfe, after having met
with so many persons who seemed to pay me no regard, nor even to
consider me as a fellow-creature, much less as one whose heart beats
with all the feeling of an honest man!

To one possessed of tender sensibility, how painful are the
reflections excited by such treatment! Happy must I esteem myself,
that I have met with so many more whose liberal minds taught them to
view me in a far different light -- most happy, that Providence has
enabled me to rank you, my benefactresses, as chief among the number.
Fortunate was the lot that placed me within the limits of that
extensive sphere, which your benevolence embraces. I owe it to that
protection, which you so graciously conferred upon me, that I have
not been compelled, by the necessity of my unhappy situation, still
to wander, God knows whither, with his Providence alone for my guide.
Be assured, that I will ever retain, in the inmost recesses of my
soul, the delightful remembrance of your goodness; and that my heart
will never cease to cherish those sentiments of gratitude with which
your benevolence has impressed it; nor to pour forth its earnest wish
that the Supreme Being may ever bless you with his choicest
blessings.

Before I had the happiness to enjoy the protection of the family of
Metcalfe, I was anxious, in furtherance of the plan which I had.
projected, to give a concert, as I had then the opportunity of a free
passage for America. I happened, just at that time to meet with his
Lordship the Archbishop of Dublin, and his lady, who had, during my
stay in Ireland, honoured me with their patronage, and given me
repeated proofs of their bounty. As I was so well acquainted with the
noble dispositions of these eminent personages, whose greatest
pleasure consisted in anxious and unremitted endeavours to promote
the happiness of their fellow-creatures, and whose manners, though
perfectly correspondent to their illustrious birth and high
situation, were far from being formal and ceremonious, I ventured to
request a renewal of their favour I also, took the liberty to solicit
Lord and Lady Hawarden, that they would honour me, by affording to my
concert their patronage and protection. I was induced to make this
bold request, by the circumstance of Lord Hawarden being the son-in-
law of the Archbishop, and of the latter having honoured me with his
particular notice. Lady Hawarden, generously extended to me her
patronage, which could not fail of procuring me a good benefit. The
flattering circumstance of her protection of my concert is far,
however, from being the only instance of her kindness, which it
becomes my pleasing task to acknowledge. She crowned her favours by
sending me a present, for fear I should be in want, and by placing
annually in the hand of the amiable Miss Metcalfe, a sum of money to
be remitted to me in Durham. Thus has her generosity compelled me to
add my poor tribute to the sum of universal esteem and admiration,
which must be paid by those who know the virtues and the graces,
which ennoble and adorn her. But here I must stop: although my lively
feelings may inspire me with language in some degree capable of
expressing my gratitude, they cannot impart to me talents, of the
want of which I am too conscious. That character, therefore, which my
humble abilities would but injure by attempting to describe, I must
content myself with admiring in silence. In addition to the many
instances of kindness for which I am indebted to the illustrious
family of the Hawardens, it becomes my pleasing duty to record the
noble action of Colonel Greville, who gave me a striking proof of the
delicacy of his sentiments, and of his feeling disposition, by
generously presenting me with the sum of £100, as a help to increase
my income. This money was remitted by Mr. Metcalfe, and by Mr. Muir
brother-in-law of my protectresses, to that amiable and worthy
gentleman the Rev. R. G. Bouyer, who was so kind as to add it to the
sum which had been provided by my dear friend Mr. Smelt.

Notwithstanding the auspicious appearance which my affairs now began
to assume, I had not yet recovered from despair, and still felt
anxious to put in execution my purposed voyage to America. But as I
had never been in the habit of keeping any thing secret from my
benefactresses, who were acquainted with all my affairs from the
beginning to the end, I disclosed to them my intentions. I could
easily perceive, although they gave me no opinion as to my having
determined well or that what I had communicated had given them a
gloomy impression, and the conversation terminated with their
expressing a wish that I would accompany them next day into the
country, to dine with Mrs. Muir their sister, who was unwell, and had
a desire to see me. I went with them accordingly at the time
appointed: everything had been prepared for my reception; and on my
arrival, it was announced to me, that I need trouble my mind no more
with ideas of going to the other side of the water, to glean for my
living. At this fortunate moment, I received from their benevolent
hands, a sum of money sufficient to procure me independence, and the
enjoyment of a quiet, happy life. Such an unlooked-for reverse of
fortune, thus terminating at once the troubles and fatigues to which
I had been for so many years accustomed, excited in my breast a
tumult of astonishment and joy, which deprived me of all power to
give utterance to the emotions of my heart. My looks alone were
capable of conveying the least idea of the transports and ecstasies
of my gratitude towards the benevolent and amiable family of
Metcalfe, for this last act of their beneficence, which so nobly
crowned their former bounties.

I should prove myself but ill deserving of the many good friends it
has been my happiness to meet with, were I, whilst memory is employed
in the delightful task of contemplating their kindness, to forget the
name of Burdon of Hartford. This gentleman, being under an
apprehension that I might be in want, offered, with the most
unlimited generosity, to supply my necessities. I could not think of
abusing the goodness of so noble and generous a heart, by
unnecessarily availing myself of his liberal offer, and was therefore
obliged to confess, that my circumstances were then such as placed me
above the reach of want. He was a good deal surprised at this
declaration, and no doubt concerned, that he was deprived of an
opportunity of exercising his bounty. But let me assure his worthy
family, that his kind intentions towards me have impressed me with
sentiments of gratitude to his memory, which can never be
extinguished but with life itself.

I am now drawing near to the conclusion of my wandering life, being
arrived at that period in which I quitted the busy stage where I had
performed a part in so many tragic and comic scenes, and retired to
the quiet enjoyment of an asylum from its cares and perplexities,
which had been the object of my wishes from my earliest days. It was
in the happy land of England that I found this blessing.



CONCLUSION.

THE City of Durham appeared to be most happily adapted to my wishes
for a retired life; not only from its romantic situation, but from
its being the abode of a friend whose manners were so congenial with
my own, and whose society afforded me such heartfelt delight. To
Durham therefore I was now determined to direct my steps, intending
to settle there, and once more enjoy the company of my worthy friend
Ebdon.

A few days before my departure from London to realize this happiness,
the anticipation of which brought tears of pleasure to my eyes, I had
the good fortune to meet with a friend from the north, who politely
offered to conduct me to Durham, at which city he resides. I availed
myself of his kindness; and we had no sooner arrived there, than he
did me the honour to introduce me to his lady, who received me with
all the polite attention and affability which so naturally spring
from her amiable disposition.

After I had paid my respects to this esteemed gentlewoman, I
immediately attended to that object which was nearest to my heart,
and hastened to see my good friend Mr. Ebdon, whose share in my
affections and esteem remained still undiminished. I informed him, on
our meeting, that I had now quitted the busy theatre of the world,
and its noisy and promiscuous intercourse, which had unmercifully
robbed me of so many precious hours, that might, in retirement, have
been devoted to a much better use in the improvement of the mind. I
must now at the same time confess, observed I, that I have found
travelling an excellent school for acquiring a more extensive and
accurate knowledge of mankind; as it presents to our view such an
astonishing variety of characters, minds, and manners of every
description, and makes us acquainted with the moral, as well as the
natural, phenomena of the world. I have, however, now obtained from
that school all the knowledge I desire, and am not sorry to find
myself safely lodged at last, in this snug little corner of the
earth. My dear friend Ebdon, with his amiable family, happy to find
that such were my sentiments, and rejoicing in the prospect of my
being at length freed from the troubles of the world, offered me,
with most engaging frankness, a quiet asylum in his house.

This generous proposal convinced me, that I had now found one with
whom friendship was something more than a bare name; one in whose
breast its noble and genuine principles were carefully cherished. I
could not but reflect on the contrast he presented to the generality
of those whom the world compliments with the title of friends,-- who
too often mock our expectations of a substance, with an empty shadow;
and I felt happy in being enabled to enjoy, in the decline of life,
the serene and steady light of a sincere attachment, secure from the
deceitful blaze of common friendship, which in a moment disappears,
and leaves us involved in dismal darkness. Convinced as I was, that
with Mr. Ebdon I incurred no risk of being deluded by the vain
professions of an inconstant pretender of friendship; but that the
proposal of this worthy man arose from the goodness of his
disposition, and from the impulse of those feelings which prompted
him to secure for me a happy retreat, I could not resist such
kindness, but readily accepted his generous offer. My expectation of
happiness in his society were fully realized; and deeply must I
regret, that it was so soon to have an end. Unfortunately for myself,
his family, and friends, he was seized with a dangerous illness.
Recourse was had, in vain, to all the help of medical art, and within
a few months he died, with the same tranquillity and calmness of soul
which had attended him through life, This sad event, which I cannot
even now recall to mind without a tear, wounded my feelings deeply:
severe, however, as was my grief, it seemed fully warranted by the
consciousness I possessed, how worthy to be lamented was my departed
friend; and I could not but look on the occasion as one of those
which might, even in the sight of Heaven, justify my sorrow. My grief
was soon perceived by the Misses Ebdon, who knowing that it proceeded
from my affection to their father, generously proposed that we should
remain together. This unexpected honour I accepted with much
pleasure. From that time my days have been spent in their society,
and to this moment I still employ myself in studying to evince the
gratitude I feel for that kindness which has enabled me to enjoy my
beloved retreat, with those who had been the happy witnesses of my
introduction to it, and who are so nearly allied, as well by
disposition as by blood, to that lamented friend to whom I owe the
blessing.



POSTSCRIPT.

FROM the period when I fixed my residence in a quiet and retired
cottage, where my days glided on in undisturbed tranquillity, I had
ceased to remember that I was born the child of misfortune; my
troubles had all passed away, and I vainly flattered myself, that in
this sweet retirement, adversity would never reach me. Thus happy in
my present situation, and elated with the most flattering prospects
of futurity, I undertook and completed the task of writing my
MEMOIRS. But no sooner had I delivered them into the hands of the
Printer, than I had the misfortune to lose my dearest protectress,
Miss Margaret Metcalfe. My feelings are too painful to permit my
dwelling on the distressing subject. I leave it to the reader to
conceive, how severe a task it is to support the affliction felt,
when our dearest friend has bidden an eternal farewell to the world.
Nor will time itself avail to heal my sorrows; for a loss so great as
I have sustained must be contemplated, even to the latest moments of
existence, with the deepest grief and regret. One melancholy
satisfaction I possess,-- the thought that I was regarded by my
lamented benefactress, at the close of her valuable life, as not
unworthy of the goodness she had extended to me during so long a
period of it, and that I still owe my independence to her bounty. Her
sacred memory is now, alas! all that is left of my protectress, and
there my gratitude must ever dwell.

FINIS.
