THE COMPLETE CONY-CATCHING
BY
ROBERT GREENE


INTRODUCTION


     Robert Greene (1558 – 1592) was an English dramatist, poet,
pamphleteer, rake and debauchee. He appears as a minor character in
both of Anthony Burgess' Elizabethan novels Nothing Like The Sun
(about Shakespeare) and A Dead Man In Deptford (about Marlowe). A
graduate of Clare Hall, Cambridge, he eloped with a wealthy woman
whom he abandoned after having spent all her money. He then went to
London, where he lived by writing, associated with whores, thieves,
and low fellows of every kind, and spent money faster than he got it
on drunkenness and debauchery. The "Groatsworth of Wit", also
available on the Ex-Classics site, at
http://www.exclassics.com/groat/grtintro.htm is his best known work,
and has the first reference in print to William Shakespeare as a
playwright.  In addition he wrote six plays, an amount of poetry and
numerous pamphlets, mostly love stories and accounts of criminals
and swindlers.
     In the six pamphlets here collected you will learn about the
tricks of cony-catchers (swindlers), nips (cutpurses), foists
(pickpockets), cross-biters (men who extort money from a
prostitute's clients by pretending to be her husband), lifts
(shoplifters, and stealers of other unguarded goods), priggers
(horse thieves), and courbers (thieves who drag goods out through
the window with a long hooked pole).  Based on close observation,
and illustrated with stories of notable strokes, they give a great
insight into the underside of queen Bess's and Shakespeare's London. 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL AND EDITORIAL NOTE
     The six works which make up this anthology were all published
as pamphlets in 1591-92. They sold well at the time, but because of
their ephemeral nature, are now very rare.  A detailed bibliography
of the originals can be found in The Cony-catching Pamphlets of
Robert Greene – A Bibliography and Study by Frances Kirkpatrick
Darden. (http://etheses.bham.ac.uk/5572/1/Darden1952PhD.pdf) The
text for this edition has been taken from volumes X and XI of The
Complete Works of Robert Greene, edited by Alexander Grosart, Huth
Library, 1881-83.
     Spelling has been modernized and obsolete words standardized at 
the as the primary spelling used by the OED.
     The Glossary and Notes are the work of the Ex-Classics project.


A NOTABLE DISCOVERY OF COZENAGE


Title Page

A
Notable Discovery of Coosnage
Now daily practised by sundry lewd per-
sons,called Connie-catchers,
and Crosse-biters.

Plainely [l]aying open those pernitious sleights that hath brought
many igno-
rant men to confusion.

Written for the general benefit of all Gentlemen, Citizens,
Aprentises, Countrey Farmers
and yeomen, that may hap to fall into the company of such coosening
companions.

With a delightfull discourse of the coosnage of colliers.

Nascimur pro patria.<1>
By R. Greene, Maister of Arts


LONDON.
Printed by Iohn Wolfe for T.N. and are to be sold ouer
against the great south doore of Paules. 1591.


To the Reader

TO THE YOUNG GENTLEMEN,
Merchants, Apprentices,
farmers, and plain countrymen
HEALTH
     DIOGENES, gentlemen, from a counterfeit coiner of money, became
a current corrector of manners, as absolute in the one, as dissolute
in the other: time refineth men's effects, and their humours grow
different by the distinction of age. Poor Ovid that amorously writ
in his youth the art of love, complained in his exile amongst the
Getes of his wanton follies. And Socrates' age was virtuous though
his prime was licentious. So, gentlemen, my younger years had
uncertain thoughts, but now my ripe days calls on to repentant
deeds, and I sorrow as much to see others wilful, as I delighted
once to be wanton. The odd mad-caps I have been mate too, not as a
companion, but as a spy to have an insight into their knaveries,
that seeing their trains I might eschew their snares: those mad
fellows I learned at last to loathe, by their own graceless
villainies, and what I saw in them to their confusion, I can
forewarn in others to my country's commodity. None could decipher
Tyranism better than Aristippus, not that his nature was cruel, but
that he was nurtured with Dionysius: The simple swain that cuts the
lapidary's stones, can distinguish a ruby from a diamond only by his
labour: though I have not practised their deceits, yet conversing by
fortune, and talking upon purpose with such copesmates, hath given
me light into their conceits, and I can decipher their qualities,
though I utterly mislike of their practices. To be brief gentlemen,
I have seen the world and rounded it, though not with travel, yet
with experience, and I cry out with Solomon, Omnia sub sole
vanitas<2>. I have smiled with the Italian, and worn the viper's
head in my hand, and yet stopped his venom. I have eaten Spanish
myrobalans, and yet am nothing the more metamorphosed. France,
Germany, Poland, Denmark, I know them all, yet not affected to any
in the form of my life; only I am English born, and I have English
thoughts, not a devil incarnate because I am Italianate, but hating
the pride of Italy, because I know their peevishness: yet in all
these countries where I have travelled, I have not seen more excess
of vanity then we English men practise through vainglory: for as our
wits be as ripe as any, so our wills are more ready than they all,
to put in effect any of their licentious abuses: yet amongst the
rest, letting ordinary sins pass, because custom hath almost made
them a law, I will only speak of two such notable abuses, which the
practitioners of them shadow with the name of Arts, as never have
been heard of in any age before. The first and chief, is called the
Art of Cony-catching; the second, the Art of Cross-biting; two such
pestilent and prejudicial practices, as of late have been the ruin
of infinite persons, and the subversion and overthrow of many
merchants, farmers, and honest minded yeomen. The first is a deceit
at cards, which growing by enormity into a cozenage, is able to draw
(by the subtle show thereof) a man of great judgement to consent to
his own confusion. Yet gentlemen when you shall read this book,
written faithfully to discover these cozening practices, think I go
not about to disprove or disallow the most ancient and honest
pastime or recreation of card play, for thus much I know by reading:
When the city of Thebes was besieged by them of Lacedemonia, being
girt within strong fenced walls, and having men enough, and able to
rebate the enemy, they found no inconvenience of force to breed
their ensuing bane but famine, in that when victuals waxed scant,
hunger would either make them yield by a fainting composition, or a
miserable death. Whereupon to weary the foe with wintering at the
siege, the Thebans devised this policy, they found out the method of
cards and dice, and so busied their brains with the pleasantness of
that new invention, passing away the time with strange recreations
and pastimes, beguiling hunger with the delight of the new sports,
and eating but every third day, and playing two, so their frugal
sparing of victuals kept them from famine, the city from sacking,
and raised the foe from a mortal siege. Thus was the use of cards
and dice first invented, and since amongst princes highly esteemed,
and allowed in all commonwealths, as a necessary recreation for the
mind: But as in time and malice of man's nature hatcheth abuse, so
good things by ill wits are wrested to the worse, and so in cards:
for from an honest recreation, it is grown to a prejudicial
practice, and most high degree of cozenage, as shall be discovered
in my Art of Cony-catching, for not only simple swains, whose wits
is in their hands, but young gentlemen, and merchants, are all
caught like conies in the hay, and so led like lambs to their
confusion.
     The poor man that cometh to the Term to try his right, and
layeth his land to mortgage to get some crowns in his purse to see
his lawyer, is drawn in by these devilish cony-catchers, that at one
cut at cards loseth all his money, by which means, he, his wife and
children, is brought to utter ruin and misery. The poor prentice,
whose honest mind aimeth only at his master’s profits, by these
pestilent vipers of the commonwealth, is smoothly enticed to the
hazard of this game at cards, and robbed of his master's money,
which forceth him oft times either to run away, or bankrupt all, to
the overthrow of some honest and wealthy citizen. Seeing then such a
dangerous enormity groweth by them, to the discredit of the estate
of England, I would wish the justices appointed as severe censors of
such fatal mischiefs, to show themselves patres patriæ<3>, by
weeding out such worms as eat away the sap of the tree, and rooting
this base degree of cozeners out of so peaceable and prosperous a
country, for of all devilish practices this is the most prejudicial.
The high lawyer that challengeth a purse by the highway side, the
foist, the nip, the stall, the snap, I mean the pick-pockets and
cutpurses are nothing so dangerous to meet withal, as these cozening
cony-catchers. The cheaters that with their false dice make a hand,
& strike in at hazard or passage with their dice of advantage, are
nothing so dangerous as these base minded caterpillars. For they
have their vies and their revies<6> upon the poor cony's back, till
they so ferret beat him, that they leave him neither hair on his
skin, nor hole to harbour in.
     There was before this many years ago, a practice put in use by
such shifting companions, which was called the Barnard's Law,
wherein as in the art of cony-catching, four persons were required
to perform their cozening commodity. The Taker-up, the Verser, the
Barnard and the Rutter, and the manner of it indeed was thus. The
Taker-up seemeth a skilful man in all things, who hath by long
travail learned without book a thousand policies to insinuate
himself into a man's acquaintance: Talk of matters in law, he hath
plenty of cases at his finger's ends, and he hath seen, and tried,
and ruled in the King's courts: Speak of grazing and husbandry, no
man knoweth more shires than he, nor better which way to raise a
gainful commodity, and how the abuses and overture of prices might
be redressed. Finally, enter into what discourse they list, were it
into a brokerman's faculty, he knoweth what gains they have for old
boots and shoes: Yea, and it shall scape him hardly, but that ere
your talk break off, he will be your countryman at least, and
peradventure either of kin, ally, or some stale sib to you, if your
reach far surmount not his. In case he bring to pass that you be
glad of his acquaintance, then doeth he carry you to the taverns,
and with him goes the Verser, a man of more worship than the Taker-
up, and he hath the countenance of a landed man. As they are set,
comes in the Barnard stumbling into your company, like some aged
farmer of the country, a stranger unto you all, that had been at
some market town therabout, buying and selling, and there tippled so
much Malmsey, that he had never a ready word in his mouth, and is so
careless of his money, that out he throweth some forty Angels on the
board's end, and standing somewhat aloof, calleth for a pint of
wine, and saith: masters, I am somewhat bold with you, I pray you be
not grieved if I drink my drink by you: and thus ministers such idle
drunken talk, that the Verser who counterfeited the landed man,
comes and draws more near to the plain honest dealing man, and
prayeth him to call the Barnard more near to laugh at his folly.
Between them two the matter shall be so workmanly conveyed and
finely argued, that out cometh an old pair of cards, whereat the
Barnard teacheth the Verser a new game, that he says cost him for
the learning two pots of ale not two hours ago, the first wager is
drink, the next two pence or a groat, and lastly to be brief they
use the matter so, that he that were an hundred year old, and never
played in his life for a penny, cannot refuse to be the Verser's
half, and consequently at one game at cards, he loseth all they play
for, be it a hundred pound. And if perhaps when the money is lost
(to use their word of art) the poor countryman begin to smoke them,
and swears the drunken knave shall not get his money so, then
standeth the Rutter at the door and draweth his sword and picketh a
quarrel at his own shadow, if he lack an ostler or a tapster or some
other to brabble with, that while the streets and company gather to
the fray, as the manner is, the Barnard steals away with all the
coin, and gets him to one blind tavern or other, where these
cozeners had appointed to meet.
     Thus gentlemen I have glanced at the Barnard's Law, which
though you may perceive it to be a prejudicial insinuating cozenage,
yet is the art of cony-catching so far beyond it in subtlety, as the
devil is more honest than the holiest angel: for so unlikely is it
for the poor cony to lose, that might he pawn his stake to a pound,
he would lay it that he cannot be cross-bitten in the cut at cards,
as you shall perceive by my present discovery. Yet gentlemen am I
sore threatened by the hucksters of that filthy faculty, that if I
set their practices in print, they will cut off that hand that
writes the pamphlet, but how I fear their bravados, you shall
perceive by my plain painting out of them, yea, so little do I
esteem such base minded braggarts, that were it not I hope of their
amendment, I would in a schedule set down the names of such cozening
cony-catchers. Well, leaving them and their course of life to the
honourable and the worshipful of the land, to be censors of with 
justice, have about for a blow at the Art of Cross-biting: I mean
not cross-biters at dice, when the cheater with a langret, cut
contrary to the vantage, will cross-bite a card cater trey:<4> Nor I
mean not when a broking knave cross-biteth a gentleman with a bad
commodity: nor when the foyst, the pick-pockets (sir-reverence I
mean) is cross-bitten by the Snap, and so smoked for his purchase:
nor when the Nip, which the common people call a cutpurse, hath a
cross-bite by some bribing officer, who threatening to carry him to
prison, takes away all the money, and lets him slip without any
punishment: But I mean a more dishonourable art, when a base rogue,
either keepeth a whore as his friend, or marries one to be his
maintainer, and with her not only cross-bites men of good calling,
but especially poor ignorant country farmers, who God wot be by them
led like sheep to the slaughter. Thus gentle readers, have I given
you a light in brief, what I mean to prosecute at large, and so with
an humble suit to all Justices, that they will seek to root out
these two roguish arts, I commit you to the Almighty.
     Yours Rob. Greene.


The Art of Cony-Catching
     THERE be requisite effectually to act the art of cony-catching
three several parties: the Setter, the Verser, and the Barnacle. The
nature of the Setter, is to draw any person familiarly to drink with
him, which person they call the Cony, & their method is according to
the man they aim at: if a gentleman, merchant, or apprentice, the
cony is the more easily caught, in that they are soon induced to
play, and therefore I omit the circumstance which they use in
catching of them. And for because the poor country farmer or yeoman
is the mark which they most of all shoot at, who they know comes not
empty to the Term, I will discover the means they put in practice to
bring in some honest, simple & ignorant men to their purpose. The
cony-catchers, apparelled like honest civil gentlemen, or good
fellows, with a smooth face, as if butter would not melt in their
mouths, after dinner when the clients are come from Westminster Hall
and are at leisure to walk up and down Paul's, Fleet-street,
Holborn, the Strand, and such common haunted places, where these
cozening companions attend only to spy out a prey: who as soon as
they see a plain country fellow well and cleanly apparelled, either
in a coat of homespun russet, or of frieze, as the time requires,
and a side pouch at his side, there is a cony, saith one. At that
word out flies the Setter, and overtaking the man, begins to salute
him thus: Sir, God save you, you are welcome to London, how doth all
our good friends in the country, I hope they be all in health? The
countryman seeing a man so courteous he knows not, half in a brown
study at this strange salutation, perhaps makes him this answer.
Sir, all our friends in the country are well thanks be to God, but
truly I know you not, you must pardon me. Why sir, saith the Setter,
guessing by his tongue what country man he is, are you not such a
country man, if he say yes, then he creeps upon him closely: if he
say no, the straight the setter comes over him thus: in good sooth
sir, I know you by your face & have been in your company before, I
pray you (if without offence) let me crave your name and the place
of your abode. The simple man straight tells him where he dwells,
his name, and who be his next neighbours, and what gentlemen dwell
about him. After he hath learned all of him then he comes over his
fallows kindly: sir, though I have been somewhat bold to be
inquisitive of your name, yet hold me excused, for I took you for a
friend of mine, but since by mistaking I have made you slack your
business, we'll drink a quart of wine, or a pot of ale together: if
the fool be so ready as to go, then the cony is caught: but if he
smack the setter, and smells a rat by his clawing, and will not
drink with him, then away goes the setter, and discourseth to the
verser the name of the man, the parish he dwells in, and what
gentlemen are his near neighbours, with that away goes he, &
crossing the man at some turning, meets him full in the face, and
greets him thus.
     What goodman Barton, how fare all our friends about you? you
are well met, I have the wine for you, you are welcome to town. The
poor countryman hearing himself named by a man he knows not,
marvels, & answers that he knows him not, and craves pardon. Not me
goodman Barton, have you forgot me? why I am such a man's kinsman,
your neighbour not far off: how doth this or that good gentleman my
friend? good Lord that I should be out of your remembrance, I have
been at your house divers times. Indeed, sir, saith the farmer, are
you such a man's kinsman, surely sir if you had not challenged
acquaintance of me, I should never have known you, I have clean
forgot you, but I know the good gentleman your cousin well, he is my
very good neighbour: & for his sake saith the verser, we'll drink
afore we part, haply the man thanks him, and to the wine or ale they
go, then ere they part, they make him a cony, & so ferret-claw him
at cards, that they leave him as bare of money, as an ape of a tail:
thus have the filthy fellows their subtle fetches to draw on poor
men to fall into their cozening practices: thus like consuming moths
of the common wealth, they prey upon the ignorance of such plain
souls, as measure all by their own honesty, not regarding either
conscience, or the fatal revenge that's threatened for such idle &
licentious persons, but do employ all their wits to overthrow such
as with their handy thrift satisfy their hearty thirst: they
preferring cozenage before labour, and choosing an idle practice
before any honest form of good living. Well, to the method again of
taking up their conies. If the poor countryman smoke them still, and
will not stoop unto either of their lures: then one, either the
verser, or the setter, or some of their crew, for there is a general
fraternity betwixt them, steppeth before the cony as he goeth, and
letteth drop twelve pence in the highway, that of force the cony
must see it. The countryman spying the shilling, maketh not dainty,
for quis nisi mentis inops ollatum respuit aurum,<5> but stoopeth
very mannerly and taketh it up: then one of the cony-catchers behind
crieth half part, and so challengeth half of his finding. The
countryman content, offereth to change the money. Nay faith friend,
saith the verser, ''tis ill luck to keep found money, we'll go spend
it in a pottle of wine, or in a breakfast, dinner or supper, as the
time of day requires: If the cony say he will not, then answers the
verser, spend my part: if still the cony refuse, he taketh half and
away, if they spy the countryman to be of a having and covetous
mind, then have they a further policy to draw him on: another that
knoweth the place of his abode, meeteth him and saith Sir, well met,
I have run hastily to overtake you, I pray you dwell you not in
Darbyshire, in such a village? Yes marry do I friend saith the cony,
then replies the verser, truly sir I have a suit to you, I am going
out of town, & must send a letter to the parson of your parish, you
shall not refuse to do a stranger such a favour as to carry it him,
haply, as men may in time meet, it may lie in my lot to do you as
good a turn, and for your pains I will give you xii. pence. The poor
cony in mere simplicity saith, sir, I'll do so much for you with all
my heart, where is your letter? I have it not good sir ready
written, but may I entreat you to step into some tavern or alehouse,
we'll drink the while, and I will write but a line or two: at this
the cony stoops, and for greediness of the money, and upon courtesy
goes with the setter unto the tavern. As they walk they meet the
verser, and then they all three go into the tavern together.
     See gentlemen what great logicians these cony-catchers be, that
have such rhetorical persuasions to induce the poor countryman to
his confusion, and what variety of villainy they have to strip the
poor farmer of his money. Well, imagine the cony is in the tavern,
then sits down the verser, and saith to the setter, what sirrah,
wilt thou give me a quart of wine, or shall I give thee one? we'll
drink a pint saith the setter, & play a game at cards for it,
respecting more the sport than the loss: content quoth the verser,
go call for a pair, and while he is gone to fetch them, he saith to
the cony, you shall see me fetch over my young master for a quart of
wine finely, but this you must do for me, when I cut the cards, as I
will not cut above five off, mark then of all the greatest pack
which is undermost, & when I bid you call a card for me, name that,
and you shall see we'll make him pay for a quart of wine straight,
truly saith the cony, I am no great player at cards, and I do not
well understand your meaning, why, saith he, it is thus: I will play
at mum-chance, or decoy, that he shall shuffle the cards, and I will
cut: now either of us must call a card, you shall call for me, and
he for himself, and whose card comes first wins, therefore when I
have cut the cards, then mark the nethermost of the greatest heap,
that I set upon the cards which I cut off, & always call that for
me. O now saith the cony, I understand you, let me alone, I warrant
I'll fit your turn, with that in comes the setter with his cards,
and asketh at what game they shall play, why saith the verser, at a
new game called mum-chance, that hath no policy nor knavery, but
plain as a pike-staff, you shall shuffle and I'll cut, you shall
call a card, and this honest man, a stranger almost to us both,
shall call another for me, and which of our cards comes first, shall
win, content saith the setter, for that's but mere hazard, & so he
shuffles the cards, and the verser cuts off some four cards, and
then taking up the heap to set upon them, giveth the cony a glance
of the bottom card of that heap, and saith, now sir, call for me.
The cony to blind the setter's eyes, asketh as though he were not
made privy to the game, what shall I cut? what card saith the
verser? why what you will, either heart, spade, club or diamond,
court-card or other. O is it so, saith the cony? why then you shall
have the four of hearts, which was the card he had a glance of, and
saith the setter (holding the cards in his hand, and turning up the
uppermost card, as if he knew not well the game) I'll have the knave
of trumps. Nay saith the verser, there is no trump, you may call
what card you will: then saith he, I'll have the ten of spades, with
that he draws, and the four of hearts comes first: well saith the
setter, 'tis but hazard, mine might have come as well as yours, five
is up, I fear not the set: so they shuffle and cut, but the verser
wins. Well saith the setter, no butter will cleave on my bread,
what, not one draught among five: drawer, a fresh pint, I'll have
another bout with you: but sir I believe, saith he to the cony, you
see some card, that it goes so cross on my side. I, saith the cony,
nay I hope you think not so of me, 'tis but hazard and chance, for I
am but a mere stranger unto the game, as I am an honest man I never
saw it before.
     Thus this simple cony closeth up smoothly to take the verser's
part, only for greediness to have him win the wine: well answers the
setter, then I'll have one cast more, and to it they go, but he
loseth all, and beginneth to chafe in this manner: were it not quoth
he, that I care not for a quart of wine, I could swear as many oaths
for anger, as there be hairs on my head, why should not my luck be
as good as yours, and fortune favour me as well as you? what, not
one called card in ten cuts, I'll forswear the game for ever. What,
chafe not man, saith the verser, seeing we have your quart of wine.
I'll show you the game, and with that discourseth all to him, as if
he knew it not. The setter, as simply as if the knave were ignorant,
saith, marry, I think so, you must needs win, when he knows what
card to call, I might have played long enough before I had got a
set. Truly says the cony, 'tis a pretty game, for 'tis not possible
for him to lose that cuts the cards: I warrant the other that
shuffles may lose Saint Peter's cope if he had it. Well, I'll carry
this home with me into the country, and win many a pot of ale with
it. A fresh pint, saith the verser, and then we'll away: but seeing
sir, you are going homeward, I'll learn you a trick worth the
noting, that you shall win many a pot with in the winter nights:
with that he culls out the four knaves, & pricks one in the top, one
in the midst, and one in the bottom. Now sir, saith he, you see
these three knaves apparently, thrust them down with your hand, &
cut where you will, & though they be so far asunder, I'll make them
all come together. I pray you let's see that trick, saith the cony,
methinks it should be impossible. So the verser draws, and all the
three knaves comes in one heap: this he doth once or twice, then the
cony wonders at it, and offers him a pint of wine to teach it him.
Nay, saith the verser, I'll do it for thanks, and therefore mark me
where you have taken out the four knaves, lay two together above,
and draw up one of them that it may be seen, then prick the other in
the midst, & the third in the bottom, so when any cuts, cut he never
so warily, three knaves must of force come together, for the bottom
knave is cut to lie upon both the upper knaves. I marry, saith the
setter, but then the 3 knaves you showed come not together. Truth,
saith the verser, but not one among a thousand mark that, it
requires a quick eye, a sharp wit, and a reaching head to spy at the
first. Now gramercy sir for this trick, saith the cony, I'll
domineer with this amongst my neighbours. Thus doth the verser and
the setter feign friendship to the cony, offering him no show of
cozenage, nor once to draw him in for a pint of wine, the more to
shadow their villainy, but now begins the sport: as thus they sit
tippling, comes the barnacle and thrusts open the door, looking into
the room where they are, and as one bashful steppeth back again, and
saith, I cry you mercy gentlemen, I thought a friend of mine had
been here, pardon my boldnes. No harm saith the verser, I pray you
drink a cup of wine with us and welcome: so in comes the barnacle,
and taking the cup drinks to the cony, and then saith, what, at
cards gentlemen? were it not I should be offensive to the company I
would play for a pint till my friend come that I look for. Why sir,
saith the Verser, if you will sit down you shall be taken up for a
quart of wine. With all my heart, saith the barnacle, what will you
play at, at primero, primo visto, sant, one and thirty, new cut, or
what shall be the game? Sir, saith the verser, I am but an ignorant
man at cards, & I see you have them at your fingers’ end, I will
play with you at a game wherein can be no deceit, it is called mum-
chance at cards, and it is thus: you shall shuffle the cards, and I
will cut, you shall call one, and this honest country yoman shall
call a card for me, and which of our cards comes first shall win:
here you see is no deceit, and this I'll play. No truly, saith the
cony, me thinks there can be no great craft in this: well saith the
barnacle, for a pint of wine have at you: so they play as before,
five up, and the verser wins. This is hard luck, saith the barnacle,
and I believe the honest man spies some card in the bottom, and
therefore I'll make this, always to prick the bottom card: content
saith the verser, and the cony to cloak the matter, saith: sir, you
offer me injury to think that I can call a card, when I neither
touch them, shuffle, cut, nor draw them: Ah sir, saith the barnacle,
give losers leave to speak: well, to it they go again, and then the
barnacle knowing the game best, by chopping a card wins two of the
five, but lets the verser win the set, then in a chafe he sweareth
'tis but his ill luck, and he can see no deceit in it, and therefore
he will play xii.d. a cut. The verser is content, & wins ii. or
iii.s. of the barnacle, whereat he chafes, and saith, I came hither
in an ill hour: but I will win my money again, or lose all in my
purse: with that he draws out a purse with some three or four pound,
& claps it on the bord: the verser asketh the cony secretly by signs
if he will be his half, he says aye, and straight seeks for his
purse: well, the barnacle shuffles the cards throughly, and the
verser cuts as before, the Barnacle when he hath drawn one card,
saith, I'll either win somthing or lose something, therefore I'll
vie and revie<6> every card at my pleasure, till either yours or
mine come out, and therefore twelve pence upon this card, my card
comes first for twelve pence: no saith the verser, aye saith the
cony, and I durst hold twelve pence more, why, I hold you, saith the
Barnacle, and so they vie and revie till some ten shillings be on
the stake: and then next comes forth the verser's card, that the
cony called, and the barnacle loseth: well, this flesheth the cony,
the sweetness of gain maketh him frolic, and no man is more ready to
vie and revie than he. Thus for three or four times the barnacle
loseth, at last to whet on the cony, he striketh his chopped card,
and winneth a good stake. Away with the witch, cries the Barnacle, I
hope the cards will turn at last. Aye much, thinketh the cony, twas
but a chance that you asked so right, to ask one of the five that
was cut off, I am sure there was forty to one on my side, and I'll
have you on the lurch anon, so still they vie and revie, and for
once that the barnacle wins, the cony gets five, at last when they
mean to shave the cony clean of all his coin, the barnacle chafeth,
and upon a pawn borroweth some money of the Tapster, & swears he
will vie it to the uttermost, then thus he chops his card to cross-
bite the cony: he first looks on the bottom card, and shuffles
often, but still keeping that bottom card which he knows to be
uppermost, then sets he down the cards, and the verser to encourage
the cony, cut off but three cards, whereof the barnacle's card must
needs be the uppermost, then shows he the bottom card of the other
heap cut off to the cony, and sets it upon the barnacle's card which
he knows, so that of force the card that was laid uppermost, must
come forth first, and then the barnacle calls that card: they draw a
card, and then the Barnacle vies, and the countryman vies upon him:
for this is the law, as often as one vies or revies, the other must
see it, else he loseth the stake: well, at last the barnacle plies
it so, that perhaps he vies more money then the cony hath in his
purse. The cony upon this, knowing his card is the third or fourth
card, and that he hath forty to one against the Barnacle, pawns his
rings if he have any, his sword, his cloak, or else what he hath
about him, to maintain the vie, and when he laughs in his sleeve,
thinking he hath fleeced the barnacle of all, then the barnacle's
card comes forth, and strikes such a cold humour unto his heart,
that he sits as a man in a trance, not knowing what to do, and
sighing while his heart is ready to break, thinking on the money
that he hath lost, perhaps the man is very simple and patient, and
whatsoever he thinks, for fear goes his way quiet with his loss,
while the cony-catchers laugh and divide the spoil, and being out of
the doors, poor man, goes to his lodging with a heavy heart, pensive
& sorrowful, but too late, for perhaps his state did depend on that
money, and so he, his wife, his children, and his family, are
brought to extreme misery. Another perhaps more hardy and subtle,
smokes the cony-catchers, and smelleth cozenage, and saith, they
shall not have his money so, but they answer him with braves, and
though he bring them before an officer, yet the knaves are so
favoured, that the man never recovers his money, and yet he is let
slip unpunished. Thus are the poor conies robbed by these base
minded caterpillars: thus are serving men oft enticed to play, and
lose all: thus are prentices induced to be conies, and so are
cozened of their master's money, yea young gentlemen, merchants, and
others, are fetched in by these damnable rakehells, a plague as ill
as hell, which is, present loss of money, & ensuing misery. A
lamentable case in England, when such vipers are suffered to breed
and are not cut off with the sword of justice. This enormity is not
only in London, but now generally dispersed through all England, in
every shire, city, and town of any receipt, and many complaints are
heard of their egregious cozenage. The poor farmer simply going
about his business, or unto his attorney's chamber, is catched up &
cozened of all. The serving-man sent with his lord's treasure,
loseth oft-times most part to these worms of the commonwealth, the
prentice having his master's money in charge, is spoiled by them,
and from an honest servant either driven to run away, or to live in
discredit for ever. The gentleman loseth his land, the merchant his
stock, and all to these abominable cony-catchers, whose means is as
ill as their living, for they are all either wedded to whores, or so
addicted to whores, that what they get from honest men, they spend
in bawdy houses among harlots, and consume it as vainly as they get
it villainously. Their ears are of adamant, as pitiless as they are
treacherous, for be the man never so poor, they will not return him
one penny of his loss.
     I remember a merry jest done of late to a Welshman, who being a
mere stranger in London, and not well acquainted with the English
tongue, yet chanced amongst certain cony-catchers, who spying the
gentleman to have money, they so dealt with him, that what by signs,
and broken English, they got him in for a cony, and fleeced him of
every penny that he had, and of his sword, at last the man smoked
them, and drew his dagger upon them at Ludgate, for thereabouts they
had catched him, and would have stabbed one of them for his money,
people came and stopped him, and the rather because they could not
understand him, though he had a card in one hand, and his dagger in
the other, and said as well as he could, a card, a card, Mon dieu.
In the mean while the cony-catchers were got into Paul's, and so
away. The Welshman followed them, seeking them there up and down in
the church still with his naked dagger and the card in his hand, and
the gentlemen marvelled what he meant thereby, at last one of his
countrymen met him, and enquired the cause of his choler, and then
he told him how he was cozened at cards, and robbed of all his
money, but as his loss was voluntary, so his seeking them was mere
vanity, for they were stepped into some blind ale house to divide
the shares.
     Near to S. Edmunds Bury in Suffolk, there dwelt an honest man,
a shoemaker, that having some twenty marks in his purse, long a-
gathering, and nearly kept, in came to the market to buy a dicker of
hides, and by chance fell among cony-catchers, whose names I omit,
because I hope of their amendment. This plain countryman drawn in by
these former devices was made a cony, and so straight stripped of
all his xx. marks, to his utter undoing: the knaves escaped, and he
went home a sorrowful man. Shortly after, one of these cony-catchers
was taken for a suspected person, and laid in Bury gaol, the
sessions coming, and he produced to the bar, it was the fortune of
this poor shoemaker to be there, who spying this rogue to be
arraigned, was glad, and said nothing unto him, but looked what
would be the issue of his appearance, at the last he was brought
before the justices, where he was examined of his life, and being
demanded what occupation he was, said none, what profession then are
you of, how live you? Marry quoth he, I am a gentleman, and live of
my friends. Nay that is a lie, quoth the poor shoemaker, under
correction of the worshipful of the bench, you have a trade, and are
by your art a cony-catcher. A cony-catcher, said one of the
justices, and smiled, what is he a warrener fellow, whose warren
keepeth he, canst thou tell? Nay sir, your worship mistaketh me
quoth the shoemaker, he is not a warrener, but a cony-catcher: the
bench, that never heard this name before, smiled, attributing the
name to the man's simplicity, thought he meant a warrener, which the
shoemaker spying, answered, that some conies this fellow catched,
were worth twenty mark apiece, and for proof quoth he, I am one of
them: and so discoursed the whole order of the art, and the baseness
of the cozening: whereupon the justices looking into his life,
appointed him to be whipped, and the shoemaker desired that he might
give him his payment, which was granted: when he came to his
punishment, the shoemaker laughed, saying, 'tis a mad world when
poor conies are able to beat their catchers, but he lent him so
friendly lashes, that almost he made him pay an ounce of blood for
every pound of silver.
     Thus we see how the generation of these vipers increase, to the
confusion of many honest men, whose practices to my poor power I
have discovered, and set out, with the villainous sleights they use
to entrap the simple, yet have they cloaks for the rain, and shadows
for their villainies, calling it by the name of art or law: as cony-
catching art, or cony-catching law. And hereof it riseth, that like
as law, when the term is truly considered, signifieth the ordinance
of good men, established for the commonwealth, to repress all
vicious living, so these cony-catchers turn the cat in the pan,
giving to divers vile patching shifts, an honest & godly title,
calling it by the name of a law, because by a multitude of hateful
rules, as it were in good learning, they exercise their villainies
to the destructio of sundry honest persons. Herupon they give their
false conveyance, the name of cony-catching law, as there be also
other laws; as high law, sacking law, figging law, cheating law and
Barnard's law. If you marvel at these mysteries and quaint words,
consider, as the carpenter hath many terms familiar enough to his
prentices, that others understand not at all, so have the cony-
catchers, not without great cause: for a falsehood once detected,
can never compass the desired effect. Therefore will I presently
acquaint you with the signification of the terms in a table.
     But leaving them till time and place, coming down Turnmill
street the other day, I met one whom I suspected a cony-catcher, I
drew him on to the tavern, and after a cup of wine or two, I talked
with him of the maner of his life, & told him I was sorry for his
friends' sake, that he took so bad a course, as to live upon the
spoil of poor men, and specially to deserve the name of cony-
catching, dissuading him from that base kind of life, that was so
ignominious in the world, and so loathsome in the sight of God. Tut
sir, quoth he, calling me by my name, as my religion is small, so my
devotion is less, I leave God to be disputed on by divines, the two
ends I aim at, are gain and ease, but by what honest gains I may
get, never comes within the compass of my thoughts. Though your
experience in travail be great, yet in some matters mine be more,
yea, I am sure you are not so ignorant, but you know that few men
can live uprightly, unless he have some pretty way more than the
world is witness to, to help him withal: Think you some lawyers
could be such purchasers, if all their pleas were short, and their
proceedings justice and conscience? That offices would be so dearly
bought, and the buyers so soon enriched, if they counted not pillage
an honest kind of purchase? or do you think that men of handy trades
make all their commodities without falsehood,when so many of them
are become daily purchasers? nay what will you more, who so hath not
some sinister way to help himself, but followeth his nose always
straight forward, may well hold up the head for a year or two, but
the third he must needs sink, and gather the wind into beggars'
haven, therefore sir, cease to persuade me to the contrary, for my
resolution is to beat my wits, and spare not to busy my brains to
save and help me, by what means soever I care not, so I may avoid
the danger of the law: whereupon, seeing this cony-catcher resolved
in his form of life, leaving him to his lewdness I went away,
wondering at the baseness of their minds, that would spend their
time in such detestable sort. But no marvel, for they are given up
into a reprobate sense, and are in religion mere atheists, as they
are in trade flat dissemblers. If I should spend many sheets in
deciphering their shifts, it were frivolous, in that they be many,
and full of variety, for every day they invent new tricks, and such
quaint devices as are secret, yet passing dangerous, that if a man
had Argus eyes, he could scant pry into the bottom of their
practices. Thus for the benefit of my country I have briefly
discovered the law of cony-catching, desiring all justices, if such
cozeners light in their precinct, even to use summum ius<7> against
them, because it is the basest of all villainies. And that London
prentices, if they chance in such cony-catchers' company, may teach
them London law, that is, to defend the poor men that are wronged,
and learn the caterpillars the highway to Newgate, where if Hind
favour them with the heaviest irons in all the house, & give them
his unkindest entertainment, no doubt his other petty sins shall be
half pardoned for his labour: but I would it might be their fortune
to happen into noble's, northward in Whitechapel, there in faith
round Robin his deputy, would make them, like wretches, feel the
weight of his heaviest fetters. And so desiring both honourable and
worshipful, as well justices, as other officers, and all estates,
from the prince to the beggar, to rest professed enemies to these
base-minded cony-catchers, I take my leave.
Nascimur pro patria.<1>


A table of the words of art, used in the effecting these base
villainies.

Wherein is discovered the nature of every term, being proper to none
but to the professors thereof.
1 High law
Robbing by the highway side.
2 Sacking law
Lechery.
3 Cheating law
Play at false dice.
4 Cross-biting
law
Cozenage by whores.
5 Cony-catching
law
Cozenage by cards.
6 Versing law
Cozenage by false gold.
7 Figging law
Cutting of purses, & picking of pockets.
8 Barnard's law
A drunken cozenage by cards.

These are the eight laws of villainy, leading the high way to
infamy.
In high law.
The thief is called a high lawyer.
He that setteth the watch — a scrippet.
He that standeth to watch — an oak
He that is robbed — the Martin
When he yieldeth — stooping.
In sacking law.
The bawd, if it be a woman — a pander
The bawd, if a man — an apple squire
The whore — a commodity
The whore house — a trugging place.
In cheating law.
Pardon me gentlemen,for although no man could
better than myself discover this law and his
terms,and the name of their cheats, barddice,
flats, forgers, langrets, gourds, demies,and
many other, with their nature, & the crosses and
contraries to them upon advantage, yet for some
special reasons, herein I will be silent.
In cross-biting
law
The whore — the traffique
The man that is brought in — the simpler.
The villains that take them — the cross-biters.
In cony-catching
law
The party that taketh up the cony — the setter.
He that playeth the game — the verser
He that is cozened — the cony
He that comes in to them — the barnacle
The money that is won — purchase
In versing law.
He that bringeth him in — the verser
The poor countryman — the cozen
And the drunkard that comes in — the suffier
In Figging law.
He that bringeth him in — a nip
He that is half with him — the snap
The knife — the cuttle bung
The pickpocket — a foin
He that faceth the man — the stall
Taking the purse — drawing
Spying of him — smoking
The purse — the bung
The money — the shells
The Act doing — striking
In Barnard's
law.
He that fetcheth the man — the taker
He that is taken — the cozen
The landed man — the verser
The drunken man — the Barnard
And he that makes the fray — the rutter.

Cum multis aliis quæ nunc præscribere longum est. <8>
     These quaint terms do these base arts use to shadow their
villainy withal: for, multa latent quæ non patent,<9> obscuring
their filthy crafts with these fair colours, that the ignorant may
not espy what their subtlety is: but their end will be like their
beginning, hatched with Cain, and consumed with Judas: and so
bidding them adieu to the devil, and you farewell to God, I end. And
now to the art of cross-biting.


The Art of Cross-Biting.
     THE Cross-biting law is a public profession of shameless
cozenage, mixed with incestuous whoredoms, as ill as was practised
in Gomorrah or Sodom, though not after the same unnatural manner:
for the method of their mischievous art (with blushing cheeks &
trembling heart let it be spoken) is, that these villainous vipers,
unworthy the name of men, base rogues (yet why do I term them so
well) being outcasts from God, vipers of the world, and an
excremental reversion of sin, doth consent, nay constrain their
wives to yield the use of their bodies to other men, that taking
them together, he may cross-bite the party of all the crowns he can
presently make, and that the world may see their monstrous
practices, I will brifly set down the manner.
     They have sundry preys that they call simplers, which are men
fondly and wantonly given, whom for a penalty of their lust, they
fleece of all that ever they have: some merchants, prentices,
serving-men, gentlemen, yeomen, farmers, and all degrees, and this
is their form: there are resident in London & the suburbs, certain
men attired like gentlemen, brave fellows, but basely minded, who
living in want, as their last refuge, fall unto this cross-biting
law and to maintain themselves, either marry with some stale whore,
or else forsooth keep one as their friend: and these persons be
commonly men of the eight laws before rehearsed: either high
lawyers, versers, nips, cony-catchers, or such of the like
fraternity. These when their other trades fail, as the cheater, when
he has no cozen to grime with his stop dice,<10> or the high lawyer,
when he hath no set match to ride about, and the nip when there is
no term, fair, nor time of great assembly, then to maintain the main
chance, they use the benefit of their wives or friends, to the
cross-biting of such as lust after their filthy enormities: some
simple men are drawn on by subtle means, which never intended such a
bad matter. In summer evenings, and in the winter nights, these
traffics, these common trulls I mean, walk abroad either in the
fields or streets that are commonly haunted, as stales to draw men
into hell, and afar of, as attending apple-squires, certain cross-
biters stand aloof, as if they knew them not: now so many men so
many affections. Some unruly mates that place their content in lust,
letting slip the liberty of their eyes on their painted faces, feed
upon their unchaste beauties, till their hearts be set on fire: then
come they to these minions, and court them with many sweet words:
alas their loves needs no long suits, for they are forthwith
entertained, and either they go to the tavern to scale up the match
with a pottle of hippocras, or straight she carries him to some bad
place, and there picks his pocket, or else the cross-biters comes
swearing in, & so out-face the dismayed companion, that rather then
he would be brought in question, he would disburse all that he hath
present. But this is but an easy cozenage. Some other meeting with
one of that profession in the street, will question if she will
drink with him a pint of wine, their trade is never to refuse, and
if for manners they do, it is but once: & then scarce shall they be
warm in the room, but in comes a terrible fellow, with a side hair &
a fearful beard, as though he were one of Polyphemus'<11> cut, & he
comes frowning in & saith, what hast thou to do base knave, to carry
my sister or my wife to the tavern: by his owns<12> you whore, 'tis
some of your companions, I will have you both before the justice,
Deputy, or Constable, to be examined. The poor serving-man,
apprentice, farmer, or whatsoever he is, seeing such a terrible
huff-snuff, swearing with his dagger in his hand, is fearful both of
him and to be brought in trouble, and therefore speaks kindly and
courteously unto him, and desires him to be content he meant no
harm. The whore, that hath tears at command, falls a weeping, and
cries him mercy. At this submission of them both he triumphs like a
braggart, and will take no compassion: yet at last, through entreaty
of other his companions coming in as strangers, he is pacified with
some forty shillings, and the poor man goes sorrowful away, sighing
out that which Solomon hath in his Proverbs, A shameless woman hath
honey in her lips, and her throat as sweet as honey, her throat as
soft as oil: but the end of her is more bitter than aloes, and her
tongue is more sharp than a two edged sword, her feet go unto death,
and her steps lead unto hell.<13>
     Again these trulls when they have got in a novice, then
straight they pick his purse, and then have they their cross-biters
ready, to whom they convey the money and so offer themselves to be
searched: but the poor man is so outfaced by these cross-biting
ruffians, that he is glad to go away content with his loss, yet are
these easy practices. O might the justices send out spials in the
night, they should see how these street walkers will jet in rich
garded gowns, quaint periwigs, ruffs of the largest size, quarter
and half deep, gloried richly with blue starch, their cheeks dyed
with surfling water, thus are they tricked up, and either walk like
stales up and down the streets, or stand like the devil's Si
quis<14> at a tavern or alehouse, as if who should say, if any be so
minded to satisfy his filthy lust, to lend me his purse, and the
devil his soul, let him come in and be welcome. Now sir comes by a
country farmer, walking from his inn to perform some busines, and
seeing such a gorgeous damsel, he wondering at such a brave wench,
stands staring her on the face, or perhaps doth but cast a glance,
and bid her good speed, as plain simple swains have their lusty
humours as well as others: the trull straight beginning her
exordium<15> with a smile, saith, how now my friend, what want you,
would you speak with anybody here? If the fellow have any bold 
spirit, perhaps he will offer the wine, & then he is caught, 'tis
enough: in he goes, and they are chambered: then sends she for her
husband, or her friend, and there either the farmer's pocket is
stripped, or else the cross-biters fall upon him, and threaten him
with Bridewell and the law: then for fear he gives them all in his
purse, and makes them some bill to pay a sum of money at a certain
day. If the poor farmer be bashful, and passeth by one of these
shameless strumpets, then will she verse it with him, and claim
acquaintance of him, and by some policy or other fall aboard on him,
and carry him into some house or other: if he but enter in at the
doors with her (though the poor farmer never kist her) yet then the
cross-biters, like vultures, will prey upon his purse, and rob him
of every penny. If there be any young gentleman that is a novice and
hath not seen their trains, to him will some common filth (that
never knew love) feign an ardent and honest affection, till she and
her cross-biters have versed him to the beggar's estate. Ah
gentlemen, merchants, yeomen and farmers, let this to you all, and
to every degree else, be a caveat to warn you from lust, that your
inordinate desire be not a mean to impoverish your purses, discredit
your good names, condemn your souls, but also that your wealth got
with the sweat of your brows, or left by your parents as a
patrimony, shall be a prey to those cozening cross-biters. Some fond
men are so far in with these detestable trugs, that they consume
what they have upon them, and find nothing but a Neapolitan
favour<16> for their labour.
     Read the seventh of Solomon's proverbs, and there at large view
the description of a shameless and impudent courtesan: yet is there
another kind of cross-biting which is most pestilent, and that is
this. There lives about this town certain householders, yet mere
shifters and cozeners, who learning some insight in the civil law,
walk abroad like parators, sumners<17> and informers, being none at
all either in office or credit, and they go spying about where any
merchant, or merchant's prentice, citizen, wealthy farmer, or other
of credit, either accompany with any woman familiarly, or else hath
gotten some maid with child, as men's natures be prone to sin,
straight they come over his fallows thus: they send for him to a
tavern, & there open the matter unto him, which they have cunningly
learned out, telling him he must be presented to the Arches<18>, &
the citation shall be peremptorily served in his parish church. The
party afraid to have his credit cracked with the worshipful of the
City, and the rest of his neighbours, & grieving highly his wife
should hear of it, straight takes composition with this cozener for
some twenty marks, nay I heard of forty pound cross-bitten at one
time, & then the cozening informer or cross-biter promiseth to wipe
him out of the book, & discharge him from the matter, when it was
neither known nor presented: so go they to the woman, and fetch her
off if she be married, and though they have this gross sum yet oft
times they cross-bite her for more: nay thus do they fear citizens,
prentices, & farmers, that they find but any way suspicious of the
like fault. The cross-biting bawds, for no better can I term them,
in that for lucre they conceal the sin, and smother up lust, do not
only enrich themselves mightily thereby, but also discredit, hinder,
and prejudice the court of the Arches, and the Officers belonging to
the same. There are some poor blind patches of that faculty, that
have their tenements purchased, and their plate on the board very
solemnly, who only get their gains by cross-biting, as is afore
rehearsed. But leaving them to the deep insight of such as be
appointed with Justice to correct vice, again to the crew of my
former cross-biters, whose fee simple to live upon, is nothing but
the following of common, dishonest and idle trulls, and thereby
maintain themselves brave, and the strumpets in handsome furniture.
And to end this art with an English demonstration, I'll tell you a
pretty tale of late performd in Bishopgate street, there was there
five traffics, pretty, but common housewives, that stood fast by a
tavern door, loking if some prey would pass by for their purpose,
anon the eldest of them, and most experienced in that law, called
Mal B., spied a master of a ship coming along: here is a simpler
quoth she, I'll verse him, or hang me. Sir, said she, God even,
what, are you so liberal to bestow on three good wenches that are
dry, a pint of wine. In faith, fair women quoth he, I was never
niggard for so much, and with that he takes one of them by the hand,
and caries them all into the tavern, there he bestowed cheer and
hippocras upon them, drinking hard till the shot came to a noble, so
that they three carousing to the gentleman, made him somewhat tipsy,
and then & venus in vinis, ignis in igne fuit,<19> well, night grew
on, and he would away, but this mistress Mal B. stopped his journey
thus, gentleman, quoth she, this undeserved favour of yours makes us
so deeply beholding to you, that our ability is not able any way to
make sufficient satisfaction, yet to show us kind in what we can,
you shall not deny me this request, to see my simple house before
you go. The gentleman a litle whiffled, consented, & went with them,
so the shot was paid, & away they go: Without the tavern door stood
two of their husbands, J. B. & J. R. and they were made privy to the
practice. Home goes the gentleman with these lusty housewives,
stumbling, at last he was welcome to M. Mal's house, and one of the
three went into a chamber, and got to bed, whose name was A. B.
After they had chatted a while, the gentleman would have been gone,
but she told him that before he went, he should see all the rooms of
her house, and so led him up into the chamber where the party lay in
bed: who is here said the gentleman. Marry saith Mal, a good pretty
wench sir, and if you be not well, lie down by her, you can take no
harm of her: drunkenness desires lust, and so the gentleman begins
to dally, and away goes she with the candle, and at last he put of
his clothes and went to bed: yet he was not so drunk, but he could
after a while remember his money, and feeling for his purse all was
gone, and three links of his whistle broken off: the sum that was in
his purse was in gold and silver twenty nobles. As thus he was in a
maze, though his head were well laden, in comes J. B. the good man
of the house, and two other with him, and speaking somewhat loud,
peace husband quoth she, there is one in bed, speak not so loud. In
bed, saith he, gogs nownes<20> I'll go see, and so will I, saith the
other: you shall not saith his wife, but strove against him, but up
goes he and his cross-biters with him, & seeing the gentleman in
bed, out with his dagger, and asked what base villain it was that
there sought to dishonest his wife: well, he sent one of them for a
constable, and made the gentleman rise, who half drunk yet had that
remembrance to speak fair, and to entreat him to keep his credit:
but no entreaty could serve, but to the Compter he must, & the
constable must be sent for: yet at the last one of them entreated
that the gentleman might be honestly used, and carried to a tavern
to talk of the matter till a constable come. Tut, saith J. B. I will
have law upon him: but the base cross-biter at last stooped, and to
the tavern they go, where the gentleman laid his whistle to pawn for
money, & there bestowed as much of them as came to ten shillings,
and sat drinking and talking until the next morrow. By that the
gentleman had stolen a nap, and waking it was daylight, and then
seeing himself compassed with these cross-biters, and remembering
his night's work, soberly smiling, asked them if they knew what he
was: they answered, not well. Why then quoth he, you base cozening
rogues, you shall ere we part: and with that drawing his sword, kept
them into the chamber, desiring that the constable might be sent
for: but this brave of his could not dismay M. Mall, for she had
bidden a sharper brunt before, witness the time of her martyrdom,
when upon her shoulders was engraven the history of her whorish
qualities: but she replying, swore, sith he was so lusty, her
husband should not put it up by no means. I will tell thee thou base
cross-biting bawd, quoth he, and you cozening companions, I serve a
noble man, & for my credit with him, I refer me to the penalty he
will impose on you, for by God I will make you an example to all
cross-biters ere I end with you, I tell you villains, I serve, and
with that he named his Lord. When the guilty whores and cozeners
heard of his credit and service, they began humbly to entreat him to
be good to them: then quoth he, first deliver me my money, they upon
that gladly gave him all, and restored the links of his chain. When
he had all, he smiled, and swore afresh that he would torment them
for all this, that the severity of their punishment might be a
caveat to others to beware of the like cozenage: and upon that
knocked with his foot, and said he would not let them go till he had
a constable. Then in general they humbled themselves, so
recompensing the party, that he agreed to pass over the matter,
conditionally beside, that they would pay the sixteen shillings he
had spent in charges, which they also performed. The gentleman
stepped his way, and said, you may see the old proverb fulfilled,
Fallere fallentem non est fraus.<21>
     Thus have I deciphered an odious practice not worthy to be
named: and now wishing all, of what estate soever, to beware of
filthy lust, and such damnable stales as draws men on to inordinate
desires, and rather to spend their coin amongest honest company,
than to bequeath it to such base cross-biters, as prey upon men,
like ravens upon dead carcasses, I end with this prayer, that cross-
biting and cony-catching may be as little known in England, as the
eating of swine's flesh was amongst the Jews. Farewell.
Nascimur pro patria.
FINIS.


A Pleasant Discovery of the cozenage of Colliers.
     ALTHOUGH (courteous Readers) I did not put in amongst the laws
of cozening, the law of legering, which is a deceit wherewith
colliers abuse the commonwealth, in having unlawful sacks, yet take
it for a petty kind of craft or mystery, as prejudicial to the poor,
as any of the other two, for I omitted divers other devilish vices;
as the nature of the lift, the black art, & the curbing law, which
is the filchers and thieves that come into houses or shops, & lift
away anything: or picklocks, or hookers at windows, though they be
as species and branches to the table before rehearsed. But leaving
them, again to our law of legering. Know therefore, that there be
inhabiting in & about London, certain caterpillars (colliers I
should say) that term themselves (among themselves) by the name of
legers who for that the honourable the L. Mayor of the city of
London, & his officers, look strictly to the measuring of coals, do
(to prevent the execution of his justice,) plant themselves in &
about the suburbs of London, as Shoreditch, Whitechapel, Southwark,
& such places, and there they have a house or yard, that hath a back
gate, because it is the more convenient for their cozening purpose,
and the reason is this; the leger, the crafty collier I mean, riseth
very early in the morning, and either goeth towards Croydon,
Whetstone, Greenwich, or Romford, and there meeteth the country
colliers, who bring coals to serve the market: there, in a
forestalling manner, this leger bargainth with the country collier
for his coals, and payeth for them nineteen shillings or twenty at
the most, but commonly fifteen and sixteen, and there is in the load
36 sacks: so that they pay for every couple about fourteen pence.
Now having bought his coals, every sack containing full four
bushels, he carrieth the country collier home to his legering place,
and there at the back gate causeth him to unload, and as they say,
shoot the coals down. As soon as the country collier hath dispatched
and is gone, then the leger who hath three or four hired men under
him, bringeth forth his own sacks, which be long & narow, holding at
the most not three bushels, so that they gain in the change of every
sack a bushel for their pains. Tush, yet this were somewhat to be
borne withal, although the gain is monstrous, but this sufficeth
not, for they fill not these sacks full by far, but put into them
some two bushels & a half, laying in the mouth of the sack certain
great coals, which they call fillers, to make the sack show fair,
although the rest be small wilow coals, and half dross. When they
have thus not filled their sacks, but thrust coals into them, that
which they lay uppermost, is best filled, to make the greater show:
then a tall sturdy knave, that is all ragged, and dirty on his legs,
as though he came out of the country (for they dirty their hose and
shoes on purpose to make themselves seem country colliers:) Thus
with two sacks apiece they either go out at the back gate, or steal
out at the street side, and so go up and down the suburbs, & sell
their coals in summer for fourteen and sixteen-pence a couple, and
in winter for eighteen or twenty. The poor cooks & other citizens
that buy them, think they be country colliers, that have left some
coals of their load, and would gladly have money, supposing (as the
statute is) they be good and lawful sacks, are thus cozened by the
legers, & have but two bushels and a half for four bushels, and yet
are extremely racked in the price, which is not only a great
hindrance to her Majesty's poor comons, but greatly prejudicial to
the master colliers, that bring true sacks & measure out of the
country. Then consider (gentle readers) what kind of cozenage these
legers use, that make of thirty sacks some 56, which I have seen,
for I have set down with my pen how many turns they have made of a
load, and they make 28, every turn being two sacks, so that they
have got an intolerable gains by their false measure. I could not be
silent seeing this abuse, but thought to reveal it for my country's 
commodity, and to give light to the worshipful justices, and other
her Majesty's officers in Middlesex, Surrey, and elswhere, to look
to such a gross cozenage, as contrary to a direct statute, doth
defraud & impoverish her Majesty's poor commons. Well may the
honourable and worshipful of London flourish, who carefuly look to
the country coals, & if they find not 4 bushels in every sack, do
sell them to the poor as forfeit, & distribute the money to them
that have need, burning the sack, & honouring or rather dishonouring
the pillory with the colliers' dirty faces: & well may the
honourable & worshipful of the suburbs prosper, if they look in
justice to these legers who deserve more punishment than the statute
appoints for them, which is whipping at a cart's tail, or with
favour the pillory.
A Plain Discovery.
     For fuel or firing being a thing necessary in a commonwealth,
and charcoal used more then any other, the poor not able to buy by
the load, are fain to get in their fire by the sack, & so are
greatly cozened by the retail. Seeing therefore the careful laws her
Majesty hath appointed for the wealth of her commons, and succour of
the poor, I would humbly entreat all her Majesty's officers, to look
into the life of these legers, and to root them out, that the poor
feel not the burden of their unconscionable gains. I heard with my
ears a poor woman of Shoreditch who had bought coals of a leger,
with weeping tears complain and rail against him in the street, in 
her rough eloquence calling him cozening knave, & saying, 'tis no
marvel, villain (quoth she) if men compare you colliers to the
devil, seeing your consciences are worser then the devil's, for he
takes none but those souls whom God hates: and you undo the poor
whom God loves.
     What is the matter good wife (quoth I) that you use such
invective words against the collier: a collier sir, (saith she) he
is a thief and a robber of the common people. I'll tell you sir, I
bought of a country collier two sacks for thirteen-pence & I bought
of this knave three sacks, which cost me 22 pence: and sir, when I
measured both their sacks, I had more in the two sacks by three
pecks, then I had in the three. I would (quoth she) the Justices
would look into this abuse, and that my neighbours would join with
me in a supplication, and by God I would kneel before the Queen, and
entreat that such cozening colliers might not only be punished with
the bare pillory, (for they have such black faces, that no man knows
them again, and so are they careless) but that they might leave
their ears behind them for a forfeit: & if that would not mend them,
that Bull<22> with a fair halter might root them out of the world,
that live in the world by such gross and dishonest cozenage. The
collier hearing this, went smiling away, because he knew his life
was not looked into, & the woman wept for anger that she had not
some one by that might with justice revenge her quarrel. There be
also certain colliers that bring coals to London in barges, and they
be called Gripers, to these comes the leger, & bargains with him for
his coals, & sells by retail with the like cozenage of sacks as I
rehearsed before. But these mad legers (not content with this
monstrous gain) do besides mix among their other sacks of coals,
store of shruff dust and small coal, to their great advantage. And
for proof hereof, I will recite you a matter of truth, lately
performed by a cook's wife upon a cozening collier.
How a Cook's wife in London did lately serve a Collier for his
cozenage.
     IT chanced this summer that a load of coals came forth of Kent
to Billingsgate, and a leger bought them, who thinking to deceive
the citizens, as he did those in the suburbs, furnished himself with
a couple of sacks, and comes up Saint Mary Hill to sell them: a
cook's wife bargained with the collier and bought his coals, and
they agreed upon fourteen pence for the couple: which being done, he
carried the coals into the house, and shot them: and when the wife
saw them, and perceiving there was scarce five bushels for eight,
she calls a little girl to her, and bade her go for the Constable:
for thou cozening rogue, quoth she, (speaking to the collier) I will
teach thee how thou shalt cozen me with thy false sacks, whatsoever
thou doest to others, and I will have thee before my Lord Mayor:
with that she caught a spit in her hand, and swore if he offered to
stir, she would therewith broach him; at which words the Collier was
amazed, and the fear of the pillory put him in such a fright, that
he said he would go to his boat, & return again to answer whatsoever
she durst object against him, and for pledge hereof (quoth the
collier) keep my sacks, your money, and the coals also. Whereupon
the woman let him go, but as soon as the collier was out of doors,
it was needless to bid him run, for down he gets to his boat, & away
he thrusts from Billingsgate, and so immediately went down to
Wapping, and never after durst return to the cook's wife to demand
either money, sacks or coals.
How a Flax-wife and her neighbours used a cozening Collier.
     NOW gentlemen by your leave, and hear a mery jest: There was in
the suburbes of London a flax-wife that wanted coals, and seeing a
leger come by with a couple of sacks, that had before deceived her
in like sort, cheapened, bargained & bought them, & so went in with
her to shoot them in her coalhouse. As soon as she saw her coals she
easily guessed there was scarce six bushels, yet dissembling the
matter, she paid him for them, and bade him bring her two sacks
more: the collier went his way, & in the meantime the flax-wife
measured the coals, and there was just five bushels and a peck.
Hereupon she called to her neighbours; being a company of women,
that before time had also been pinched in their coals, and showed
them the cozenage, & desired their aid to her in tormenting the
collier, which they promised to perform, & thus it fell out. She
conveyed them into a back room (some sixteen of them) every one
having a good cudgel under her apron; straight comes the collier,
and saith, Mistress, here be your coals: welcome good collier, quoth
she, I pray thee follow me into the back side, & shoot them in an
other room. The collier was content, and went with her. but as soon
as he was in, the good wife locked the door, and the Collier seeing
such a troupe of wives in the room, was amazed, yet said God speed
you all shrews, welcome quoth one jolly dame, being appointed by
them all to give sentence against him: who so soon as the collier
had shot his sacks, said, Sirrah collier, know that we are here all
assembled as a Grand Jury, to determine of thy villainies, for
selling us false sacks of coals, & know that thou art here indited
upon cozenage, therefore hold up thy hand at the bar, & either say,
guilty, or not guilty, and by whom thou wilt be tried, for thou must
receive condign punishment for the same ere thou depart. The collier
who thought they had but jested, smiled & said Come on, which of you
shall be my judge? Marry, quoth one jolly dame, that is I, and by
God you knave, you shall find I will pronounce sentence against you
severely, if you be found guilty. When the collier saw they were in
earnest, he said, Come, come, open the door, and let me go: with
that five or six started up, and fell upon the collier, and gave
unto him half a score of sound lambacks with their cudgels, and bade
him speak more reverently to their principal.
     The collier feeling it smart, was afraid, & thought mirth &
courtesy would be the best mean to make amends for his villainy, and
therefore said he would be tried by the verdict of the smock. Upon
this they panelled a jury, and the flax-wife gave evidence; and
because this unaccustomed jury requir'd witness, she measured the
coals before the collier's face, upon which he was found guilty, &
she that sat as principal to give judgement upon him, began as
followeth.
     Collier, thou art condemned here by proof, of flat cozenage,
and I am now appointed in conscience to give sentence against thee,
being not only moved thereunto because of this poor woman, but also
for the general commodity of my country, and therefore this is my
sentence: we have no pillory for thee, nor cart to whip thee at, but
here I do award that thou shall have as many bastinadoes as thy
bones will bear, and then to be turned out of doors without sacks or
money. This sentence being pronounced, she rose up, and gave no
respite of time for the execution, but according to the sentence
before expressed, all the women fell upon him, beating him
extremely, among whom he lent some lusty buffets. But might
overcomes right, and therefore Ne Hercules contra duos.<23> The
women so crushed him, that he was not able to lift his hands to his
head, and so with a broken pate or two, he was paid, & like Jack
Drum<24>, fair and orderly thrust out of doors.
     This was the reward that the collier had, and I pray God all
such colliers may be so served, and that good wives when they buy
such sacks, may give them such payments, and that the honourable and
worshipful of this land, may look into this gross abuse of colliers,
as well for charity sake, as also for the benefit of the poor: and
so wishing colliers to amend their deceitful and disordered dealings
herein, I end.
FINIS


THE SECOND PART OF CONY-CATCHING.


Title Page

The
SECOND
Part of Conny-Catching
Contayning the discovery of certaine wondrous
Coosenages, either superficiallie passed ouer, or
vtterly vntoucht in the first.
As the nature of
(The black Art
(The Vincent's Law
(The Prigging Law
(The Courbing Law
(The Lifting Law
(The Foist
(The Nip
(Picking of locks.
(Cozenage at Bowls.
(Horse stealing.
(Hooking at windows.
(Stealing of parcels
(The pickpocket.
(The cut purse.

With sundrie pithy and pleasant Tales worthy the reading of all e-
states, that are ennemies to such base and dishonest practises.
Mallem non esse quam non prodesse patriae.<25>
R. G.
LONDON.
Printed by Iohn Wolfe for William Wright, and
are to be sold at his shop in Pauls Church
yard, near to the French schoole.
1591.


The Epistle Dedicatory

TO ALL YOUNG GENTLEMEN, merchants, citizens, apprentices, yeomen,
and plain country farmers, Health.
     When Scaevola, gentlemen, saw his native city besieged by
Porsena, and that Rome the mistress of the world was ready to be
mastered by a professed foe to the public estate: he entered boldly
into the enemy's camp, and in the tent of the king (taking him for
the king) slew the king's secretary, whereupon condemned, brought to
the fire, he thrust his right hand into the flame burning it off
voluntary, because it was so unfortunate to miss the fatal stab he
had intended to his couuntry's enemies, and then with an honourable
resolution, breathed out this, Mallum non esse quam non prodesse
patriae.<25>. This instance of Scaevola greatly hath emboldened me
to think no pains nor danger too great that groweth to the benefit
of my country, & though I cannot as he manage with my cutlass, nor
attempt to unleaguer Porsena: yet with my pen I will endevour to
display the nature and secrets of divers cozenages more prejudicial
to England then the invasion of Porsena was to Rome. For when that
valiant king saw the resolution of Scaevola: as one dismayed at the
honour of his thoughts, he sorrowed so brave a man had so
desperately lost his hand, and thereupon grew friends with the
Romans. But gentlemen these cony-catchers, these vultures, these
fatal harpies, that putrefy with their infections, this flourishing
estate of England, as if they had their consciences sealed with a
hot iron, & that as men delivered up into a reprobate sense, grace
were utterly exiled from their hearts, so with the deaf adder they
not only stop their ears against the voice of the charmer, but
dissolutely without any spark of remorse stand upon their bravados,
and openly in words & actions maintain their palpable and manifest
cozenages, swearing by no less then their enemies' blood, even by
God himself, that they will make a massacre of his bones, and cut
off my right hand for penning down their abominable practices: but
alas for them, poor snakes, words are wind, & looks but glances:
every thunderclap hath not a bolt, nor every cony-catcher's oath an
execution. I live still, & I live to display their villainies,
which, gentlemen you shall see set down in most ample maner in this
small treatise, but here by the way, give me leave to answer an
objection, that some inferred against me, which was, that I showed
no eloquent phrases, nor fine figurative conveiance in my first book
as I had done in other of my works, to which I reply that ?? ??????
[to prepon]<26>, a certain decorum is to be kept in every thing, and
not to apply a high style in a base subject: beside the faculty is
so odious, and the men so servile and slavish minded, that I should
dishonour that high mystery of eloquence, and derogate from the
dignity of our English tongue, either to employ any figure or bestow
one choice English word upon such disdained rakehells as those cony-
catchers. Therefore humbly I crave pardon, and desire I may write
basely of such base wretches, who live only to live dishonestly. For
they seek the spoil and ruin of all, and like drones eat away what
others labour for. I have set down divers other laws untouched in
the first, as their Vincent's law, a notable cozenage at bowls, when
certain idle companions stand and make bets, being compacted with
the bowlers, who look like honest minded citizens, either to win or
lose, as their watch-word shall appoint, then the Prigger or Horse-
stealer, with all his gins belonging to his trade, and their subtle
cautels to amend the statute, next the curbing law, which some call
but too basely hookers, who either dive in at windows, or else with
a hook, which they call a courb, do fetch out whatsoever, either
apparel, linen, or wollen, that be left abroad. Beside I can set
down the subtlety of the black Art, which is picking of locks, a
cozenage as prejudicial as any of the rest, and the nature of the
lift, which is he that stealeth any parcels, and slyly taketh them
away. This (gentlemen) have I searched out for your commodities,
that I might lay open to the world, the villainy of these cozening
caterpillars, who are not only abhorred of men, but hated of God,
living idly to themselves, & odiously to the world, they be those
foolish children that Solomon speaks of, that feeds themselves fat
with iniquity, those untamed heifers, that will not break the yoke
of labour, but get their livings by the painful thrift of other
men's hands. I cannot better compare them, than unto vipers, who
while they live are hated & shunned of all men as most prejudicial
creatures, they feed upon hemlock and aconiton, and such fatal &
empoisoned herbs, but the learned apothecaries takes them, cuts off
their heads, and after they be embowelled of their flesh, they make
the most precious mithridate: so these cony-catchers, foists, nips,
priggers, & lifts, while they live are most improfitable members of
the commonwealth: they glut themselves as vipers upon the most
loathsome, and detestable sins, seeking after folly with greediness,
never doing anything that is good, till they be trussed up at
Tyburn: and then is a most wholesome mithridate made of them, for by
their deaths others are forewarned for falling into the like
enormities. And as the gangrene is a disease incurable by the
censure of the surgeons, unless the member where it is first be cut
off: so this untoward generation of loose libertines, can by no
wholesome counsels, nor advised persuasions be dissuaded from their
loathsome kind of life, till by death they be fatally, and finally
cut off from the commonwealth, whereof spake Ovid well in his
Metamorphosis.
Immedicabile vulnus,
Ense resecandum est ne pars sincera trahitur.<27>
     Sith then this cursed crew, these Machavellians, that neither
care for God nor devil, but set with the Epicures, gain and ease
their summum bonum<28> cannot be called to any honest course of
living: if the honourable and worshipful of this land look into
their lives, and cut off such upstarting suckers that consume the
sap from the root of the tree: they shall neither lose their reward
in heaven, nor pass over any day wherein there will not be many
faithful prayers of the poor, exhibited for their prosperous success
and welfare: so deeply are these monstrous cozeners hated in the
commonwealth. Thus gentlemen I have discovered in brief, what I mean
to prosecute at large: though not eloquently, yet so effectually,
that if you be not altogether careless, it may redound to your
commodity: forewarned, forearmed: burnt children dread the fire, and
such as neither counsel, nor other men's harms may make to beware,
are worthy to live long, and still by the loss. But hoping these
secrets I have set abroach, and my labours I have taken in searching
out those base villainies, shall not be only taken with thanks, but
applied with care: I take my leave with this farewell. God either
confound, or convert such base minded cozeners.
Yours R. G.


The Discovery of the Prigging Law or Nature of Horse Stealing.

Illustration – The Horse Thief
     TO the effecting of this base villainy of Prigging or horse
stealing, there must of necessity be two at the least, and that is
the Prigger and the Marter. The prigger is he that steals the horse,
and the marter is he that receives him, and chops and changeth him
away in any fair, mart, or other place where any good vent for
horses is: and their method is thus.
     The prigger if he be a lanceman, that is, one that is already
horsed, then he hath more followers with him, and they ride like
gentlemen, and commonly in the form of drovers, & so coming into
pasture grounds or enclosures, as if they meant to survey for
cattle, do take an especial and perfect view where prankers or
horses be, that are of worth, and whether they be trammelled or no,
that is whether they have horse-locks or no, then lie they hovering
about till fit oportunity serve, and in the night they take him or
them away, and are skilful in the black art, for picking open the
trammels or locks, and so make haste till they be out of those
quarters. Now if the priggers steal a horse in Yorkshire, commonly
they have vent for him in Surrey, Kent, or Sussex, and their marters
that receive them at his hand, chops them away in some blind fairs
after they have kept them a month or two, till the hue and cry be
ceased and passed over. Now if their horse be of any great valure
and sore sought after, and so branded or ear marked, that they can
hardly sell him without extreme danger, either they brand him with a
cross brand upon the former, or take away his ear mark, and so keep
him at hard meat<29> till he be whole, or else sell him in Cornwall
or Wales, if he be in Cumberland, Lincolnshire, Norfolk or Suffolk,
but this is if the horse be of great valour and worthy the keeping:
Marry if he be only coloured and without brands, they will straight
spot him by sundry policies, and in a black horse, mark saddle
spots, or star him in the forehead and change his tail, which
secrets I omit least I should give too great a light to other to
practice such lewd villainies. But again to our lance-men priggers,
who as before I said, cry with the lapwing farthest from their nest
and from their place of residence, where their most abode is,
furthest from thence they steal their horses, and then in another
quarter as far off they make sale of them by the marter's means,
without it be some base prigger that steals of mere necessity, and
beside is a Trailer. The trailer is one that goeth on foot, but
meanly attired like some plain gran of the country, walking in a
pair of boots without spurs, or else without boots, having a long
staff on his neck, and a black buckram bag at his back, like some
poor client that had some writing in it, and there he hath his
saddle, bridle and spurs, stirrups and stirrup leathers, so quaintly
and artificially made that it may be put in the slop of a man's
hose<30>, for his saddle is made without any tree, yet hath both
cantle & bolsters, only wrought artificially of cloth and bombast,
with folds to wrap up in a short room, his stirrups are made with
devices and gins that one may put them in a pair of gloves, and so
are his spurs, and then a little white leather headstall and reins
with a small Scottish brake or snaffle, all so featly formed, that
as I said before they may be put in a buckram bag. Now this trailer
he bestrides the horse which he priggeth, and saddles and bridles
him as orderly as if he were his own, and then carries him far from
the place of his breed, and there sells him. Oh will some man say,
it is easier to steal a horse then to sell him, considering that her
Majesty and the honourable Privy Council, hath in the last Act of
Parliament made a strict statute for horse stealing, and the sale of
horses, whose proviso is this: That no man may buy a horse untolled,
nor the toll be taken without lawful witnesses, that the party that
selleth the horse is the true owner of him, upon their oath and
special knowledge, and that who buyeth a horse without this
certificate or proof, shall be within the natue of Felony, as well
as the party that stealeth him.<31> To this I answer that there is
no Act, Statute, nor Law so strict conveyed, but there be straight
found starting-holes to avoid it, as in this. The prigger when he
hath stolen a horse and hath agreed with his marter, or with any
other his confederate, or with any honest person to sell the horse,
bringeth to the toller, which they call the rifler, two honest men
either apparelled like citizens, or plain country yeomen, and they
not only affirm, but offer to depose, that they know the horse to be
his, upon their proper knowledge, although perhaps they never saw
man nor horse before, and these perjured knaves be commonly old
knights of the post,<32> that are foisted off from being taken for
bail at the kings bench, or other places, and seeing for open
perjuries they are refused, there they take that course of life, and
are wrongly called equerries, but it were necessary and very much
expedient for the commonwealth, that such base rogues should be
looked into, and be punished as well with the pillory, as the other
with the halter. And thus have I revealed the nature of priggers, or
horse-stealers briefly, which if it may profit, I have my desire,
but that I may recreate your minds with a pleasant history, mark the
sequel.
A pleasant story of a horse-stealer.
     NOT far off from Truro in Cornwall, a certain prigger, a horse-
stealer, being a lance-man, surveying the pastures thereaboutes,
spied a fair black horse without any white spot at all about him,
the horse was so fair and lusty, well proportioned, of a high crest,
of a lusty countenance, well buttocked, and strongly trussed, which
set the prigger's teeth a-water to have him: well he knew the
hardest hap was but a halter, and therefore he ventured fair, and
stole away the prancer: and seeing his stomach was so good as his
limbs, he kept him well, and by his policy seared him in the
forehead, and made him spotted in the back, as if he had been
saddle-bitten, and gave him a mark in both ears, whereas he had but
a mark in one. Dealing thus with his horse, after a quarter of a
year, that all hurly-burly was passed for the horse, he came riding
to Truro to the market, and there offered him to be sold, the
gentleman that lost the horse, was there present, and looking on him
with other gentlemen, liked him passing well, and commended him:
insomuch that he beat the price of him, bargained, & bought him: and
so when he was tolled, and that the horse-stealer clapped him good
luck: Well my friend, quoth the gentleman, I promise thee I like the
horse the better, in that once I lost one as like him as might be,
but that mine wanted these saddle spots, and this starre in the
forehead. It may be so sir, said the prigger, and so the gentleman
and he parted: the next day after, he caused a letter to be made,
and sent the gentleman word that he had his horse again that he
lost, only he had given him a mark or two, and for that he was well
rewarded, having twenty mark for his labour. The gentleman hearing
how he was cozened by a horse-stealer, and not only robbed, but
mocked, let it pass till he might conveniently meet with him to
revenge it. It fortuned not long after, that this lanceman prigger
was brought to Truro gaol for some such matter, and indeed it was
about a mare that he had stolen: but as knaves have friends,
especially when they are well moneyed, he found divers that spake
for him, and who said it was the first fault: and the party
plaintiff gave but slender evidence against him, so that the judge
spake favourably in his behalf: the gentleman as then sat in the
bench, and callling to mind the prigger's countenance, how he had
stolen his horse and mocked him, remembered he had the letter in his
pocket that he sent him, and therefore rising up, spake in his
behalf, and highly commended the man, and desired the judges for one
fault he might not be cast away, and besides, may it please you
(quoth he) I had this morning a certificate of his honesty and good
behaviour sent me, and with that he delivered them the letter, and
the judge and the rest of the bench smiled at this conceit, and
asked the fellow if he never stole a horse from that gentleman: no
quoth the prigger, I knew him not: your honours mistake me, said the
gentleman, he did but borrow a black horse of me, and marked him
with a star in the forehead, and asked twenty mark of me for his
labour, and so discoursed the whole matter: whereupon the quest went
upon him, and condemned him: and so the prigger went to heaven in a
string, as many of his faculty had done before.


The Vincents Law, with the Discovery therof.
     THE Vincents Law is a common deceit or cozenage used in
bowling-alleys amongst the baser sort of people, that commonly haunt
such lewd and unlawful places: for although I will not discommend
altogether the nature of bowling, if the time, place, persons, and
such necessary circumstances be observed: yet as it is now used,
practised & suffered, it groweth altogether to the maintenance of
unthrifts that idly and disorderly make that recreation a cozenage.
Now the manner and form of their device is thus effected: the
Baulkers, for so are the common haunters of the alley termed, 
apparelled like very honest and substantial citizens come to bowl,
as though rather they did it for sport than gains, & under that
colour of carelessness, do shadow their pretended knavery: well to
bowls they go, and then there resort of all sorts of people to
behold them, some simple men brought in of purpose by some cozening
companions to be stripped of their crowns, others, gentlemen or
merchants, that delighted with the sport, stand there as beholders
to pass away the time: amongst these are certain old soakers, which
are lookers on, and listen for bets either even or odd, and these
are called Gripes: and these fellows will refuse no lay if the odds
may grow to their advantage, for the gripes and the baulkers are
confederate, and their fortune at play ever sorts according as the
gripes have placed their bets, for the baulker he marketh how the
lays goes, and so throws his casting: so that note this, the bowlers
cast ever booty, and doth win or lose as the bet of the gripe doth
lead them, for suppose seven be up for the game, and the one hath
three and the other none, then the Vincent, for that is the simple
man that stands by & is not acquainted with their cozenage, nor doth
so much as once imagine that the baulkers that carry such a
countenance of honest substantial men, would by any means, or for
any gains be persuaded to play booty. Well this vincent, for so the
cozeners or gripes please to term him, seeing three to none,
beginneth to offer odds on that side that is fairest to win: what
odds, says the gripe? three to one, says the vincent, no says the
gripe it is more, and with that they come to four for none, then the
vincent offers to lay four to one, I take six to one says the gripe,
I lay it says the vincent, and so they make a bet of some six
crowns, shillings, or pence as the vincent is of ability to lay, &
thus will sundry take their odds of him: well then, the baulkers go
forward with their bowls, and win another cast which is five, then
the vincent grows proud, & thinks both by the odds and goodness of
the play, that it is impossible for his side to lose, and therefore
takes and lays bets freely, then the baulkers' fortune begin to
change, and perhaps they come to three for five, and still as their
luck changes, diversity of bets grows on, till at last it comes to
five and five, and then the Gripe comes upon the vincent and offers
him odds, which if the vincent take he looseth all, for upon what
side the Gripe lays, that side ever wins how great soever the odds
be at the first in the contrary part, so that the cozenage grows in
playing booty, for the gripe and the baulker meet at night, & there
they share whatsoever termage they have gotten, for so they call the
money that the poor vincent loseth unto them: Now to shadow the
matter the more, the baulker that wins and is afore-hand with the
game will lay frankly that he shall win, and will bet hard and lay
great odds, but with whom, either with them which play with him that
are as crafty knaves as himself, or else with the gripe, and this
makes the poor vincent stoop to the blow, and to lose all the money
in his purse: Besides, if any honest men that holds themselves
skilful in bowling, offer to play any set match against these common
baulkers, if they fear to have the worse or suspect the other's play
to be better then theirs, then they have a trick in watering of the
alley to give such a moisture to the bank, that he that offers to
strike a bowl with a shore, shall never hit it whilst he lives,
because the moisture of the bank hinders the proportion of his
aiming. Divers other practices there are in bowling tending unto
cozenage, but the greatest is booty, and therefore would I wish all
men that are careful of their coin, to beware of such cozeners, and
not to come in such places, where a haunt of such hell-rakers are
resident, & not in any wise to stoop to their bets, least he be made
a vincent, for so manifest and palpable is their cozenage, that I
have seen men stone-blind offer to lay bets frankly, although they
can see a bowl come no more then a post, but only hearing who plays,
and how the old gripes make their lays: seeing then as the game is
abused to a deceit, that is made for an honest recreation, let this
litle be a caveat for men to have an insight into their knavery.


A Table of the Laws contained in this second part.

1 Black Art.
Picking of locks.
2 Courbing Law.
Hooking at windows.
3 Vincents Law.
Cozenage at Bowls.
4 Prigging Law.
Horse stealing.
5 Lifting Law.
Stealing of any parcels.
The discovery of the words of Art used in these Laws.
In black Art.
*	The Picklock, is called a Charm.
*	He that watcheth, a Stond.
*	Their engines, Wresters.
*	Picking the lock, Farsing.
*	The gains gotten, Pelfrey.
In courbing Law.
*	He that hooks, the Courber.
*	He that watcheth, the Warp.
*	The hook, the Courb.
*	The goods, Snappings .
*	The gin to open the window, the Trickar.
In lifting Law.
*	He that first stealeth, the Lift.
*	He that receives it, the Marker.
*	He that standeth without and carries it away, the Santer.
*	The goods gotten, Garbage.
In Vincent's Law.
*	They which play booty, the Bankers.
*	He that betteth, the Gripe.
*	He that is cozened, the Vincent.
*	Gains gotten, Termage.
In Prigging Law.
*	The horse stealer, the Prigger.
*	The horse, the Prancer.
*	The tolling place, All-hallows.
*	The toller, the Rifler.
*	The sureties, Querris.
For the Foist and the Nip, as in the first Book.


The Second Part of Cony-Catching.
     THE professors of this law, being somewhat dashed, and their
trade greatly impoverished by the late editions of their secret
villainies, seek not a new means of life, but a new method how to
fetch in their conies and to play their pranks: for as grievous is
it for them to let slip a country farmer come to the term that is
well apparelled, and in a dirty pair of boots (for that is a token
of his new coming up, and a full purse) as it was for the boys of
Athens to let Diogenes pass by without a hiss. But the countrymen
having had partly a caveat for their cozenage, fear their favourable
speeches and their courteous salutations, as deadly as the Greeks
did the whistle of Polyphemus<12>. The cony-catcher now no sooner
cometh in company, and calleth for a pair of cards, but straight the
poor cony smokes him, and says: masters, I bought a book of late for
a groat that warns me of card-play, least I fall amongst cony-
catchers: What, doest thou take us for such, says the verser? no
gentlemen says the cony, you may be men of honest disposition, but
yet pardon me, I have forsworn cards ever since I read it: at this
reply God wot, I have many a cozening curse at these cony-catchers'
hands, but I solemnly stick to the old proverb: the fox the more he
is cursed, the better he fares: but yet I will discover some of
their newest devices, for these caterpillars resemble the nature of
the Syrens, who sitting with their watching eyes upon the rocks to
allure sea-passengers to their extreme prejudice, sound out most
heavenly melody in such pleasing chords, that who so listens to
their harmony, lends his ear unto his own bane and ruin: but if any
wary Ulysses pass by and stop his ears against their enchauntments,
then have they most delightful jewels to show him, as glorious
objects to inveigle his eye with such pleasant vanities, that coming
more nigh to behold them, they may dash their ship against a rock
and so utterly perish. So these cony-catchers, for that I smoked
them in my last book, and laid open their plots and policies, where
with they drew poor conies into their lay, seeking with the orators
benevolentiam captare<33>, and as they use rhetorical tropes and
figures, the better to draw their hearers with the delight of
variety: so these moths of the commonwealth, apply their wits to
wrap in wealthy farmers with strange and uncouth conceits. Tush, it
was so easy for the setter to take up a cony before I discovered the
cozenage that one stigmatical shameless companion amongst the rest,
would in a bravery wear parsley in his hat, and said he wanted but
aqua vitae to take a cony with but since he hath looked on his feet,
and veiled his plumes with the Peacock, and swears by all the shoes
in his shop, I shall be the next man he means to kill, for spoiling
of his occupation: but I laugh at his bravadoes, and though he
speaks with his eunuch's voice, and wears a long sword like a
morris-pike, were it not I think he would with Bathyllus<34> hang
himself at my invective, his name should be set down with the nature
of his follies: but let him call himself home from this course of
life and this cozenage, and I shall be content to shadow what he is
with pardon, but fron this degression again to the double diligence
of these cony-catchers, whose new sleights, because you shall the
more easily perceive, I will tell you a story pleasant and worth the
noting.
A pleasant tale of the cony-chatchers.
     Not long since, certain Exeter merchants came up to London to
traffic such wares as their city commodities affords, & one of them
whose name I conceal, called Master F., having leisure at will,
walked about the city to visit his friends, and by chance met with
two or three cony-catchers: amongst whom was one of his old and
familiar acquaintance. This gentleman at that time taking the
setter's office upon him seeing such a fat cony so fit for his
purpose began to pitch his lay with this courteous and clawing
gratulation. What, Master F., (quoth he) welcome to London, and well
are you met; I see time may draw friends together, little did I
think to have seen you here, but sith oportunity hath granted me
such a favour to meet with such an unlooked-for man, we'll at the
next tavern drink a pint of wine together, to your welcome, and the
health of our friends. The merchant hearing the gentleman ply him
with such plausible entertainment, stooped as a poor cony, and
granted to take his courtesy, and with them went the verser, a lusty
fellow, well apparelled, and as smooth tongued as if every word came
out of an orator's inkhorn: this jolly squire that played the
verser, when he came at the tavern door, would needs drop away, and
offered to be gone: but the setter said to him, nay I pray you sir
stay, and drink with this friend of mine, for I have not a more
familiar acquaintance in Exeter: The merchant simply also entreated
him, and with few words he was satisfied, and as three of them went
in together, and asked for a room, the boy showed them up into a
chamber, and as soon as they came to, the verser, having a pair of
cards in his pocket, for they thought it too suspicious to call for
a pair, stepped to the window, and clapped his hand on the ledge,
and laughed, gog's wounds (quoth he) a man can neither come into
tavern, nor Alehouse, but he shall find a pair of cards in the
window: Here hath been some praying, and have left their books
behind them. Boy (quoth he) throw me a couple of faggots on the
fire, and set a pottle of sack too, and burn it, and sir he says to
the setter, thou and I will play at cards who shall pay for it.
Content says the setter, so you will play at a game that I can play
at, which is called mum-chance. I know it well, says the verser:
have with you for a pottle of burnt sack, and so to it they go, as
before in my first part I describe it unto you: the poor merchant
the simple honest cony, calling the card: well the verser lost, and
at last they reveal the policy to the cony, who wondered at the
strange device, and solemnly swore it was impossible for him either
to lose, or the other to win: As thus they sat drinking the setter
showed him divers tricks at Cards, to pass away the time, because
their barnacle stayed over long, who at last, attired like a
serving-man, came and thrust open the door, and said, masters by
your leave, I look for a greyhound that hath broken my slip, & is
run into this house. In faith friend, quoth the setter, here is
none, nor did we see any: Then by your leave gentlemen (quoth he)
and sit you merry, I had rather have given forty shillings then have
lost the dog: Nay stay sir (quoth the verser) and drink a cup of
sack with us: at that the Barnacle came in, and courteously took it
of them, and made sore lament for his dog, saying, he durst scarce
look his master in the face: but I hope (quoth he) he is run to the
farmer's house, where he was brought up, and therefore I'll seek him
nowhere to day, with that he called for a pint of wine, to requite
their courtesies withal, and the verser answered that they would
take none of him as a gift, but if he would play for a pint or a
quart he should be welcome into their company: at this he sat down,
and said he would, then they induced him to play at mum-chance, and
the cony called the card, so the barnacle lost all, who being in a
great chafe, cursed his luck, and the cards, and offered to play
three games, xii. pence: the setter took him up, and secretly asked
the cony if he would be his half, or play with him himself. In
faith, says the merchant, I dare play with him, as long as five
shillings last, and so much I will venture: with that the barnacle
drew out a purse with some three or four pence in it, and to this
game they go, with vie and revie<6> till the barnacle had lost all
his money, then he blasphemed the name of God mightily, and laid his
sword and his cloak to pawn to the good man of the house, and
borrowed money of it, to the value of some xx. shillings . The cony
smiled at this for he counted all his own, & winked upon the verser,
and the setter, again they go to it, and they make five games for
ten shillings, and every card to be vied at the losers pleasure, the
cony won three of them, and the barnacle never a one: then he
exclaimed against fortune, and swore he would make short work, and
of a ring he borrowed thirty shillings more, and vied hard: well
that game he won, and got some twenty shillings of the cony, who
thought it was but a chance, that could not hit in seven years
again, and the next game they vied, and layed some five pound by on
the belt, so that the vie and call, came to some seven pound, then
the barnacle stroke in his chopped card, and wipe the cony's mouth
clean for troubling his purse, with any of those crowns, yea he so
handled the poor merchant, that of nine pound he had in his purse,
these three base cony-catchers left him never a penny, although he
was sore nipped on the head, with this hard fortune, yet he brooked
it with patience, and litle suspected that his countryman the setter
had sifted him out of his money, and therefore drunk to him
friendly, and took his leave without smoking them at all, and went
quiet though discontent to his lodging. The cony-catchers they
shared the purchase, and went singing home as winners do that have
leave and leisure to laugh at the spoil of such wealthy and honest
merchants.
     Not long after this, the cony chanced to come to my chamber to
visit me for old acquaintance, where he found a book of cony-
catching new come out of the press which when he had smiled at, for
the strangeness of the title: at last he began to read it, and there
saw how simply he was made a cony, and stripped of his crowns: with
that he fetched a great sigh, and said: sir, if I had seen this book
but two days since, it had saved me nine pound in my purse, and then
he rehearsed the whole discourse, how kindly he was made a cony.
Thus you may see that these base cony-catchers spare not their own
acquaintance nor familiar friends: but like vultures seek to prey
upon them, and like the harpy, infects that house wherein they
harbour: so odious is their base and detestable kind of cozenage,
that the very nips, the cutpurses I mean, desire to smoke them, and
have them in as great contempt, as they themselves are despised of
others: holding the cony-catcher for their inferior: for, say the
nips, I disdaine to use my occupation against any friend, or so draw
a purse from him that I am familiarly acquainted with: whereas the
cony-catcher preyeth most upon his countrymen and friends, and at
the first hand comes with a smiling face to embrace that man, whom
presently he means to spoil and cozen. Again, the nip useth his
knife, and if he see a bung lie fair, strikes the stroke, and
ventures his neck for it if he be taken, which is a certain point
(say they) of resolution, though in the basest degree: but the cony-
catcher, like a coward keeps himself within compass of law, as the
picture of a faint-hearted cozener: like a fawning cur wags his tail
upon him he means most deadly to bite. Then let this be a caveat for
all men, and all degrees to take heed of such prejudicial peasants:
who like worms in a nut eat the kernel, wherein they are bred, and
are so venomous minded, that like the viper they disparage
whomsoever they light on: I know I shall have many braves uttered
against me for this invective: but so I may profit my countrymen I
will hazard myself against their deepest villainies: and therefore
sleeping never a whit the worse for their bravado, I commit such
enemies of the flourishing estate of England, to the consideration
of the justices who I hope will look into the loose life of bad,
base, and dishonest caterpillars.

A pleasant Tale of a Horse, how at Uxbridge, he cozened a Cony-
catcher, and had like to brought him to his Neckverse<35>.
     IT fortuned that not long since certain cony-catchers met by
hap a pranker or horse-stealer at Uxbridge, who took up his inn
where those honest crews lodged, & as one vice follows another, was
as ready to have a cast at cards as he had a hazard at a horse, the
cony-catchers who supped with him, feeling him pliant to receive the
blow, began to lay the plot how they might make him stoop all the
money in his purse, & so for a pint of wine drew him in at cards, by
degrees as these rakehells do, Lento gradu,<36> measure all things
by minutes: he fell from wine to money, and from pence to pounds,
that he was stripped of all that ever he had, as well crowns,
apparell, as jewels, that at last to maintain the main and to check
vies with revies he laid his horse in the hazard and lost him, when
the prigger had smoked the game, and perceived he was bitten of all
the bite in his bung, and turned to walk penniless in Mark lane, as
the old proverb is, he began to chafe, and to swear, and to rap out
goggs Nownes, and his pronouns, while at voluntary he had sworn
through the eight parts of speech in the Accidence,<37> avowing they
had cozened him both of his money and horse. Whereupon the gross ass
more hardy then wise, understanding the cony-catchers were gone,
went to the Constable and made hue & cry after them, saying: They
had robbed him of his horse, at this the headboroughs followed
amain, and by chance met with another hue and cry that came for him
that had stolen, which hue and cry was served upon the horse
stealer, and at that time as far as I can either conjecture or
calculate, the cony-catchers were taken suspicious for the same
horse, and the rather for that they were found loose livers & could
yield no honest method or means of their maintenance, upon this for
the horse they were apprehended, & bound over to the Sessions at
Westminster, to answer what might be objected against them in her
Majesty's behalf. Well the horse stealer broke from his keepers and
got away, but the rest of the rascal crew; the cony-catchers I mean,
were brought to the place of judgement, and there like valiant
youths they thrust twelve men into a corner, who found them
guiltless for the fact, but if great favour had not been shown they
had been condemned & burnt in the ears for rogues.
     Thus the horse stealer made hue & cry after the cony-catchers,
and the man that had lost the horse he pursued the horse stealer, so
that a double hue and cry passed on both sides, but the cony-
catchers had the worse, for what they got in the bridle they lost in
the saddle, what they cozened at cards had like to cost them their
necks at the Sessions, so that when they were free and acquited, one
of the cony-catchers in a merry vein, said, he had catched many
conies, but now a horse had like to caught him, and so deeply quoth
he, that Miserere mei<35> had like to have been my best matins. Thus
we may see Fallere fallentem non est fraus,<21> every deceit hath
his due, he that maketh a trap falleth into the snare himself, and
such as covet to cozen all, are crosssed themselves often times
almost to the cross, and that is the next neighbour to the gallows.
Well gentlemen thus I have bewrayed much and gotten little thanks, I
mean of the dishonest sort, but I hope such as measure virtue by her
honours, will judge of me as I deserve. Marry the good men cony-
catchers, those base excrements of dishonesty, they in their huffs
report they have got one (---) I will not bewray his name, but a
scholar they say he is, to make an invective against me, in that he
is a favourer of those base reprobates, but let them, him, and all
know, the proudest peasant of them all, dare not lift his plumes in
disparagement of my credit, for if he do, I will for revenge only
appoint the jakes farmers<38> of London, who shall cage them in
their filthy vessels, and carry them as dung to manure the barren
places of Tyburn, and so for cony-catchers an end.


A discourse, or rather discovery of the Nip and the Foist, laying
open the nature of the Cutpurse and Pick-pocket.

     Now gentlemen, merchants, farmers, and termers, yea whosoever
he be, that useth to carry money about him, let him attentively hear
what a piece of new found philosophy, I will lay open to you whose
opinions, principles, aphorisms, if you carefuly note and retain in
memory, perhaps save some crowns in your purse ere the year pass,
and therefore thus: The Nip & the Foist, although their subject is
one which they work on, that is, a well lined purse, yet their
manner is different, for the nip useth his knife, and the foist his
hand: the one cutting the purse, the other drawing the pocket: but
of these two scurvy trades, the foist holdeth himself of the highest
degree, and therefore, they term themselves gentlemen foists, and so
much disdain to be called cutpurses, as the honest man that lives by
his hand or occupation, in so much that the foist refuseth even to
wear a knife about him to cut his meat withal, lest he might be
suspected to grow into the nature of the nip, yet as I said before
is their subject and haunt both alike, for their gains lies by all
places of resort and assemblies, therefore their chief walks is
Paul's, Westminster, the Exchange, plays, bear garden, running at
tilt, the Lord Mayor's day, any festival meetings, frays, shootings,
or great fairs: to be short, wheresoever there is any extraordinary
resort of people, there the nip and the foist have fittest
oportunity to show their juggling agility. Commonly, when they spy a
farmer or merchant, whom they suspect to be well moneyed, they
follow him hard until they see him draw his purse, then spying in
what place he puts it up, the stall or the shadows being with the
foist or nip, meets the man at some straight turn & jostles him so
hard, that the man marvelling, and perhaps quarrelling with him, the
whiles the foist hath his purse and bids him farewell. In Paul's
(especially in the term time) between ten and eleven, then is their
hours, and there they walk, and perhaps, if there be great press,
strike a stroke in the middle walk, but that is upon some plain man
that stands gazing about, having never seen the Church before; but
their chiefest time is at divine service, when men devoutly given do
go up to hear either a sermon, or else the harmony of the choir and
the organs: there the nip and the foist as devoutly as if he were
some zealous parson, standeth soberly with his eyes elevated unto
heaven when his hand is either on the purse or in the pocket,
surveying every corner of it for coin, then when the service is done
and the people press away, he thrusteth amidst the throng, and there
worketh his villainy. So likewise in the markets, they note how
every one putteth up his purse, and there either in a great press,
or while the party is cheapening of meat, the foist is in their
pocket and the nip hath the purse by the strings, or some times cuts
out the bottom, for they have still their stalls following them, who
thrusteth and jostleth him or her whom the foist is about to draw.
So likewise at plays, the nip standeth there leaning like some
mannerly gentleman against the door as men go in, and there finding
talk with some of his companions, spieth what every man hath in his
purse, and where, in what place, and in which sleeve or pocket he
puts the bung, and according to that so he worketh either where the
thrust is great within, or else as they come out at the doors: but
suppose that the first is smoked, and the man misseth his purse, &
apprehendeth him for it then straight he either conveyeth it to his
stall, or else droppeth the bung, and with a great brave he defieth
his accuser: and though the purse be found at his foot, yet because
he hath it not about him, he comes not within compass of life. Thus
have they their shifts for the law, and yet at last, so long the
pitcher goeth to the brook that it cometh broken home, and so long
the foists put their villainy in practice, that westward they go,
and there solemnely make a rehearsal sermon at Tyburn.
     But again, to their places of resort, Westminster, aye marry,
that is their chiefest place that brings in their profit, the term-
time is their harvest: and therefore, like provident husband-men
they take time while time serves, and make hay while the sun shines,
following their clients, for they are at the hall very early and
there they work like bees, haunting every Court, as the Exchequer
chamber, the Star chamber, the Kings-bench, the Common-pleas, and
every place where the poor client standeth to hear his lawyer handle
his matter, for alas the poor country gentleman or farmer is so
busied with his causes, and hath his mind so full of cares to see
his counsel and to ply his attorney, that the least thing in his
thought is his purse: but the eagle-eyed foist or nip he watcheth,
and seeng the client draw his purse to pay some charges or fees
necessary for the court, marketh where he putteth it, and then when
he thrusteth into the throng, either to answer for himself, or to
stand by his counseller to put him in mind of his cause, the foist
draws his pocket and leaves the poor client penniless. This do they
in all courts, and go disguised like servingmen, wringing the simple
people by this juggling subtlety; well might therefore the
honourable & worshipful of those courts do to take order from such
vile and base minded cutpurses, that as the law hath provided death
for them if they be taken, so they might be rooted out especially
from Westminster where the poor clients are undone by such roguish
catchers. It boots not to tell their course at every remove of her
Majesty when the people flock together, nor at Bartholomew fair, on
the Queen's day, at the tilt-yard and at all other places of
assembly: for let this suffice, at any great press of people or
meeting, there the foist and the nip is in his kingdom: Therefore
let all men take this caveat, that when they walk abroad amid any of
the forenamed places or like assemblies, that they take great care
for their purse how they place it, and not leave it careless in
their pockets or hose, for the foist is so nimble handed that he
exceeds the juggler for agility, and hath his legerdemain as
perfectly: therefore an exquisite foist must have three properties
that a good surgeon should have, and that is an eagle's eye, a
lady's hand, and a lion's heart, an eagle's eye to spy a purchase,
to have a quick insight where the bung lies, and then a lion's heart
not to fear what the end will be, and then a lady's hand to be
little and nimble, the better to dive into the pocket. These are the
perfect properties of a foist: but you must note that there be
diversities of this kind of people, for there be city nips & country
nips, which haunt from fair to fair, and never come in London,
unless it be at Bartholomew fair, or some other great and
extraordinary assemblies. Now there is a mortal hate between the
country foist and the city foist, for if the city foist spy one of
the conies in London, straight he seeks by some means to smoke him,
and so the country nip if he spy a city nip in any fair, then he
smokes him straight, and brings him in danger, if he flee not away
the more speedily. Beside there be women foists and women nips, but
the woman foist is most dangerous, for commonly there is some old
hand, or mouthfair strumpet, who inveigleth either some ignorant man
or some young youth to folly, she hath straight her hand in his
pocket, and so foists him of all that he hath: but let all men take
heed of such common harlots, who either sit in the streets in
evenings, or else dwell in bawdy houses and are pliant to every
man's lure, such are always foists and pickpockets, and seek the
spoil of all such as meddle with them, and in cozening of such base
minded lechers as give thenselves to such lewd company, are worthy
of whatsoever befalls, and sometime they catch such a Spanish pip,
that they have no more hair on their head then on their nails.
     But leaving such strumpets to their souls' confusion and
bodies' correction in Bride-well: again, to our nips and foists, who
have a kind of fraternity or brotherhood among them, having a hall
or place of meeting, where they confer of weighty matters, touching
their workmanship, for they are provident in that, every one of them
hath some trusty friend whom he calleth his treasurer, and with him
he lays up some rateable portion, of every purse he draws, that when
need requires, and he is brought in danger, he may have money to
make composition with the party: But of late, there hath been a
great scourge fallen amongst them, for now if a purse be drawn of
any great value, straight the party maketh friends to some one or
other of the Counsel or other inferior her Majesty's Justices, and
then they send out warrants if they cannot learn who the foist is,
to the keepers of Newgate that they take up all the nips and foists
about the city, and let them lie there while the money be reanswered
unto the party, so that some pay three pound, nay five pound at a
time according as the same loss did amount unto, which doth greatly
impoverish their trade, and hinder their figging law. Therefore
about such causes grows their meeting, for they have a kind of
corporation, as having wardens of their company, and a hall: I
remember their hall was once about Bishopsgate, near unto Fisher's
Folly, but because it was a noted place, they have removed it to
Kent-street, and as far as I can learn, it is kept at one Laurence
Pickering's house, one that hath been if he be not still a notable
foist. A man of good calling he is, and well allied brother in law
to Bull the hangman<22>, there keep they their feasts and weekly
meetings, fit for their company. Thus have I partly set down the
nature of the foist, and the nip, with their special haunts, as a
caveat to all estates to beware of such wicked persons, who are as
prejudicial to the Commonwealth as any other faculty whatsoever; and
although they be by the great discretion of the Judges and Justices
daily trussed up, yet still there springeth up young that grow in
time to bear fruit fit for the gallows: let then every man be as
careful as possibly he may, and by this caveat take heed of his
purse, for the prey makes the thief, and there an end.
A merry tale how a Miller had his purse cut in Newgate market.
     IT fortuned that a nip and his stall drinking at the Three Tuns
in Newgate market, sitting in one of the rooms next to the street,
they might perceive where a meal-man stood selling of meal, and had
a large bag by his side, where by conjecture there was some store of
money, the old Coole, the old cutpurse I mean, spying this, was
delighted with the show of so glorious an object, for a full purse
is as pleasing to a cutpurse's eye, as the curious physiognomy of
Venus was to the amorous God of war, and entering to a merry vein as
one that counted that purchase his own, discovered it to the novice
and bade him go & nip it, the young toward scholar although perhaps
he had striken some few strokes before, yet seeing no great press of
people, and the meal-man's hand often upon his bag, as if he had in
times past smoked some of their faculty, was half afraid and doubted
of his own experience and so refused to do it. Away villain, saith
the old nip, art thou faint hearted, belongs it to our trade to
despair? If thou wilt only do common work, and not make experience
of some hard matters to attempt, thou wilt never be master of thine
occupation, therefore try thy wits and do it, at this the young
stripling stalks me out of the Tavern, and feeling if his cuttle-
bung were glib and of a good edge, went to this meal-man to enter
combat hand to hand with his purse, but seeing the meal-man's eye
was still abroad, and for want of other sport that he played with
his purse, he was afraid to trust either to his wit or fortune, and
therefore went back again without any act achieved. How now, saith
the old nip, what hast thou done, nothing, quoth he, the knave is so
wary, that it is unpossible to get any purchase there, for he stands
playing with his purse for want of other exercise. At this his
fellow looks out and smiles, making this reply. And doest thou count
it impossible to have the meal-man's bung, lend me thy knife for
mine is left at home, & thou shalt see me strike it straight, and I
will show thee a method, how perhaps hereafter to do the like after
my example, and to make thee a good scholar, and therefore go with
me and do as I shall instruct thee, begin but a feigned quarrel, and
when I give thee a watch word, then throw flour in my face, and if I
miss his purse let me be hanged for my labour, with that he gave him
certain principles to observe, and then paid for the wine and out
they went together. As soon as they were come to the meal-man, the
old nip began to jest with the other about the miller's sack, and
the other replied as knavishly, at last, the elder called the
younger rogue, rogue thou swain, quoth he, doest thou or darest thou
dishonour me with such a base title? And with that taking a whole
hand full of meal out of the sack, threw it full in the old nip's
neck and his breast, and then ran away. He being thus dusted with
meal, entreated the meal-man to wipe it out of his neck, and stooped
down his head, the meal-man laughing to see him so arrayed and
whited, was willing to shake off the meal, and while he was busy
about that, the nip had stroken the purse and done his feat, and
both courteously thanked the meal-man and closely went away with his
purchase. The poor man thinking little of this cheat, began again to
play with his purse strings, and suspected nothing till he had sold
a peck of meal, and offered to change money, and then he found his
purse bottomless, which struck such a cold quandary to his stomach,
as if in a frosty morning he had drunk a draught of small beer next
his heart, he began then to exclaim against such villains, and
called to mind how in shaking the dust out of the gentleman's neck,
he shaked his money out of his purse, and so the poor meal-man
fetched a great sigh, knit up his sack and went sorrowing home.
A Kind Conceit of a Foist Performed in Paul's.
     While I was writing this discovery of foisting, & was desirous
of any intelligence that might be given me, a gentleman a friend of
mine, reported unto me this pleasant tale, of a foist, & as I well
remember it grew to this effect. There walked in the middle walk a
plain country farmer, a man of good wealth, & that had a well lined
purse, only barely thrust up in a round slop<30> which a crew of
foists having perceived, their hearts were set on fire to have it,
and every one had a fling at him but all in vain, for he kept his
hand close in his pocket, and his purse fast in his fist like a
subtle churl, that either had been forewarned of Paul's, or else had
afore time smoked some of that faculty, well howsoever, it was
unpossible to do any good with him he was so wary. The foists spying
this, strained their wits to the highest string how to compass this
bung, yet could not all their politic conceits fetch the farmer
over, for jostle him, chat with him, offer to shake him by the hand,
all would not serve to get his hand out of his pocket. At last one
of the crew that for his skill might have been doctorate in his
mystery, amongst them all chose out a good foist, one of a nimble
hand & great agility, and said to the rest thus: masters it shall
not be said such a base peasant shall slip away from such a crew of
gentlemen foists as we are, and not have his purse drawn, and
therefore this time I'll play the stall myself, and if I hit him not
home, count me for a bungler for ever, and so he left them and went
to the farmer and walked directly before him & next him three or
four turns, at last standing still he cried alas honest man help me,
I am not well, and with that sunke down suddenly in a swoon, the
poor farmer seeing a proper young gentleman (as he thought) fall
dead afore him, stepped to him, held him in his arms, rub'd him and
chafed him: at this there gathered a great multitude of people about
him, and the whilst the foist drew the farmer's purse and away: by
that the other thought the feat was done, he began to come something
to himself again, and so half staggering, stumbled out of Paul's,
and went after the crew where they had appointed to meet, and there
boasted of his wit and experience. The farmer little suspecting this
villainy, thrust his hand into his pocket and missed his purse,
searched for it, but lining and shells and all was gone, which made
the countryman in a great maze, that he stood still in a dump so
long, that a gentleman perceiving it asked what he ailed: what ail I
sir, quoth he, truly I am thinking how men may long as well as
women, why dost thou conjecture that, honest man, quoth he? marry
sir, answers the farmer, the gentleman even now that swooned here I
warrant him breeds his wife's child, for the cause of his sudden
qualm that he fell down dead grew of longing: the gentleman demanded
how he knew that, well enough sir, quoth he, and he hath his longing
too, for the poor man longed for my purse, and thanks be to God he
hath it with him. At this all the hearers laughed, but not so
merrily as the foist and his fellows, that then were sharing his
money.
A Quaint Conceit of a Cutler & a Cutpurse.
     A nip having by fortune lost his cuttle-bung or having not one
fit for his purpose, went to a cunning cutler to have a new made,
and prescribed the cutler such a method and form to make his knife
and the fashion to be so strong, giving such a charge of the
fineness of the temper and well setting of the edge, that the cutler
wondered what the gentleman would do with it, yet because he offered
so largely for the making of it, the cutler was silent and made few
questions, only he appointed him the time to come for it, and that
was three days after: Well, the time being expired, the gentleman
nip came, and seeing his knife liked it passing well, and gave him
his money with advantage<39>. The cutler desirous to know to what
use he would put it, said to the cutpurse thus, sir quoth he I have
made many knives in my days, and yet I never saw any of this form,
fashion, temper or edge, & therefore if without offence I pray you
tell me how or to what will you use it? While thus he stood talking
with the nip, he spying the purse in his apron, had cut it passing
cunningly, and then having his purchase close in his hand, made
answer, in faith my friend to dissemble is a folly, 'tis to cut a
purse withal and I hope to have good handsel, you are a merry
gentleman, quoth the cutler, I tell true said the cutpurse and away
he goes. No sooner was he gone from the stall, but there came an
other and bought a knife and should have single money again, the
cutler thinking to put his hand in his bagge, thrust it quite
through at the bottom, all his money was gone, & the purse cut,
perceiving this and remembering how the man prayed he might have
good handsel, he fetched a great sigh and said, now I see he that
makes a snare, first falls into it himself: I made a knife to cut
other men's purses and mine is the first handsel, well revenge is
fallen upon me, but I hope the rope will fall upon him, and so he
smoothed up the matter to himself, lest men should laugh at his
strange fortune.


The Discovery of the lifting Law.
     The lift, is he that stealeth or prowleth any plate, jewels,
bolts of satin, velvet, or such parcels from any place by a sleight
conveyance under his cloak, or so secretly that it may not be
espied: of lifts there be divers kinds as their natures be
different, some base rogues that lift when they come into alehouses
quart pots, platters, cloaks, swords, or any such paltry trash which
commonly is called pilfering or petty-larceny, for under the colour
of spending two or three pots of ale, they lift away anything that
cometh within the compass of their reach, having a fine & nimble
agility of the hand as the foist had: these are the common and
rascal sorts of lifts, but the higher degrees and gentlemen lifts
have to the performance of their faculty three parties of necessity:
the Lift, the Marker and the Santar: the lift attired in the form of
a civil country gentleman, comes with the marker into some mercer's
shop, haberdasher's, goldsmith's, or any such place where any
particular parcels of worth are to be conveyed, and there he calls
to see a bolt of satin, velvet or any such commodity, and not liking
the pile, colour or brack, he calls for more, and the whiles he
begins to resolve which of them most fitly may be lifted, and what
garbage (for so he calls the goods stolen) may be most easily
conveyed, then he calls to the mercer's man and says, sirrah reach
me that piece of velvet or satin, or that jewel, chain or piece of
plate, and whilst the fellow turns his back, he commits his garbage
to the marker: for note, the lift is without his cloak, in his
doublet & hose to avoid the more suspicion: the marker which is the
receiver of the lift's luggage, gives a wink to the santar that
walks before the window and then the santar going by in great haste,
the marker calls him & says, sir a word with you, I have a message
to do unto you from a very friend of yours, and the errand is of
some importance, truly sir says the santar I have very urgent
business in hand and as at this time I cannot stay, but one word and
no more says the marker, and then he delivers him whatsoever the
lift hath conveyed unto him, and then the santar goes his way, who
never came within the shop, and is a man unknown to them all:
suppose he is smoked and his lifting is looked into, then are they
upon their pantofles<40>, because there is nothing found about them:
they defy the world for their honesty, because they be as dishonest
as any in the world, and swear as God shall judge them they never
saw the parcel lost, but oaths with them are like wind out of a
bellows, which being cool kindleth fire: so their vows are without
conscience and so they call for revenge: Therefore let this be a
caveat to all occupations, sciences and mysteries, that they beware
of the gentleman lift, and to have an eye to such as cheapen their
wares and not when they call to see new stuff to leave the old
behind them, for the fingers of lifts are formed of adamant, though
they touch not yet they have virtue attractive to draw any pelf to
them as the adamant doth the iron.
     But yet these lifts have a subtle shift to blind the world for
this close kind of cozenage they have when they want money, one of
them apparels himself like a country farmer, & with a memorandum
drawn in some legal form, comes to the chamber of some counsellor or
serjeant-at-law with his marker and his santar, and there tells the
lawyer his case and desires his counsel, the whilst the marker and
the santar lay the platform for any rapier, dagger, cloak, gown or
any other parcel of worth that is in the withdrawing or outer
chanber, and as soon as they have they go their way: then when the
lawyer hath given his opinion of the case the lift requires, then he
puts in some demur or blind, and says he will have his cause better
discovered and then he will come to his worship again, so taking his
leave without his ten shillings fee, he goes his ways to share what
his companions had gotten: the like method they use with scriveners,
for coming by the shop and seeing any garbage worth the lifting on,
starteth in to have an obligation or bill made in haste, and while
the scrivener is busy, the lift bringeth the marker to the blow, and
so the luggage is carried away. Now, these lifts have their special
receivers of their stolen goods, which are two sundry parties,
either some notorious bawds in whose houses they lie, and they keep
commonly tapping-houses and have young trugs in their house which
are consorts to these lifts and love them so dear, that they never
leave them till they come to the gallows, or else they be brokers, a
kind of idle sort of livers as pernicious as the lift, for they
receive at their hands whatsoever garbage is conveyed, be it linen,
woollen, plate, jewels, and this they do by a bill of sale, making
the bill in the name of John a Nokes or John a Styles, so that they
shadow the lift & yet keep themselves without the danger of the law.
Thus are these brokers and bawds as it were, efficient causes of the
lifters' villainy, for were it not their alluring speeches and their
secret concealings, the lift for want of receivers should be fain to
take a new course of life, or else be continually driven into great
extremes for selling his garbage, and thus much briefly for the
nature of the lift.


The discovery of the Courbing Law.
     The Courber, which the common people call the hooker, is he
that with a courb (as they term it) or hook, do pull out of a window
any loose cloth, apparel or else any other houshould stuff
whatsoever, which stolen parcels, they in their art call snappings:
to the performance of this law there be required, only two persons,
the Courber and the Warp: the courber his office is to spy in the
day time fit places where his trade may be practised at night, and
coming to any window if it be open, then he hath his purpose; if
shut, then growing into the nature of the black art, hath his
trickers, which are engines of iron so cunningly wrought, that he
will cut a bar of iron in two with them so easily, that scarcely
shall the standers-by hear him: then when he hath the window open
and spies any fat snappings worth the curbing, then straight he sets
the warp to watch, who hath a long cloak to cover whatsoever he
gets, then doth the other thrust in a long hook some nine foot in
length (which he calleth a courb) that hath at the end a crook with
three tines turned contrary so that 'tis unpossible to miss if there
be any snappings abroad: Now this long hook they call a courb, and
because you shall not wonder how they carry it for being espied,
know this that it is made with joints like an angle rod, and can be
conveyed into the form of a truncheon & worn in the hand like a
walking staff, until they come to their purpose and then they let it
out at the length and hook or courb whatsoever is loose and within
the reach, and then he conveys it to the warp, and from thence (as
they list) their snappings goes to the broker or to the bawd, and
there they have as ready money for it as merchants have for their
ware in the exchange: beside, there is a Diver, which is in the very
nature of the courber, for as he puts in a hook, so the other puts
in at the window some little figging boy who plays his part notably,
and perhaps the youth is so well instructed that he is a scholar in
the black art, and can pick a lock if it be not too cross-warded,
and deliver to the diver what snappings he finds in the chamber.
Thus you hear what the courber doth and the diver, and what
inconvenience grows to many by their base villainies: therefore I do
wish all men servants and maids, to be careful for their masters'
commodities, and to leave no lose ends abroad, especially in
chambers where windows open to the street, least the courber take
them as snappings, and convey them to the cozening broker.
     Let this suffice, and now I will recreate your wits with a
merry Tale or two.
Of a Courber, & how Cunningly he was Taken.
     IT fortuned of late that a courber & his warp went walking in
the dead of the night to spy out some window open for their purpose,
& by chance came by a nobleman's house about London and saw the
window of the porter's lodge open, and looking in, spied fat
snappings and bade his warp watch carefuly for there would be
purchase, & with that took his courb and thrust it into the chamber,
and the porter lying in his bed was awake & saw all, and so was his
bedfellow that was yeoman of the wine-seller, the porter stole out
of his bed to mark what would be done, and the first snapping the
courber light on, was his livery coat, as he was drawing it to the
window, the porter easily lifted it off and so the courber drew his
hook in vain, the whilst his bedfellow stole out of the chamber and
raised up two or three more and went about to take them, but still
the rogue he plied his business and lighted on a gown that he used
to sit in in the porters lodge, and warily drew it, but when it came
at the window, the porter drew it off so lightly that the hooker
perceived it not: then when he saw his courb would take no hold, he
swore and chafed and told the warp he had hold of two good snaps and
yet missed them both and that the fault was in his courb, then he
fell to sharping and hammering of the hook to make it keep better
hold, and in again he thrusts it and lights upon a pair of buff
hose, but when he had drawn them to the window the porter took them
off again, which made the courber almost mad, & swore he thought the
devil was abroad tonight he had such hard fortune: nay says the
yeoman of the seller, there is three abroad, and we are come to
fetch you and your hooks to hell: so they apprehended these base
rogues & carried them into the porter's lodge and made that their
prison. In the morning a crew of gentlemen in the house, sat for
judges (in that they would not trouble their Lord with such filthy
caterpillars) and by them they were found guilty, and condemned to
abide forty blows apiece with a bastinado, which they had solemnly
paid, and so went away without any further damage.
Of the Subtlety of a Curber in Cozening a Maid.
     A Merry jest and a subtle, was reported to me of a cunning
courber, who had apparelled himself marvelous brave, like some good
well-favoured young gentleman, and instead of a man had his warp to
wait upon him: this smooth faced rogue comes into Moorfields, and
caused his man to carry a pottle of hippocras under his cloak, and
there had learned out, amongst others that was drying of clothes, a
very well-favoured maid that was there with her basket of linen,
what her master was, where she dwelt, and what her name: having
gotten this intelligence, to this maid he goes, and courteously
salutes her, and after some pretty chat, tells her how he saw her
sundry times at her master's door, and was so besotted with her
beauty, that he had made inquiry what her qualities were, which by
the neighbours he generally heard to be so virtuous, that his desire
was the more inflamed, and thereupon in sign of good will, and in
further acquaintance he had brought her a pottle of hippocras: the
maid seeing him a good proper man, took it very kindly, and thanked
him, and so they drunk the wine, and after a little lovers' prattle,
for that time they parted.
     The maid's heart was set on fire, that a gentleman was become a
suitor unto her, and she began to think better of herself than ever
she did before, and waxed so proud that her other suitors were
counted too base for her, and there might be none welcome but this
new come gentleman her lover. Well, divers times they appointed
meetings, that they grew very familiar, and he oftentimes would come
to her master's house, when all but she and her fellow maids were
abed so that he and the warp his man did almost know every corner of
the house: It fortuned that so long he dallied, that at length he
meant earnest, but not to marry the maid whatsoever he had done
else, and coming into the fields to her on a washing day, saw a
mighty deal of fine linen worth twenty pound as he conjectured:
whereupon he thought this night to set down his rest, and therefore
he was very pleasant with his lover, and told her that that night
after her master and mistress were to bed he would come and bring a
bottle of sack with him and drink with her: the maid glad at these
news, promised to sit up for him and so they parted: till about ten
o'clock at night, when he came and brought his man with him, and one
other courber with his tools, who should stand without the doors. To
be brief, welcome he came, and so welcome as a man might be to a
maid: he that had more mind to spy the clothes, then to look on her
favour, at last perceived them in a parlour that stood to the
street-ward, and there would the maid have had him sit, no sweeting
quoth he, it is too near the street, we can neither laugh nor be
merry but every one that passeth by must hear us: upon that they
removed into another room, and pleasant they were, and tippled the
sack round, till all was out, and the gentleman swore that he would
have another pottle, and so sent his man, who told the other courber
that stood without, where the window was he should work at, & away
goes he for more sack and brings it very orderly, and then to their
cups they fall again, while the courber without had not left one rag
of linen behind. Late it grew, and the morning began to wear grey,
and away goes this courber and his man, leaving the maid very
pleasant with his flattering promises until such time as poor soul
she went into the parlour, and missed all her master's linen, then
what a sorrowful heart she had, I refer to them that have grieved at
the like loss.


The Discovery of the Black Art.
     The Black Art is picking of locks, and to this busy trade two
persons are required, the Charm and the Stand, the charm is he that
doth the feat, and the stand is he that watcheth: There be more that
belong to the burglary for conveying away the goods, but only two
are employed about the lock: the charm hath many keys and wrests,
which they call picklocks, and for every sundry fashion they have a
sundry term, but I am ignorant of their words of art, and therefore
I omit them, only this, they have such cunning in opening a lock,
that they will undo the hardest lock though never so well warded,
even while a man may turn his back, some have their instruments from
Italy made of steel, some are made here by smiths, that are
partakers in their villainous occupations: but howsoever, well may 
it be called the black Art, for the Devil cannot do better then they
in their faculty. I once saw the experience of it myself, for being
in the Compter upon a commandment, there came in a famous fellow in
the black art, as strong in that quality as Samson: The party now is
dead, and by fortune died in his bed, I hearing that he was a charm,
began to enter familiarity with him, and to have an insight into his
art, after some acquaintance he told me much, and one day being in
my chamber I showed him my desk, and asked him if he could pick that
little lock that was so well warded, and too little as I thought for
any of his gins. Why sir, says he, I am so experienced in the black
art, that if I do but blow upon a lock it shall fly open, and
therefore let me come to your desk, and do but turn five times
about, and you shall see my cunning, with that I did as he bade me,
and ere I had turned five times, his hand was rifling in my desk
very orderly, I wondered at it, and thought verily that the Devil
and his dam was in his fingers. Much discommodity grows by this
black art in shops and noblemen's houses for their plate: therefore
are they most severely to be looked in to by the honourable and
worshipful of England, and to end this discourse as pleasantly as
the rest, I will rehearse you a true tale done by a most worshipful
knight in Lancashire, against a tinker that professed the black art.
A true and merry Tale of a Knight, and a Tinker that was a pick-
lock.
     Not far off from Bolton in the Moors, there dwelled an ancient
knight, who for courtesy and hospitality was famous in those parts:
divers of his tenants making repair to his house, offered divers
complaints to him how their locks were picked in the night and
divers of them utterly undone by that means, and who it should be
they could not tell, only they suspected a tinker that went about
the country and in all places did spend very lavishly: the knight
willing, heard what they exhibited, and promised both redress and
revenge if he or they could learn out the man. It chanced not long
after their complaints, but this jolly tinker (so expert in the
black art) came by the house of this knight, as the old gentleman
was walking afore the gate, and cried for work, the knight straight
conjecturing this should be that famous rogue that did so much hurt
to his tenants, called in and asked if they had any work for the
tinker, the cook answered there was three or four old kettles to
mend, come in tinker, so this fellow came in, laid down his budget
and fell to his work, a blackjack of beer for this tinker says the
knight, I know tinkers have dry souls: the tinker he was pleasant
and thanked him humbly, the knight sat down by him and fell a
ransacking his budget, and asked wherefore this tool served and
wherefore that, the tinker told him all, at last as he tumbled
amongst his old brass the Knight spied three or four bunches of
pick-locks, he turned them over quickly as though he had not seen
them and said, well tinker I warrant thou art a passing cunning
fellow & well skilled in thine occupation by the store of tools thou
hast in thy budget: In faith if it please your worship, quoth he, I
am thanks be to God my craft's master: Aye, so much I perceive that
thou art a passing cunning fellow quoth the knight, therefore let us
have a fresh jack of beer and that of the best and strongest for the
tinker: thus he passed away the time pleasantly, and when he had
done his work he asked what he would have for his pains? but two
shillings of your worship, quoth the tinker. Two shillings, says the
Knight, alas tinker it is too little, for & see by thy tools thou
art a passing cunning workman, hold there is two shillings: come in,
thou shalt drink a cup of wine before thou goest; but I pray thee to
tell me which way travellest thou? faith sir, quoth the tinker all
is one to me; I am not much out of my way wheresoever I go, but now
I am going to Lancaster: I pray thee tinker then, quoth the knight
carry me a letter to the gaoler, for I sent in a felon thither the
other day and I would send word to the gaoler he should take no bail
for him; marry that I will in most dutiful manner, quoth he, and
much more for your worship then that: give him a cup of wine quoth
the knight and sirrah (speaking to his clerk) make a letter to the
gaoler, but then he whispered to him and bade him make a
mittimus<41> to send the tinker to prison, the clerk answered he
knew not his name. I'll make him tell it thee himself, says the
Knight and therefore fall you to your pen: the clerk began to write
his mittimus, and the Knight began to ask what countryman he was
where he dwelt & what was his name, the tinker told him all, and the
clerk set it in with this proviso to the gaoler that he should keep
him fast bolted or else he would break away. As soon as the mittimus
was made, sealed and subscribed in form of a letter, the Knight took
it and delivered it to the tinker and said, give this to the chief
Gaoler of Lancaster & here's two shillings more for thy labour, so
the tinker took the letter and the money and with many a cap & knee
thanked the old knight and departed: and made haste till he came at
Lancaster, and stayed not in the town so much as to taste one cup of
nappy ale, before he came at the Gaoler, and to him very briskly he
delivered his letter, the Gaoler took it and read it and smiled a
good, and said tinker thou art welcome for such a knight's sake, he
bids me give thee the best entertainment I may. Aye sir, quoth the
tinker, the knight loves me well, but I pray you hath the courteous
gentleman remembered such a poor man as I? Aye marry doth he,
tinker, and therefore sirrah, quoth he to one of his men, take the
tinker in the lowest ward, clap a strong pair of bolts on his heels,
and a basil of 28 pound weight, and then sirrah see if your
picklocks will serve the turn to bail you hence? at this the tinker
was blank, but yet he thought the Gaoler had but jested, but when he
heard the mittimus, his heart was cold, and had not a word to say
his conscience accused, and there he lay while the next sessions,
and was hanged at Lancaster, and all his skill in the black art
could not serve him.
FINIS.


THE THIRD AND LAST PART OF CONY-CATCHING.


Title Page

THE
Third and last part of Conny-
catching.
With the new deuised knauish arte of
Foole-taking.
The like Coosnages and Villanies never before discovered.
By R. G.

Printed by T. Scarlet for C. Burby, and are to be solde at
his shop vnder S. Mildreds Church in the
poultry.
1592.


To The Reader
     TO ALL SUCH AS HAVE received either pleasure or profit by the
two former published books of this Argument, and to all beside, that
desire to know the wonderful sly devices of this hellish crew of
cony-catchers.
     IN the time of king Henry the fourth, as our English
chroniclers have kept in remembrance, lived diverse sturdy and loose
companions, in sundry places about the City of London, who gave
themselves to no good course of life, but because the time was
somewhat troublesome, watched diligently, when by the least occasion
of mutiny offered, they might prey upon the goods of honest
citizens, and so by their spoil enrich themselves. At that time
likewise lived a worthy gentleman, whose many very famous deeds
(whereof I am sorry I may here make no rehearsal, because neither
time nor occasion will permit me) renown his name to all ensuing
posterities: he, being called Sir Richard Whittington, the founder
of Whittington College<42> in London, and one that bare the office
of Lord Mayor of this City three several times. This worthy man well
noting the dangerous disposition of that idle kind of people, took
such good and discreet order (after he had sent divers of them to
serve in the King's wars, and they loath to do so well returned to
their former vomit) that in no place of or about London they might
have lodging, or entertainment, except they applied themselves to
such honest trades and exercises, as might witness their maintaining
was by true and honest means. If any to the contrary were found,
they were in justice so sharply proceeded against, as the most
hurtful and dangerous enemies to the commonwealth.
     In this quiet and most blissful time of peace, when all men (in
course of life) should show themselves most thankful for so great a
benefit, this famous city is pestered with the like, or rather worse
kind of people, that bear outward show of civil, honest, and
gentlemanlike disposition, but in very deed their behaviour is most
infamous to be spoken of. And as now by their close villainies they
cheat, cozen, prig, lift, nip, and such like tricks now used in
their cony-catching trade, to the hurt and undoing of many an honest
citizen, and other: So if God should in justice be angry with us, as
our wickedness hath well deserved, and (as the Lord forfend) our
peace should be molested as in former time, even as they did, so
will these be the first in seeking domestical spoil and ruin: yea so
they may have it, it skills not how they come by it. God raise such
another as was worthy Whittington, that in time may bridle the
headstrong course of this hellish crew, and force them live as
becometh honest subjects, or else to abide the reward due to their
looseness. By reading this little treatise ensuing, you shall see to
what marvellous subtle policies these deceivers have attained, and
how daily they practice strange drifts for their purpose. I say no
more, but if all these forewarnings may be regarded, to the benefit
of the well minded, and just control of these careless wretches, it
is all I desire, and no more than I hope to see.
Yours in all he may
R. G.


The third and last part of Cony-catching with the new devised
knavish art of Fool-taking.
     BEING by chance invited to supper, where were present divers,
both of worship and good account, as occasion served for intercourse 
of talk, the present treacheries and wicked devices of the world was
called in question. Amongst other most hateful and well worthy
reprehension, the wondrous villainies of loose and lewd persons,
that bear the shape of men, yet are monsters in condition, was
specially remembered, and not only they, but their complices, their
confederates, their base natured women and close compacters were
noted: Namely, such as term themselves cony-catchers, cross-biters,
with their appertaining names to their several cozening qualities,
as already is made known to the world, by two several imprinted
books, by means whereof, the present kind of conference was
occasioned. Quoth a gentleman sitting at the table, whose deep step
into age deciphered his experience, and whose gravity in speech
reported his discretion, quoth he, by the two published books of
cony-catching: I have seen divers things wherof I was before
ignorant, notwithstanding, had I been acquainted with the author, I
could have given him such notes of notorious matters that way
intenting, as in neither of the pamphlets are the like set down.
Beside, they are so necessary to be known, as they will both fore-
arm any man against such treacherous vipers, and forewarn the
simpler sort from conversing with them. The gentleman being known to
be within commission of the peace, and that what he spake of either
came to him by examinations, or by riding in the circuits as other
like officers do: was entreated by one man above the rest (as his
leisure served him) to acquaint him with those notes, and he would
so bring it to pass, as the writer of the other two books, should
have the sight of them, and if their quantity would serve, that he
should publish them as a third, and more necessary part than the
former were. The gentleman replied, all such notes as I speak, are
not of mine own knowledge, yet from such men have I received them,
as I dare assure their truth: and but that by naming men wronged by
such mates, more displeasure would ensue than were expedient, I
could set down both time, place and parties. But the certainty shall
suffice without any such offence. As for such as shall see their
injuries discovered, and (biting the lip) say to themselves, thus
was I made a cony: their names being shadowed, they have no cause of
anger, in that the example of their honest simplicity beguiled, may
shield a number more endangered from tasting the like. And seeing
you have promised to make them known to the author of the former two
books, you shall the sooner obtain your request: assuring him thus
much upon my credit and honesty, that no one untruth is in the
notes, but every one credible, and to be justified if need serve.
Within a fortnight or thereabout afterward, the gentleman performed
his promise, in several papers sent the notes, which here are in our
book compiled together: when thou hast read, say, if ever thou
heardest more notable villainies discovered. And if thou or thy
friends receive any good by them, as it cannot be but they will make
a number more careful of themselves: thank the honest gentleman for
his notes, and the writer that published both the other and these,
for general example.


A pleasant tale how an honest substantial Citizen was made a cony,
and simply entertained a knave that carried away his goods very
politicly.
     WHAT laws are used among this hellish crew, what words and
terms they give themselves and their copesmates, are at large set
down in the former two books: let it suffice ye then in this, to
read the simple true discourses of such as have by extraordinary
cunning and treachery been deceived, and remembering their subtle
means there, and sly practices here, be prepared against the reaches
of any such companions.
     Not long since, a crew of cony-catchers meeting together, and
in conference laying down such courses as they severally should
take, to shun suspect, and return a common benefit among them: the
carders received their charge, the dicers theirs, the hangers about
the court theirs, the followers of sermons theirs, and so the rest
to their offices. But one of them especially, who at their wonted
meetings, when report was made how every purchase was gotten, and by
what policy each one prevailed: this fellow in a kind of priding
scorn, would usually say, In faith masters, these things are
prettily done, common sleights, expressing no deep reach of wit, and
I wonder men are so simple to be so beguiled. I would fain see some
rare artificial feat indeed, that some admiration and fame might
ensue the doing thereof: I promise ye, I disdain these base and
petty paltries, and may my fortune jump with my resolution, ye shall
hear my boys within a day or two, that I will accomplish a rare
stratagem indeed, of more value than forty of yours, and when it is
done shall carry some credit with it. They wondering at his words
desired to see the success of them, and so dispersing themselves as
they were accustomed, left this frolic fellow pondering on his
affairs. A citizen's house in London, which he had diligently eyed
and aimed at for a fortnight's space, was the place wherein he must
perform this exploit, and having learned one of the servant maid's
name of the house, as also where she was born and her kindred: Upon
a Sunday in the afternoon, when it was her turn to attend on her
master and mistress to the garden in Finsbury fields, to regard the
children while they sported about, this crafty mate having duly
watched their coming forth, and seeing that they intended to go down
S. Laurence lane, stepped before them, ever casting an eye back,
least they should turn some contrary way. But their following still
fitting his own desire, near unto the Conduit in Aldermanbury, he
crossed the way and came unto the maid, and kissing her said: Cousin
Margaret, I am very glad to see you well, my uncle your father, and
all your friends in the country are in good health God be praised.
The maid hearing herself named, and not knowing the man, modestly
blushed, which he perceiving, held way on with her amongst her
fellow apprentices, and thus began again. I see cousin you know me
not, and I do not greatly blame you, it is so long since you came
forth of the country: but I am such a one's son, naming her Uncle
right, and his son's name, which she very well remembered, but had
not seen him in eleven years. Then taking forth a bowed groat, and
an old penny bowed, he gave it her as being sent from her uncle and
aunt, whom he termed to be his father and mother: Withal (quoth he)
I have a gammon of bacon and a cheese from my uncle your father,
which are sent to your master and mistress, which I received of the
carrier, because my uncle enjoined me to deliver them, when I must
entreat your mistress, that at Whitsuntide next she will give you
leave to come down into the country. The maid thinking simply all he
said was true, and as they so far from their parents, are not only
glad to hear of their welfare, but also rejoice to see any of their
kindred: so this poor maid, well knowing her uncle had a son so
named as he called himself, and thinking from a boy, (as he was at
her leaving the country) he was now grown such a proper handsome
young man, was not a little joyful to see him: beside, she seemed
proud that her kinsman was so neat a youth, and so she held on
questioning with him about her friends: he soothing each matter so
cunningly, as the maid was confidently persuaded of him. In this
time, one of the children stepped to her mother and said, Our
Margaret (mother) hath a fine cousin come out of the country, and he
hath a cheese for my father and you: whereon she looking back, said:
maid, is that your kinsman? Yea forsooth mistress, quoth she, my
uncle's son, whom I left a litle one when I came forth of the
country.
     The wily treacher, being master of his trade, would not let
slip this opportunity, but courteously stepping to the mistress,
(who loving her maid well, because indeed she had been a very good
servant, and from her first coming to London had dwelt with her,
told her husband thereof) coined such a smooth tale unto them both,
fronting it with the gammon of bacon and the cheese sent from their
maid's father, and hoping they would give her leave at Whitsuntide
to visit the country, as they with very kind words entertained him,
inviting him the next night to supper, when he promised to bring
with him the gammon of bacon and the cheese. Then framing an excuse
of certain business in the town, for that time he took his leave of
the master and mistress, and his new cousin Margaret, who gave many
a look after him (poor wench) as he went, joying in her thoughts to
have such a kinsman.
     On the morrow he prepared a good gammon of bacon, which he
closed up in a soiled linen cloth, and sewed an old card upon it,
whereon he wrote a superscription unto the master of the maid, and
at what sign it was to be delivered, and afterward scraped some of
the letters half out, that it might seeme they had been rubbed out
in the carriage. A good cheese he prepared likewise, with
inscription accordingly on it, that it could not be discerned, but
that some unskilful writer in the country had done it, both by the
gross proportion of the letters, as also the bad orthography which
amongst plain husbandmen is very common, in that they have no better
instruction. So hiring a porter to carry them between five and six
in the evening he comes to the citizen's house, and entering the
shop, receives them of the porter, whom the honest meaning citizen
would have payed for his pains, but this his maid's new-found cousin
said he was satisfied already, and so straining courtesy would not
permit him: well, up are carried the bacon and the cheese, where God
knows, Margaret was not a little busy, to have all things fine and
neat against her cousin's coming up, her mistress likewise, (as one
well affecting her servant) had provided very good cheer, set all
her plate on the cupboard for show, and beautified the house with
cushions, carpets, stools and other devices of needlework, as at
such times divers will do, to have the better report made of their
credit amongst their servants' friends in the country, albeit at
this time (God wot) it turned to their own after-sorrowing. The
master of the house, to delay the time while supper was ready, he
likewise shows this dissembler his shop, who seeing things fadge so
pat to his purpose, could question of this sort, and that well
enough I warrant you, to discern the best from the worst and their
appointed places, purposing a further reach than the honest citizen
dreamed of: and to be plain with ye, such was this occupier's trade,
as though I may not name it, yet thus much I dare utter, that the
worst thing he could carry away, was worth about 20 nobles, because
he dealt altogeather in whole and great sale, which made this
companion forge this kindred and acquaintance, for an hundred pound
or twaine was the very least he aimed at. At length the mistress
sends word supper is on the table, where upon up he conducts his
guest, and after divers welcomes, as also thanks for the cheese and
bacon: To the table they sit, where let it suffice, he wanted no
ordinary good fare, wine and other knacks, beside much talk of the
country, how much his friends were beholding for his cousin
Margaret, to whom by her mistress leave he drank twice or thrice,
and she poor soul doing the like again to him with remembrance of
her father and other kindred, which he still smoothed very
cunningly. Countenance of talk made them careless of the time, which
slipped from them faster then they were aware of, nor did the
deceiver hasten his departing, because he expected what indeed
followed, which was, that being past ten of the clock, and he
feigning his lodging to be at Saint Giles in the Field, was
entreated both by the good man and his wife, to take a bed there for
that night, for fashion sake (though very glad of this offer) he
said he would not trouble them, but giving the many thanks, would to
his lodging though it were further. But wonderful it was to see how
earnest the honest citizen and his wife laboured to persuade him,
that was more willing to stay then they could be to bid him, and
what dissembled willingness of departure he used on the other side,
to cover the secret villainy intended.
     Well, at the length, with much ado, he is contented to stay,
when Margaret and her mistress presently stirred to make ready his
bed, which the more to the honest man's hard hap, but all the better
for this artificial cony-catcher, was in the same room where they
supped, being commonly called their hall, and there indeed stood a
very fair bed, as in such sightly rooms it may easily be thought,
citizens use not to have anything mean or simple. The mistress, lest
her guest should imagine she distrusted him, suffered all the plate
to stand still on the cupboard: and when she perceived his bed was
warmed, and every thing else according to her mind, she and her
husband bidding him good night: took themselves to their chamber,
which was on the same floor, but inward, having another chamber
between them and the hall, where the maids and children had their
lodging. So desiring him to call for anything he wanted, and
charging Margaret to look it should be so, to bed are they gone:
when the apprentices having brought up the keys of the street door,
and left them in their master's chamber as they were wont to do,
after they had said prayers, their evening exercise, to bed go they
likewise, which was in a Garret backward over their masters chamber.
None are now up but poor Margaret and her counterfeit cozen, whom
she loath to offend with long talk, because it waxed late: after
some few more speeches, about their parents and friends in the
country, she seeing him laid in bed, and all such things by him as
she deemed needful, with a low courtesy I warrant ye, commits him to
his quiet, and so went to bed to her fellows the maidservants. Well
did this hypocrite perceive the keys of the doors carried into the
good man's chamber, whereof he being not a little glad, thought now
they would imagine all things sure, and therefore doubtless sleep
the sounder: as for the keys, he needed no help of them, because
such as he go never unprovided of instruments fitting their trade,
and so at this time was this notable treacher. In the dead time of
the night, when sound sleep makes the ear unapt to hear the very
least noise, he forsaketh his bed, & having gotten all the plate
bound up together in his cloak, goeth down into the shop, where well
remembering both the place and percels, maketh up his pack with some
twenty poundsworth of goods more. Then setling to his engine, he
getteth the door off the hinges, and being forth, lifteth close to
again, and so departs, meeting within a dozen paces, three or four
of his companions that lurked therabouts for the purpose. Their word
for knowing each other, as is said, was quest, and this villain's
comfortable news to them, was twag, signifying he had sped: each
takes a fleece for easier carriage, and so away to Bellbrow, which,
as I have heard is as they interpret it, the house of a thief
receiver, without which they can do nothing, and this house with an
apt porter to it, stands ready for them all hours of the night: too
many such are there in London, the masters whereof bear countenance
of honest substantial men, but all their living is gotten in this
order, the end of such (though they scape awhile) will be sailing
westward in a cart to Tyburn. Imagine these villains there in their
jollity, the one reporting point by point his cunning deceit, and
the other (fitting his humour) extolling the deed with no mean
commendations.
     But returning to the honest citizen, who finding in the morning
how dearly he paid for a gammon of bacon, and a cheese, and how his
kind courtesy was thus treacherously requited: blames the poor maid,
as innocent herein as himself, and imprisoning her, thinking so to
regain his own: grief with ill-cherishing there shortens her life:
And thus ensueth one hard hap upon another, to the great grief both
of master and mistress, when the truth was known, that they so
wronged their honest servant: how it may forewarn others, I leave to
your own opinions, that see what extraordinary devices are nowadays,
to beguile the simple and honest liberal-minded.


Of a notable knave, who for his cunning deceiving a gentleman of his
purse, scorned the name of a cony-catcher, and would needs be termed
a fool-taker, as master and beginner of that new found art.
     A crew of these wicked companions being one day met together in
Paul's church, (as that is a usual place of their assembly, both to
determine on their drifts, as also to speed of many a booty) seeing
no likelihood of a good afternoon, so they term it either forenoon
or after, when aught is to be done: some dispersed themselves to the
plays, other to the bowling alleys, and not past two or three stayed
in the church. Quoth one of them, I have vowed not to depart but
something or other I'll have before I go: my mind gives me, that
this place yet will yield us all our suppers this night, the other
holding like opinion with him there likewise walked up and down,
looking when occasion would serve for some cash. At length they
espied a gentleman toward the law entering in at the little North
door, and a country client going with him in very hard talk, the
gentleman holding his gown open with his arms on either side as very
many do, gave sight of a fair purple velvet purse, which was half
put under his girdle: which I warrant you the resolute fellow that
would not depart without some thing, had quickly espied. A game,
qoth he to his fellows, mark the stand, and so separating themselves
walked aloof, the gentleman going to the nether step of the stairs
that ascend up into the choir, and there he walked still with his
client. Oft this crew of mates met together, and said there was no
hope of nipping the bung because he held open his gown so wide, and
walked in such an open place. Base knaves, quoth the frolic fellow,
if I say I will have it, I must have it, though he that owes it had
sworn the contrary. Then looking aside, he spied his trug or quean
coming up the church: Away, quoth he to the other, go look you for
some other purchase, this wench and I are sufficient for this. They
go, he lessons the drab in this sort, that she should to the
gentleman, whose name she very well knew, in that she had holp to
cozen him once before, & pretending to be sent to him from one he
was well acquainted with for his counsel, should give him his fee
for avoiding suspicion, and so frame some wrong done her, as well
enough she could: when her mate (taking occasion as it served) would
work the mean, she should strike, & so they both prevail. The quean
well inured with such courses, because she was one of the most
skilful in that profession, walked up and down alone in the
gentleman's sight, that he might discern she stayed to speak with
him, and as he turned toward her, he saw her take money out of her
purse, whereby he gathered some benefit was toward him: which made
him the sooner dispatch his other client, when she stepping to him,
told such a tale of commendations from his very friend, that had
sent her to him as she said, that he entertained her very kindly,
and giving him his fee, which before her face he put up into his
purse, and thrust it under his girdle again: she proceeded to a very
sound discourse, whereto he listened with no litle attention. The
time serving fit for the fellow's purpose, he came behind the
gentleman, and as many times one friend will familiarly with
another, clap his hands over his eyes to make him guess who he is,
so did this companion, holding his hands fast over the gentleman's
eyes, said: who am I? twice or thrice, in which time the drab had
gotten the purse and put it up. The gentleman thinking it had been
some merry friend of his, reckoned the names of three or four, when
letting him go, the crafty knave dissembling a bashful shame of what
he had done, said: By my troth sir I cry thee mercy, as I came in at
the Church door, I took ye for such a one (naming a man) a very
friend of mine, whom you very much resemble: I beseech the be not
angry, it was very boldly done of me, but in penance of my fault, so
please the to accept it, I will bestow a gallon or two of wine on
ye, and so laboured him earnestly to go with him to the tavern,
still alleging his sorrow for mistaking him. The gentleman litle
suspecting how who-am-I had handled him, seeing how sorry he was,
and seeming to be a man of no such base condition: took all in good
part, saying: No harm sir, to take one for another, a fault wherein
any man may easily err, and so excusing the acceptation of his wine,
because he was busy there with a gentlewoman his friend: the
treacher with courtesy departed, and the drab (having what she
would) shortening her tale, he desiring her to come to his chamber
the next morning, went to the place where her copesmate & she met,
and not long after, divers other of the crew, who hearing in what
manner this act was performed, smiled a good thereat, that she had
both got the gentleman's purse, her own money again, and his advice
for just nothing. He that had done this tall exploit, in a place so
open in view, so hardly to be come by, and on a man that made no
mean esteem of his wit: bids his fellows keep the worthless name of
a cony-catcher to themselves: for he henceforth would be termed a
fool-taker, and such as could imitate this quaint example of his,
(which he would set down as an entrance into that art) should not
think scorn to become his scholars
     Night drawing on apace, the gentleman returned home, not all
this while missing his purse, but being set at supper, his wife
entreated a pint of sack, which he minding to send for, drew to his
purse, and seeing it gone, what strange looks (beside sighs) were
between him and his wife, I leave to your supposing, and blame them
not: for as I have heard, there was seven pound in gold, beside
thirty shillings and odd white money in the purse. But in the midst
of his grief, he remembered him that said, who am I? Wherewith he
brake forth into a great laughter, the cause whereof his wife being
desirous to know, he declared all that passed between him and the
deceiver, as also how soon afterward the quean abreviated her
discourse and followed: so by troth wife (quoth he) between who-am-I
and the drab, my purse is gone: let his loss teach others to look
better to theirs.


Another tale of a cozening companion, who would needs try his
cunning in this new invented art, and how by his knavery (at one
instant) he beguiled half a dozen and more.
     OF late time there hath a certain base kind of trade been used,
who though divers poor men, & doubtless honest apply themselves to,
only to relieve their need: yet are there some notorious varlets do
the same, being compacted with such kind of people, as this present
treatise manifesteth to the world, and what with outward simplicity
on the one side, and cunning close treachery on the other, divers
honest citizens and day-labouring men, that resort to such places as
I am to speak of, only for recreation as opportunity serveth, have
been of late sundry times deceived of their purses. This trade, or
rather unsufferable loitering quality, in singing of ballads and
songs at the doors of such houses where plays are used, as also in
open markets and other places of this city, where is most resort:
which is nothing else but a sly fetch to draw many togeather, who
listening unto an harmless ditty, afterward walk home to their
houses with heavy hearts: from such as are hereof true witnesses to
their cost, do I deliver this example.
     A subtle fellow, belike emboldened by acquaintance with the
former deceit, or else being but a beginner to practice the same,
calling certain of his companions together, would try whether he
could attain to be master of his art or no, by taking a great many
of fools with one train. But let his intent and what else beside,
remain to abide the censure after the matter is heard, & come to
Gracious street, where this villainous prank was performed. A
roguing mate, & such another with him, were there got upon a stall
singing of ballads which belike was some pretty toy, for very many
gathered about to hear it, & divers buying, as their affections
served, drew to their purses & paid the singers for them. The sly
mate and his fellows, who were dispersed among them that stood to
hear the song, well noted where every man that bought, put up his
purse again, and to such as would not buy, counterfeit warning was
sundry times given by the rogue and his associate, to beware of the
cutpurse, and look to their purses, which made them often feel where
their purses were, either in sleeve, hose, or at girdle, to know
whether they were safe or no. Thus the crafty copesmates were
acquainted with what they most desired, and as they were scattered,
by shouldering, thrusting, feigning to let fall something, and other
wily tricks fit for their purpose: here one lost his purse, there
another had his pocket picked, and to say all in brief, at one
instant, upon the complaint of one or two that saw their purses were
gone, eight more in the same company, found themselves in like
predicament. Some angry, others sorrowful, and all greatly
discontented, looking about them, knew not who to suspect or
challenge, in that the villains themselves that had thus beguiled
them, made show that they had sustained like loss. But one angry
fellow, more impatient then all the rest, he falls upon the ballad
singer, and beating him with his fists well favouredly, says, if he 
had not listened his singing, he had not lost his purse, and
therefore would not be otherwise persuaded, but that they two and
the cutpurses were compacted together. The rest that had lost their
purses likewise, and saw that so many complain together: they jump
in opinion with the other fellow, & begin to tug & hale the ballad
singers, when one after one, the false knaves began to shrink away
with the purses. By means of some officer then being there present,
the two rogues were had before a Justice, and upon his discreet
examination made, it was found, that they and the cutpurses were
compacted together, and that by this unsuspected villainy, they had
deceived many. The fine fool-taker himself, with one or two more of
that company, was not long after apprehended: when I doubt not but
they had their reward answerable to their deserving: for I hear of
their journey westward, but not of their return<43>: let this
forewarn those that listen singing in the streets.


Of a crafty mate, that brought two young men unto a Tavern, where
departing with a cup, he left them to pay both for the wine and cup.
     A friend of mine sent me this note, and assuring me the truth
therof, I thought necessary to set it down amongst the rest: both
for the honest simplicity on the one side and most cunning knavery
used on the other, and thus it was. Two young men of familiar
acquaintance, who delighted much in music, because themselves
therein were somewhat expert, as on the virginals, bandore, lute and
such like, were one evening at a common inn of this town (as I have
heard) where the one of them showed his skill on the virginals, to
the no little contentment of the hearers. Now as divers guests of
the house came into the room to listen, so among the rest entered an
artificial cony-catcher, who as occasion served, in the time of
ceasing between the several toys and fancies he played, very much
commended his cunning, quick hand, and such qualities praiseworthy
in such a professor. The time being come, when these young men
craved leave to depart, this politic varlet stepping to them,
desired that they would accept a quart of wine at his hand, which he
would, most gladly he would, bestow upon them: besides, if it liked
him that played on the virginals to instruct, he would help him to
so good a place, as happily might advantage him for ever. These kind
words, delivered with such honest outward show, caused the young
men, whose thoughts were free from any other opinion, than to be as
truly and plainly dealt withal as themselves meant, accepted his
offer, because he that played on the virginals was desirous to have
some good place of service, and here upon to the tavern they go, and
being set, the wily companion calleth for two pints of wine, a pint
of white, and a pint of claret, casting his cloak upon the table,
and falling to his former communication of preferring the young man.
The wine is brought, and two cups withal, as is the usual manner:
when drinking to them of the one pint, they pledge him, not
unthankful for his gentleness. After some time spent in talk, and as
he perceived fit for his purpose, he takes the other cup, and tastes
the other pint of wine: wherewith he finding fault, that it drank
somewhat hard, said, that rose-water and sugar would do no harm,
whereupon he leaves his seat, saying he was well acquainted with one
of the servants of the house, of whom he could have two pennyworth
of rose-water for a penny, and so of sugar likewise, wherefore he
would step to the bar unto him, so taking the cup in his hand, he
did, the young men never thinking on any such treachery as ensued,
in that he seemed an honest man, and beside left his cloak lying on
the table by them. No more returns the younker with rose-water and
sugar, but stepping out of doors, unseen of any, goes away roundly
with the cup. The young men not a little wondering at his long
tarrying, by the coming of the servants to see what they wanted, who
took no regard of his sudden departure, find themselves there left,
not only to pay for the wine, but for the cup also, being rashly
supposed by the master and his servants to be co-partners with the
treacherous villain: but their honest behaviour well known, as also
their simplicity too much abused well witnessed their innocence:
notwithstanding they were fain to pay for the cup, as afterward they
did, having nothing towards their charge but a threadbare cloak not
worth two shillings. Take heed how you drink wine with any such
companions.


Of an honest householder which was cunningly deceived by a subtle
companion, that came to hire a chamber for his master.
     NOT far from Charing Cross dwelleth an honest young man, who
being not long since married, and having more rooms in his house
than himself occupieth, either for term time, or the Court lying so
near, as divers do, to make a reasonable commodity, and to ease
house-rent, which (as the world goeth now is none of the cheapest)
letteth forth a chamber or two, according as it may be spared. In an
evening but a while since, came one in the manner of a serving-man
to this man and his wife, and he must needs have a chamber for his
master, offering so largely, as the bargain was soon concluded
between them. His intent was to have fingered some booty in the
house, as by the sequel it may be likeliest gathered: but belike no
fit thing lying abroad, or he better regarded than happily he would
be, his expectation that way was frustrate: yet as a resolute cony-
catcher indeed, that scorneth to attempt without some success, and
rather will prey upon small commodity, than return to his fellows
disgraced with a lost labour: he summons his wits together, and by a
smooth tale over-reached both the man and his wife. He tells them,
that his master was a captain late come from the Sea, and had costly
apparel to bring thither, which for more easy carriage, he entreats
them lend him a sheet to bind it up in: they suspecting no ill,
because he required their boy should go with him to help him carry
the stuff, the good wife steps unto her Chest, where her linen lay
finely sweetened with roseleaves and lavender, and lends him a very
good sheet indeed. This success made him bold to venture a little
further, and then he tells them, his master had a great deal of
broken sugar, and fine spices that lay negligently abroad in his
lodging as it was brought from the ship, all which he was assured
his master would bestow on them, so he could devise how to get it
brought thither.
     These liberal promises, prevailing with them that lightly
believed, and withal were somewhat covetous of the sugar and spices:
The woman demanded if a couple of pillow-beres would not serve to
bring the sugar and spices in? Yes marry, (quoth he) so the sugar
may best be kept by itself, and the spices by themselves. And (quoth
he) because there are many crafty knaves abroad, (grieving that any
should be craftier than himself) and in the evening the linen might
quickly be snatched from the boy: For the more safety, he would
carry the sheet and pillow-beres himself, and within an hour or
little more, return with the boy again, because he would have all
things ready before his master came, who (as he said) was attending
on the Council at the Court. The man and his wife crediting his
smooth speeches, sends their boy with him, and so along toward Ivy-
bridge go they. The Cony-catcher seeing himself at free liberty,
that he had gotten a very good sheet, and two fine pillow-beres,
steps to the wall, as though he would make water, bidding the boy go
fair and softly on before. The boy doubting nothing, did as he
willed him, when presently he stepped into some house hard by fit to
entertain him: and never since was he, his master, the sugar,
spices, or the linen heard off. Many have been in this manner
deceived, as I hear, let this then give them warning to beware of
any such unprofitable guests.


Of one that came to buy a knife, and made first proof of his trade
on him that sold it.
     ONE of the cunning nips about the Town, came unto a poor cutler
to have a cuttle made according unto his own mind, and not above
three inches would he have both the knife and the haft in length:
yet of such pure metal, as possible may be. Albeit the poor man
never made the like before, yet being promised four times the value
of his stuff and pains, he was contented to do this, and the day
being come that he should deliver it, the party came, who liking it
exceedingly, gave him the money promised, which the poor man gladly
put up into his purse, that hung at a button hole of his wascoat
before his breast smiling that he was so well paid for so small a
trifle. The party perceiving his merry countenance, and imagining he
guessed for what purpose the knife was, said, honest man, whereat
smile you? By my troth sir (quoth the cutler) I smile at your knife,
because I never made one so little before: and were it not offensive
unto you, I would request to know to what use you will put it too:
Wilt thou keep my counsel (quoth the nip?) yea on mine honesty
(quoth the cutler.) Then hearken in thy ear said the nip, and so
rounding with him, cut the poor man's purse that hung at his bosom,
he never feeling when he did it: with this knife (quoth the nip)
mean I to cut a purse: marry god forbid (quoth the cutler) I cannot
think you to be such a kind of man, I see you love to jest, and so
they parted.
     The poor man, not so wise as to remember his own purse, when by
such a warning he might have taken the offender doing the deed, but
rather proud (as it were) that his money was so easily earned: walks
to the alehouse, which was within a house or two of his own, and
finding there three or four of his neighbours, with whom he began to
jest very pleasantly: swears by cock and pie he would spend a whole
groat upon them, for he had gotten it and more, clearly by a good
bargain that morning.
     Though it was no marvel to see him so liberal, because indeed
he was a good companion: yet they were loath to put him unto such
cost, notwithstanding he would needs do it, and so far as promise
stretched, was presently filled in and set upon the board. In the
drinking time often he wished to meet with more such customers as he
had done that morning, and commended him for a very honest gentleman
I warrant you. At length, when the reckoning was to be payed, he
draws to his purse, where finding nothing left but a piece of the
string in the button hole: I leave to your judgement, whether he was
now as sorry as he was merry before.
     Blank and all amort sits the poor cutler, and with such a
pitiful countenance, as his neighbours did not a little admire his
solemn alteration, & desirous to know the cause thereof, from point
to point he discourseth the whole manner of the tragedy, never
naming his new customer, but with such a far fetched sigh, as soul
and body would have parted in sunder. And in midst of all his grief,
he brake forth into these terms. I'll beleve a man the better by his
word while I know him, the knife was bought to cut a purse indeed,
and I thank him for it he made the first proof of the edge with me.
The neighbours grieving for his loss, yet smiling at his folly to be
so overreached, were fain to pay the groat the cutler called in,
because he had no other money about him, and spent as much more
beside to drive away his heaviness. This tale, because it was
somewhat misreported before, upon talk had with the poor cutler
himself, is set down now in true form and manner how it was done,
therefore is there no offence offered, when by better consideration,
a thing may be enlarged or amended, or at least the note be better
confirmed. Let the poor cutler's mishap example others, that they
brag not over hastily of gain easily gotten, least they chance to
pay as dearly for it, as he did.


Of a young nip that cunningly beguiled an ancient professor of that
trade, and his quean with him, at a play.
     A good fellow that was newly entered into the nipping craft,
and had not as yet attained to any acquaintance with the chief and
cunning masters of that trade: In the Christmas holidays last came
to see a play at the Bull within Bishopsgate, there to take his
benefit as time and place would permit him. Not long had he stayed
in the press, but he had gotten a young man's purse out of his
pocket, which when he had, he stepped into the stable to take out
the money, and to convey away the purse. But looking on his
commodity, he found nothing therein but white counters, a thimble
and a broken threepence, which belike the fellow that ought it, had
done of purpose to deceive the cutpurse withal, or else had played
at the cards for counters, and so carried his winnings about him
till his next sitting to play. Somewhat displeased to be so
overtaken, he looked aside, and spied a lusty youth entering at the
door, and his drab with him: this fellow he had heard to be one of
the finest nippers about the town, and ever carried his quean with
him, for conveyance when the stratagem was performed: he puts up the
counters into the purse again, and follows close to see some piece
of their service. Among a company of seemely men was this lusty
companion and his minion gotten, where both they might best behold
the play, and work for advantage, and ever this young nip was next
to him, to mark when he should attempt any exploit, standing as it
were more then half between the cunning nip and his drab, only to
learn some part of their skill. In short time the deed was
performed, but how, the young nip could not easily discern, only he
felt him shift his hand toward his trug, to convey the purse to her,
but she being somewhat mindful of the play, because a merriment was
then on the stage, gave no regard: whereby thinking he had pulled
her by the coat, he twitched the young nip by the cloak, who taking
advantage of this offer, put down his hand and received the purse of
him. Then counting it discourtesy to let him lose all his labour, he
softly plucked the quean by the coat, which she feeling, and
imagining it had been her companion's hand: received of him the
first purse with the white counters in it. Then fearing lest his
stay should hinder him, and seeing the other intended to have more
purses ere he departed: away goes the young nip with the purse he
got so easily, wherin (as I have heard) was xxxvii. shillings, and
odd money, which did so much content him, as that he had beguiled so
ancient a stander in that profession. What the other thought when he
found the purse, and could not guess how he was cozened: I leave to
your censures, only this makes me smile, that one false knave can
beguile another, which bids honest men look the better to their
purses.


How a gentleman was craftily deceived of a chain of Gold and his
purse in Paul's Church in London.
     A gentleman of the country, who (as I have heard since the time
of his mishap, whereof I am now to speak) had about half a year
before buried his wife & belike thinking well of some other
gentlewoman, whom he meant to make account of as his second choice:
upon good hope or otherwise persuaded, he came up to London to
provide himself of such necessaries as the country is not usually
stored withal. Besides, silks, velvets, cambrics and such like, he
bought a chain of gold that cost him lvii. pounds and odd money,
whereof because he would have the maidenhead or first wearing
himself, he presently put it on in the goldsmith's shop, and so
walked therewith about London as his occasions served. But let not
the gentleman be offended, who if this book come to his hands, can
best avouch the truth of this discourse, if here by the way I blame
his rash pride, or simple credulity: for between the one and other,
the chain he paid so dear for about ten of the clock in the morning,
the cony-catchers the same day ere night shared amongst them, a
matter whereat he may well grieve, and I be sorry, in respect he is
my very good friend: but to the purpose. This gentleman walking in
Paul's, with his chain fair glittering about his neck, talking with
his man about some busines: was well viewed and regarded by a crew
of cony-catchers, whose teeth watered at his goodly chain, yet knew
not how to come by it hanging as it did, and therefore entered into
secret conspiration among themselves, if they could not come by all
the chain, yet how they might make it lighter by half a score pounds
at the least. Still had they their eyes on the honest gentleman, who
little doubted any such treason intended against his so late bought
bargain: and they having laid their plot, each one to be assistant
in this enterprise, saw when the gentleman dismissed his servant, to
go about such affairs as he had appointed him, himself still walking
there up and down the middle aisle. One of these mates, that stood
most on his cunning in these exploits, followed the serving-man
forth of the church calling him by divers names, as John, Thomas,
William, &c. as though he had known his right name, but could not
hit on it: which whether he did or no I know not, but well I wot the
serving-man turned back again, and seeing him that called him seemed
a gentleman, booted and cloaked after the newest fashion, came with
his hat in his hand to him, saying: Sir, do ye call me? Mary do I my
friend quoth the other, dost not thou serve such a gentleman? and
named one as himself pleased. No truly sir, answered the serving-
man, I know not any such gentleman as you speak of. By my troth
replied the cony-catcher, I am assured I knew thee and thy master,
though now I cannot suddenly remember myself. The serving-man
fearing no harm, yet fitting the humour of this treacherous
companion, told right his master's name whom he served, and that his
master was even then walking in Paul's. O God's will (quoth the
cony-catcher, repeating his master's name) a very honest gentleman,
of such a place is he not? naming a shire of the country: for he
must know both name, country and sometimes what gentlemen dwell near
the party that is to be over-reached, ere he can proceed. No indeed
sir (answered the serving-man, with such reverence as it had been to
an honest gentleman indeed) my master is of such a place, a mile
from such a Town, and hard by such a knight's house: by which report
the deceiver was half instructed, because though he was ignorant of
the fellow's master, yet well he knew the country, and the knight
named. So craving pardon that he had mistaken him, he returns again
into the Church, and the serving-man trudgeth about his assigned
business. Being come to the rest of the crew, he appoints one of
them (whom he knew to be expert indeed) to take this matter in hand,
for himself might not do it, lest the serving-man should return and
know him, he schooled the rest likewise what every man should do
when the pinch came, and changing his cloak with one of his fellows,
walked by himself attending the feat: and every one being as ready,
the appointed fellow makes his sally forth, and coming to the
gentleman, calling him by his name, gives him the courtesy and
embrace, likewise thanking him for good cheer he had at his house,
which he did with such seemly behaviour and protestation, as the
gentleman (thinking the other to be no less) used like action of
kindness to him. Now as country gentlemen have many visitors both
with near dwelling neighbours, and friends that journey from far,
whom they can hardly remember, but some principal one that serves as
countenance to the other: so he not discrediting the cunning mate's
words, who still at every point alleged his kindred to the knight
neighbour to the gentleman, which the poor serving-man had (doubting
no ill) revealed before, and that both there and at his own house in
hawking time with that knight and other gentlemen of the country he
had liberally tasted his kindness: desiring pardon that he had
forgotten him, and offered him the courtesy of the city. The cony-
catcher excused himself for that time, saying, at their next meeting
he would bestow it on him. Then seeming to have espied his chain,
and commending the fairness and workmanship thereof: says, I pray
the sir take a litle counsel of a friend, it may be you will return
thanks for it. I wonder quoth he, you dare wear such a costly jewel
so open in sight, which is even but a bait to entice bad men to
adventure time and place for it, and nowhere sooner then in this
city, where (I may say to you) are such a number of cony-catchers,
cozeners and such like, that a man can scarcely keep anything from
them, they have so many reaches and sleights to beguile withal:
which a very especial friend of mine found too true not many days
since. Hereupon he told a very solemn tale, of villainies and
knaveries in his own profession, whereby he reported his friend had
lost a watch of gold: showing how closely his friend wore it in his
bosom, and how strangely it was gotten from him, that the gentleman
by that discourse waxed half afraid of his chain. And giving him
many thanks for this good warning, presently takes the chain from
about his neck, and tying it up fast in a handkerchief, put it up
into his sleeve, saying, If the cony-catcher get it here, let him
not spare it. Not a little did the treacher smile in his sleeve,
hearing the rash security, but indeed simplicity of the gentleman,
and no sooner saw he it put up, but presently he counted it sure his
own, by the assistance of his complices, that lay in an ambuscado
for the purpose. With embraces and courtesies on either side, the
cony-catcher departs, leaving the gentleman walking there still:
whereat the crew were not a little offended, that he still kept in
the church, and would not go abroad. Well, at length (belike
remembering some business) the gentleman taking leave of another
that talked with him, hasted to go forth at the furthest west door
of Paul's, which he that had talked with him, and gave him such
counsel perceiving, hied out of the other door, and got to the
entrance ere he came forth, the rest following the gentleman at an
inch. As he was stepping out, the other stepped in, and let fall a
key, having his hat so low over his eyes, that he could not well
discern his face, and stooping to take up the key, kept the
gentleman from going backward or forward, by reason his leg was over
the threshold. The foremost cony-catcher behind, pretending a
quarrel unto him that stooped, rapping out an oath, and drawing his
dagger, said: Do I meet the villain? Nay, he shall not 'scape me
now, and so made offer to strike him.
     The gentleman at his standing up, seeing it was he that gave
him so good counsel,and pretended himself his very friend, but never
imagining this train was made for him: stepped in his defence, when
the other following tripped up his heels: so that he and his
counsellor were down together, and two more upon them, striking with
their daggers very eagerly, marry indeed the gentleman had most of
the blows, and both his hand-kerchief with the chain, and also his
purse with three and fifty shillings in it, were taken out of his
pocket in this struggling, even by the man that himself defended.
     It was marvellous to behold, how not regarding the villain's
words uttered before in the church, nor thinking upon the charge
about him (which after he had thus treacherously lost unwittingly:)
he stands pacifying them that were not discontented but only to
beguile him. But they vowing that they would presently go for their
weapons, & so to the field, told the gentleman he laboured but in
vain, for fight they must and would, and so going down by Paul's
Chain, left the gentleman made a cony going up toward Fleet street,
sorry for his new counsellor and friend, and wishing him good luck
in the fight: which indeed was with nothing but wine pots, for joy
of their late gotten booty. Near to Saint Dunstan's Church the
gentleman remembered himself, and feeling his pocket so light had
suddenly more grief at his heart, than ever happen to him or any man
again. Back he comes to see if he could espy any of them, but they
were far enough from him: God send him better hap when he goes next
a-wooing, and that this his loss may be a warning to others.


How a cunning knave got a Trunk well stuffed with linen and certain
parcels of plate out of a citizen's house, and how the master of the
house holp the deceiver to carry away his own goods.
     WITHIN the city of London, dwelleth a worthy man who hath very
great dealing in his trade, and his shop very well frequented with
customers: had such a shrewd mischance of late by a cony-catcher, as
may well serve for an example to others lest they have the like. A
cunning villain, that had long time haunted this citizen's house,
and gotten many a cheat which he carried away safely: made it his
custom when he wanted money, to help himself ever where he had sped
so often, divers things he had which were never missed, especially
such as appertained to the citizen's trade, but when any were found
wanting, they could not devise which way they were gone, so
politicly this fellow always behaved himself, well knew he what
times of greatest business this citizen had in his trade, and when
the shop is most stored with chapmen: then would he step up the
stairs (for there was and is another door to the house besides that
which entereth into the shop) and what was next to hand came ever
away with. One time above the rest, in an evening about Candlemas,
when daylight shuts in about six of the clock, he watched to do some
feat in the house, and seeing the mistress go forth with her maid,
the goodman and his folks very busy in the shop: up the stairs he
goes as he was wont to do, and lifting up the latch of the hall
portal door, saw nobody near to trouble him, when stepping into the
next chamber, where the citizen and his wife usually lay, at the
beds feet there stood a hansome trunk, wherein was very good linen,
a fair gilt saltcellar, two silver french bowls for wine, two silver
drinking pots, a stone jug covered with silver, and a dozen of
silver spoons. This trunk he brings to the stairs' head, and making
fast the door again, draws it down the steps so softly as he could,
for it was so big and heavy, as he could not easily carry it, having
it out at the door, unseen of any neighbour or anybody else, he
stood strugling with it to lift it up on the stall, which by reason
of the weight troubled him very much. The goodman coming forth of
his shop, to bid a customer or two farewell, made the fellow afraid
he should now be taken for all together: but calling his wits
together to escape if he could, he stood gazing up at the sign
belonging to the house, as though he were desirous to know what sign
it was: which the citizen perceiving, came to him and asked him what
he sought for? I look for the sign of the Bluebell sir, quoth the
fellow, where a gentleman having taken a chamber for this term time,
hath sent me hither with this his trunk of apparel. Quoth the
citizen, I know no such sign in this street, but in the next (naming
it) there is such a one indeed, and there dwelleth one that letteth
forth chambers to gentlemen. Truly sir quoth the fellow, that's the
house I should go to, I pray you sir lend me your hand, but to help
the trunk on my back, for I thinking to ease me a while upon your
stall, set it short, and now I can hardly get it up again. The
citizen not knowing his own trunk, but indeed never thinking on any
such notable deceit, helps him up with the trunk, and so sends him
away roundly with his own goods. When the trunk was missed, I leave
to your conceits what houshould grief there was on all sides,
especially the goodman himself, who remembering how he helped the
fellow up with a trunk, perceived that hereby he had beguiled
himself, and lost more then in haste he should recover again. How
this may admonish others, I leave to the judgement of the
indifferent opinion, that see when honest meaning is so craftily
beleaguered, as good foresight must be used to prevent such dangers.


How a broker was cunningly over-reached by as crafty a knave as
himself and brought in danger of the Gallows.
     IT hath been used as a common byword, a crafty knave needeth no
broker, whereby it should appear that there can hardly be a craftier
knave than a broker. Suspend your judgements till you have heard
this discourse ensuing, & then as you please censure both the one
and the other.
     A lady of the country sent up a servant whom she might well put
in trust, to provide her of a gown answerable to such directions as
she had given him, which was of good price, as may appear by the
outside and lace, whereto doubtless was every other thing agreeable.
For the tailor had seventeen yards of the best black satin that
could be got for money, and so much gold lace, beside spangles, as
valued thirteen pound, what else was beside I know not, but let it
suffice thus much was lost, and therefore let us to the manner how.
     The satin and the lace being brought to the tailor that should
make the gown, and spread abroad on the shop board to be measured,
certain good fellows of the cony-catching profession chanced to go
by, who seeing so rich lace, and so excellent good satin, began to
commune with themselves how they might make some purchase of what
they had seen: and quickly it was to be done or not at all. As ever
in a crew of this quality, there is some one more ingenious and
politic then the rest, or at leastwise that covets to make himself
more famous then the rest, so this instant was there one in this
company that did swear his cunning should deeply deceive him, but he
would have both the lace and satin. When having laid the plot with
his companions, how and which way their help might stand him in
stead, this way they proceeded.
     Well noted they the serving-man that stood in the shop with the
tailor, and gathered by his diligent attendance, that he had some
charge of the gown there to be made, wherefore by him must they work
their treachery intended, and use him as an instrument to beguile
himself. One of them sitting on a seat near the tailor's stall,
could easily hear the talk that passed between the serving-man and
the tailor, where among other communication, it was concluded that
the gown should be made of the self-same fashion in every point, as
another lady's was who then lay in the City, and that measure being
taken by her, the same would fitly serve the lady for whom the gown
was to be made. Now the serving-man intended to go speak with the
lady, and upon a token agreed between them (which he carelessly
spake so loud, that the cony-catcher heard it) he would as her
leisure served, certify the tailor, and he should bring the stuff
with him, to have the lady's opinion both of the one and the other.
     The serving-man being gone about his affairs, the subtle mate
that had listened to all their talk, acquaints his fellows both with
the determination and token appointed for the tailor's coming to the
lady. The guide and leader to all the rest for villainy, though
there was no one but was better skilled in such matters than
honesty: he appoints that one of them should go to the tavern, which
was not far off, and laying two faggots on the fire in a room by
himself, and a quart of wine filled for countenance of the
treachery: another of that crew should give attendance on him, as if
he were his master, being bareheaded, and sir, humbly answering at
every word. To the tavern goes this counterfeit gentleman, and his
servant waiting on him, where every thing was performed as is before
rehearsed. When the master knave calling the drawer, demanded if
there dwelt near at hand a skilful tailor, that could make a suit of
velvet for himself, marry it was to be done with very great speed.
     The drawer named the tailor that we now speak of, and upon the
drawer's commending his cunning, the man in all haste was sent for
to a gentleman, for whom he must make a suit of velvet forthwith.
Upon talk had of the stuff, how much was to be bought of every thing
appertaining thereto: he must immediately take measure of this
counterfeit gentleman, because he knew not when to return that way
again: afterward they would go to the mercer's.
     As the tailor was taking measure on him bare-headed, as if he
had been a substantial gentleman indeed, the crafty mate had
cunningly gotten his purse out of his pocket, at the one string
whereof was fastened a little key, and at the other his signet ring:
This booty he was sure of already, whether he should get anything
else or no of the mischief intended, stepping to the window he cuts
the ring from the purse, and by his supposed man (rounding him in
the ear) sends it to the plot-layer of this knavery, minding to
train the tailor along with him, as it were to the mercer's, while
he the meantime took order for the other matter.
     Afterward speaking aloud to his man, Sirrah, quoth he, dispatch
what I bade you, and about four of the clock meet me in Paul's, by
that time I hope the tailor and I shall have dispatched. To
Cheapside goeth the honest tailor with this notorious dissembler,
not missing his purse for the space of two hours after, in less then
half which time the satin and gold lace was gotten likewise by the
other villain from the tailor's house in this order.
     Being sure the tailor should be kept absent, he sends another
mate home to his house, who abused his servants with this device:
That the lady's man had met their master abroad, and had him to the
other lady to take measure of her, and lest they should delay the
time too long, he was sent for the satin and lace, declaring the
token appointed, and withal giving their masters signet ring for
better confirmation of his message. The servants could do no less
then deliver it, being commanded (as they supposed) by so credible
testimony: Neither did the leisure of any one serve to go with the
messenger, who seemed an honest young gentleman, and caried no cause
of distrust in his countenance: Wherefore they delivered him the
lace and satin folded up together as it was, and desired him to will
their master to make some speed home, both for cutting out of work,
and other occasions.
     To a broker fit for their purpose, goes this deceiver with the
satin lace, who knowing well they could not come honestly by it, nor
anything else he bought of that crew, as often before he had dealt
much with them: either gave them not so much as they would have, or
at least as they judged they could have in another place, for which
the ring-leader of this cozenage, vowed in his mind to be revenged
on the broker. The master knave, who had spent two hours and more in
vain with the tailor, & would not like of any velvet he saw, when he
perceived that he missed his purse, and could not devise how or
where he had lost it, showed himself very sorry for his mishap, and
said in the morning he would send the velvet home to his house, for
he knew where to speed of better than any he had seen in the shops.
Home goes the tailor very sadly, where he was entertained with a
greater mischance, for there was the lady's serving-man swearing and
stamping, that he had not seen their master since the morning they
parted, neither had he sent for the satin and lace, but when the
servants justified their innocency, beguiled both with the true
token rehearsed, and their master's signet ring, it exceedeth my
cunning to set down answerable words, to this exceeding grief and
amazement on either part, but most of all the honest tailor, who
sped the better by the broker's wilfulness, as afterward it
happened, which made him the better brook the loss of his purse.
That night all means were used that could be, both to the mercers,
brokers, goldsmiths, gold-finers, and such like, where haply such
things do come to be sold: but all was in vain, the only help came
by the inventor of this villainy, who scant sleeping all night, in
regard of the broker's extreme gaining, both by him, and those of
his profession: the next morning he came by the tailor's house, at
what time he espied him with the lady's serving-man, coming forth of
the doors, and into the tavern he went to report what a mishap he
had upon the sending for him thither the day before.
     As she was but newly entered his sad discourse, in comes the
party offended with the broker, and having heard all, (whereof none
could make better report than himself) he takes the tailor &
serving-man aside, and pretending great grief for both their causes,
demands what they would think him worthy of that could help them to
their good again. On condition to meet with such a friend offer was
made of five pound, and after sundry speeches passing between them
alone, he seeming that he would work the recovery thereof by art,
and they promising not to disclose the man that did them good, he
drew forth a litle book out of his bosom—whether it were Latin or
English it skilled not, for he could not read a word on it—then
desiring them to spare him alone a while, they should perceive what
he would do for them. Their hearts encouraged with some good hope,
kept all his words secret to themselves: and not long had they
sitten absent out of the room, but he called them in again, and
seeming as though he had been a scholar indeed, said he found by his
figure that a broker in such a place had their goods lost, and in
such a place of the house they should find it, bidding them go
thether with all speed, and as they found his words, so (with
reserving to themselves how they came to knowledge thereof) to meet
him there again in the evening, and reward him as he had deserved.
     Away in haste goes the tailor and the serving-man, and entering
the house with the constable, found them in the place where he that
revealed it, knew the broker alway laid such gotten goods. Of their
joy again, I leave you to conjecture, and think you see the broker
with a good pair of bolts on his heels, ready to take his farewell
of the world in a halter, when time shall serve. The counterfeit
cunning man, and artificial cony-catcher, as I heard, was paid his
five pound that night. Thus one crafty knave beguiled another, let
each take heed of dealing with any such kind of people.


A merry Tale taken not far from Fetter Lane end, of a new-found
cony-catcher, that was cony-catched himself.
     But amongst all these blithe and merry jests, a little by your
leave, if it be no farther than Fetter lane: oh take heed, that's
too nigh the Temple: what, then, I will draw as near the sign of the
White Hart as I can, and breathing myself by the bottle ale-house,
I'll tell you a merry jest how a cony-catcher was used.
     So it fell out, that a gentleman was sick and purblind, and
went to a good honest man's house to sojourn, and taking up his
chamber grew so sick that the goodman of the house hired a woman to
keep and attend day and night upon the gentleman: this poor woman,
having a good conscience, was careful of his welfare, and looked to
his diet, which was so slender that the man, although sick, was
almost famished, so that the woman would no longer stay, but bade
his host provide him of some other to watch with him sith it grieved
her to see a man lie and starve for want of food, especially being
set on the score for meat and drink in the space of a fortnight four
pounds. The goodman of the house at last, hearing how the poor woman
did find fault with his scoring, the gentleman not only put her out
of doors without wages, but would have arrested her, for taking away
his good name, and defaming and slandering him, and with that
calling one of his neighbours to him, said neighbour, whereas such a
bad-tongued woman hath reported to my discredit that the gentleman
that lies sick in my house wants meat, and yet runs very much on the
score, I pray you, judge by his diet whether he be famished or no:
first, in the morning he hath a caudle next his heart, half an hour
after that, a quart of sugar sops; half an hour after that a neck of
mutton in broth, half an hour after that chickens in sorrel sops,
and an hour after that, a joint of roast meat for his dinner: now,
neighbour, having this provision, you may judge whether he be
spoiled for lack of meat or no, and to what great charges his diet
will arise: whereas in truth, the poor gentleman would have been
glad of the least of these, for he could get none at all. But the
cozening knave thought to verse upon him, and one day, seeing money
came not briefly to the gentleman, took some of his apparel, his
cloak, I guess, and pawned it for forty shillings, whereas, God wot,
all he eat in that time was not worth a crown: well, the gentleman 
seeing how the knave went about to cony-catch him, and that he had
taken his cloak, smothered all for revenge, and watched opportunity
to do it, and on a time, seeing the goodman out, borrowed a cloak
far better than his own of the boy, saying that he would go to a
friend of his to fetch money for his master, & discharge the house:
the boy lending it him, away walks the gentleman, though weak after
this great diet, and never came at the tailor's house to answer him
cloak or money. And thus was he cony-catched himself, that thought
to have versed upon another.
FINIS


THE BLACK BOOK'S MESSENGER.


Title Page

THE
BLACK BOOKES
MESSENGER.
Laying open the Life and Death
of Ned Browne one of the most notable Cutpurses,
Crosbiters, and conny-catchers, that
ever lived in England.
Heerein he telleth very plea-
santly, in his own person such strange prancks and
monstrous villainies by him and his Consorte
performed, as the like was yet never
heard of in any of the former
bookes of Conny-
catching.
Read and be Warnd, Laugh as you like,
Judge as you find.

Nascimur pro Patria.<1>
by R. G.
Printed at London by Iohn Danter, For Thomas
Nelson dwelling in Silver street, neere to the
Signe of the Red-Crosse. 1592.


To the Courteous Reader
Health.
     Gentlemen, I know you have long expected the coming forth of my
Black Book, which I long have promised, and which I had many days
since finished, had not sickness hindered my intent: Nevertheless,
be assured it is the first thing I mean to publish after I am
recovered. This messenger to my Black Book I commit to your
courteous censures, being written before I fell sick, which I
thought good in the meantime to send you as a fairing, discoursing
Ned Browne's villainies, which are too many to be described in my
Black Book.
     I had thought to have joined with this treatise, a pithy
discourse of the repentance of a cony-catcher lately executed out of
Newgate, yet forasmuch as the method of the one is so far differing
from the other, I altered my opinion, and the rather for that the
one died resolute and desperate, the other penitent and passionate.
For the cony-catcher's repentance which shall shortly be published,
it contains a passion of great importance. First how he was given
over from all grace and godliness, and seemed to have no spark of
the fear of God in him: yet nevertheless, through the wondrous
working of God's spirit, even in the dungeon at Newgate the night
before he died, he so repented him from the bottom of his heart,
that it may well beseem parents to have it for their children,
masters for their servants, and to be perused of every honest person
with great regard.
     And for Ned Browne of whom my Messenger makes report, he was a
man infamous for his bad course of life and well-known about London:
He was in outward show a gentlemanlike companion, attired very
brave, and to shadow his villainy the more would nominate himself to
be a marshal-man, who when he had nipped a bung or cut a good purse,
he would steal over in to the Low Countries, there to taste three or
four stoops of Rhenish wine, and then come over forsooth a brave
soldier: But at last he leapt at a daisy for his loose kind of life,
and therefore imagine you now see him in his own person, standing in
a great bay window with a halter about his neck ready to be hanged,
desperately pronouncing this his whole course of life and confesseth
as followeth.
Yours in all courtesy, R. G.


A Table of the words of Art lately devised by Ned Browne and his
associates, to Cross-bite the old Phrases used in the manner of
Cony-catching.

HE that draws the fish to the
bait,
The Beater.
The Tavern where they go,
The Bush
The fool that is caught,
The Bird.
Cony-catching to be called,
Bat Fowling.
The wine to be called,
The Shrap.
The cards to be called,
The Lime Twigs.
The fetching in a cony,
Beating the Bush.
The good ass if he be won,
Stooping to the Lure.
If he keep a loss,
A Haggard.
The verser in cony-catching
is called
The Retriver.
And the barnacle,
The Pot Hunter.



The life and death of Ned Browne, a notable Cutpurse and Cony-
catcher.
     If you think (gentlemen) to hear a repentant man speak, or to
tell a large tale of his penitent sorrows, ye are deceived: for as I
have ever lived lewdly, so I mean to end my life as resolutely, and
not by a cowardly confession to attempt the hope of a pardon. Yet,
in that I was famous in my life for my villainies, I will at my
death profess myself as notable, by discoursing to you all merrily,
the manner and method of my knaveries, which if you hear without
laughing, then after my death call me base knave, and never have me
in remembrance.
     Know therefore (gentlemen) that my parents were honest, of good
report, and no little esteem amongst their neighbours, and sought
(if good nurture and education would have served) to have made me an
honest man: but as one self-same ground brings forth flowers and
thistles; so of a sound stock proved an untoward scion; and of a
virtuous father, a most vicious son. It boots little to rehearse the
petty sins of my nonage; as disobedience to my parents, contempt of
good counsel, despising of mine elders, filching, petty-larceny, and
such trifling toys: but with these follies I inured myself, till
waxing in years, I grew into greater villainies. For when I came to
eighteen years old, what sin was it that I would not commit with
greediness, what attempt so bad, that I would not endevour to
execute; cutting of purses, stealing of horses, lifting, picking of
locks, and all other notable cozenages. Why, I held them excellent
qualities, and accounted him unworthy to live, that could not, or
durst not live by such damnable practices. Yet as sin too openly
manifested to the eye of the Magistrate, is either sore revenged or
soon cut off: So I to prevent that, had a net wherein to dance, and
divers shadows to colour my knaveries withal, as I would title
myself with the name of a fencer, & make gentlemen believe that I
picked a living out by that mystery, whereas God wot, I had no other
fence but with my short knife, and a pair of purse strings, and with
them in troth many a bout have I had in my time. In troth? O what a
simple oath was this to confirm a man's credit withal? Why, I see
the halter will make a man holy, for whilst God suffered me to
flourish, I scorned to disgrace my mouth with so small an oath as In
faith: but I rent God in pieces, swearing and forswearing by every
part of his body, that such as heard me, rather trembled at mine
oaths, than feared my braves, and yet for courage and resolution I
refer myself to all them that have ever heard of my name.
     Thus animated to do wickedness, I fell to take delight in the
company of harlots: amongst whom, as I spent what I got, so I
suffered not them I was acquainted withal to feather their nests,
but would at my pleasure strip them of all that they had. What bad
woman was there about London whose champion I would not be for a few
crowns, to fight, swear, and stare in her behalf, to the abuse of
any that should do justice upon her? I still had one or two in store
to cross-bite withal, which I used as snares to trap simple men in:
for if I took but one suspiciously in her company, straight I versed
upon him, and cross-bit him for all the money in his purse. By the
way (sith sorrow cannot help to save me), let me tell you a merry
jest how once I cross-bit a maltman, that would needs be so wanton,
as when he had shut his malt to have a wench, and thus the jest fell
out.


A Pleasant Tale how Ned Browne cross-bit a Maltman.
     This Senex Fornicator<45>, this old lecher, using continually
into Whitechapel, had a haunt into Petticoat Lane to a trugging
house there, and fell into great familiarity with a good wench that
was a friend of mine, who one day revealed unto me how she was well
thought on by a maltman, a wealthy old churl, and that ordinarily
twice a week he did visit her, and therefore bade me plot some means
to fetch him over for some crowns. I was not to seek for a quick
invention, and resolved at his coming to cross-bite him, which was
(as luck served) the next day. Monsieur the maltman coming according
to his custom, was no sooner secretly shut in the chamber with the
wench, but I came stepping in with a terrible look, swearing as if I
meant to have challenged the earth to have opened and swallowed me
quick, and presently fell upon her and beat her: then I turned to
the maltman, and lent him a blow or two, for he would take no more:
he was a stout stiff old tough churl, and then I railed upon them
both, and objected to him how long he had kept my wife, how my 
neighbours could tell me of it, how the Lane thought ill of me for
suffering it, and now that I had myself taken them together, I would
make both him and her smart for it before we parted.
     The old fox that knew the ox by the horn, was subtle enough to
spy a pad in the straw, and to see that we went about to cross-bite
him: wherefore he stood stiff, and denied all, and although the
whore cunningly on her knees weeping did confess it, yet the maltman
faced her down, and said she was an honest woman for all him, and
that this was but a cozenage compacted between her and me to verse
and cross-bite him for some piece of money for amends, but sith he
knew himself clear, he would never grant to pay one penny. I was
straight in mine oaths and braved him with sending for the
constable, but in vain: all our policies could not draw one cross
from this crafty old carl, till I gathering my wits together, came
over his fallows thus. I kept him still in the chamber, & sent (as
though I had sent for the constable) for a friend of mine, an
ancient cozener, and one that had a long time been a Knight of the
Post<32>: marry he had a fair cloak and a damask coat, that served
him to hale men withal. To this perjured companion I sent to come as
a constable, to make the maltman stoop, who (ready to execute any
villainy that I should plot) came speedily like an ancient wealthy
citizen, and taking the office of a Constable in hand, began very
sternly to examine the matter, and to deal indifferently, rather
favouring the maltman than me: but I complained how long he had kept
my wife: he answered I lied, & that it was a cozenage to cross-bite
him of his money. Master Constable cunningly made this reply to us
both: My friends, this matter is bad, and truly I cannot in
conscience but look into it. For you Browne, you complain how he
hath abused your wife a long time, & she partly confesseth as much:
he (who seems to be an honest man, and of some countenance amongst
his neighbours) forswears it, and saith, it is but a device to strip
him of his money: I know not whom to believe, and therefore this is
my best course: because the one of you shall not laugh the other to
scorn. I'll send you all three to the Compter, so to answer it
before some justice that may take examination of the matter. The
maltman loath to go to prison, and yet unwilling to part from any
pence, said he was willing to answer the matter before any man of
worship, but he desired the constable to favour him that he might
not go to ward, and he would send for a brewer a friend of his to be
his bail.
     In faith says this cunning old cozener, you offer like an
honest man, but I cannot stay so long till he be sent for, but if
you mean as you protest to answer the matter, then leave some pawn
and I will let you go whither you will while tomorrow, and then come
to my house here hard by at a grocer's shop, and you and I will go
before a justice, and then clear yourself as you may. The maltman
taking this crafty knave to be some substantial citizen, thanked him
for his friendship and gave him a seal ring that he wore on his
fore-finger, promising the next morning to meet him at his house. As
soon as my friend had the ring, away walks he, and while we stood
brabbling together he went to the brewer's house, with whom this
maltman traded, and delivered the brewer the ring as a token from
the maltman, saying he was in trouble, and that he desired him by
that token to send him ten pound. The brewer seeing an ancient
citizen bringing the message and knowing the maltman's ring, stood
upon no terms, sith he knew his chapman would and was able to answer
it again if it were a brace of hundred pounds, delivered him the
money without any more ado: which ten pound at night we shared
betwixt us, and left the maltman to talk with the brewer about the
repayment. Tush, this was one of my ordinary shifts, for I was
holden in my time the most famous cross-biter in all London.
     Well at length, as wedding and hanging comes by destiny, I
would to avoid the speech of the world be married forsooth and keep
a house, but (gentlemen) I hope you that hear me talk of marriage,
do presently imagine that sure she was some virtuous matron that I
chose out. Shall I say my conscience, she was a little snoutfair,
but the commonest harlot and hackster that ever made fray under the
shadow of Colman hedge<46>: wedded to this trull, what villainy
could I devise but she would put in practise, and yet though she
could foist a pocket well, and get me some pence, and lift now and
then for a need, and with the lightness of her heels bring me in
some crowns: yet I waxed weary, and stuck to the old proverb, that
change of pasture makes fat calves: I thought that in living with me
two years she lived a year too long, and therefore casting mine eye
on a pretty wench, a man's wife well known about London, I fell in
love with her, and that so deeply that I broke the matter to her
husband, that I loved his wife, and must needs have her, and
confirmed it with many oaths, that if he did not consent to it, I
would be his death: whereupon her husband, a kind knave, and one
every way as base a companion as myself, agreed to me, and we beat a
bargain, that I should have his wife, and he should have mine,
conditionally, that I should give him five pounds to boot, which I
promised, though he never had it: so we like two good horse-copers,
made a chop and change, and swapped up a roguish bargain, and so he
married my wife and I his. Thus gentlemen did I neither fear God nor
his laws, nor regarded honesty, manhood, or conscience: but these be
trifles and venial sins.
     Now sir, let me boast of myself a little, in that I came to the
credit of a high lawyer, and with my sword freebooted abroad in the
country like a cavalier on horseback, wherein I did excel for
subtlety: For I had first for myself an artificial hair, and a beard
so naturally made, that I could talk, dine, and sup in it, and yet
it should never be spied. I will tell you there rests no greater
villainy than in this practise, for I have robbed a man in the
morning, and come to the same inn and baited, yea and dined with him
the same day: and for my horse that he might not be known I could
ride him one part of the day like a goodly gelding with a large tail
hanging to his fetlock, and the other part of the day I could make
him a cut, for I had an artificial tail so cunningly counterfeited,
that the ostler when he dressed him could not perceive it. By these
policies I little cared for hues and cries, but straight with
disguising myself, would outslip them all, and as for my cloak it
was Tarmosind (as they do term it) made with two outsides that I
could turn it how I list, for howsoever I wore it the right side
still seemed to be outward.


A Merry Tale how Ned Browne Used a Priest.
     I remember how prettily once I served a priest, and because one
death dischargeth all, and is as good as a general pardon, hear how
I served him.
     I chanced as I rode into Berkshire to light in the company of a
fat priest that had hanging at his saddle bow a cap-case well
stuffed with crowns that he went to pay for the purchase of some
lands: Falling in talk with him (as communication will grow betwixt
travellers) I behaved myself so demurely, that he took me for a very
honest man, & was glad of my company, although ere we parted it cost
him very dear: and amongst other chat he questioned me if I would
sell my horse (for he was a fair large gelding well spread and
foreheaded and so easily and swiftly paced, that I could well ride
him seven mile an hour): I made him answer that I was loath to part
from my gelding, and so shaped him a slight reply, but before we
came at our bait he was so in love with him that I might say him no
nay, so that when we came at our inn and were at dinner together we
swapped a bargain: I had the priest's and twenty nobles to boot for
mine. Well as soon as we had changed, I got me unto the stable, and
there secretly I knit a hair about the horse's fetlock so straight
upon the vein that he began a little to check of that foot, so that
when he was brought forth the horse began to halt; which the priest
espying marvelled at it, and began to accuse me that I had deceived
him. Well, quoth I, 'tis nothing but a blood, and as soon as he is
warm he will go well, and if in riding you like him not, for twenty
shillings loss, I'll change with you at night: the priest was glad
of this, and caused his saddle to be set on my gelding, and so
having his cap-case on the saddle pommell, rode on his way, and I
with him, but still his horse halted, and by that time we were two
miles out of the town he halted right down: at which the priest
chafed, and I said I wondered at it, and thought he was pricked,
bade him alight, and I would see what he ailed, and wished him to
get up on my horse that I had of him for a mile or two, and I would
ride on his, to try if I could drive him from his halt. The priest
thanked me, and was sorrowful, and I feeling about his foot cracked
the hair asunder, and when I had done, got up on him, smiling to
myself to see the cap-case hang so mannerly before me, and putting
spurs to the horse, made him give way a little, but being somewhat
stiff, he halted for half a mile, and then began to fall into his
old pace, which the priest spying, said: Methinks my gelding begins
to leave his halting. Aye marry doth he master parson (quoth I) I'll
warrant you he'll gallop too fast for you to overtake, and so good
Priest farewell, and take no thought for the carriage of your cap-
case. With that I put spurs to him lustily, and away flung I like
the wind: the Parson called to me, and said he hoped that I was but
in jest, but he found it in earnest, for he never had his horse nor
his cap-case after.
     Gentlemen, this is but a jest to a number of villainies that I
have acted, so graceless hath my life been. The most expert and
skilful alchemist, never took more pains in experience of his
metals, the physician in his simples, the mechanical man in the
mystery of his occupation, than I have done in plotting precepts,
rules, axioms, and principles, how smoothly and neatly to foist a
pocket, or nip a bung.
     It were too tedious to hold you with tales of the wonders I
have acted, seeing almost they be numberless, or to make report how
desperately I did execute them, either without fear of God, dread of
the law, or love to my country: for I was so resolutely, or rather
reprobately given, that I held death only as nature's due, and
howsoever ignominiously it might happen unto me, that I little
regarded: which careless disdain to die, made me thrust myself into
every brawl, quarrel, and other bad action whatsoever, running
headlong into all mischief, neither respecting the end, nor
foreseeing the danger: and that secure life hath brought me to this
dishonourable death. But what should I stand here preaching? I lived
wantonly, and therefore let me end merrily, and tell you two or
three of my mad pranks and so bid you farewell.


A Pleasant Tale how Ned Brown Kissed a Gentlewoman and Cut Her
Purse.
     Amongst the rest I remember once walking up and down
Smithfield, very quaintly attired in a fustian doublet and buff
hose, both laid down with gold lace, a silk stock and a new cloak: I
traced up and down very solemnly, as having never a cross to bless
me withal, where being in my dumps there happened to me this
accident following.
     Thus gentlemen being in my dumps, I saw a brave country
gentlewoman coming along from Saint Bartholomew's in a satin gown
and four men attending upon her: by her side she had hanging a
marvellous rich purse embroidered, and not so fair without, but it
seemed to be as well lined within: At this my teeth watered, and as
the prey makes the thief, so necessity, and the sight of such a fair
purse began to muster a thousand inventions in my head how to come
by it: to go by her and nip it I could not, because she had so many
men attending on her: to watch her into a press that was in vain,
for going towards S. John's street, I guessed her about to take
horse to ride home, because all her men were booted. Thus perplexed
for this purse, and yet not so much for the bung as the shells: I at
last resolutely vowed in myself to have it though I stretched a
halter for it: and so calling in my head how to bring my fine
mistress to the blow, at last I performed it thus. She standing and
talking a while with a gentleman, I stepped before her and leaned at
the bar till I saw her leave him, and then stalking towards her very
stoutly as if I had been some young cavalier or captain, I met her
and courteously saluted her, & not only greeted her, but as if I had
been acquainted with her I gave her a kiss, and so in taking
acquaintance closing very familiarly to her I cut her purse: the
gentlewoman seeing me so brave used me kindly, & blushing said, she
knew me not. Are you not mistress, quoth I, such a gentlewoman, and
such a man's wife? No truly sir, quoth she, you mistake me: then I
cry you mercy, quoth I, and am sorry that I was so saucily bold.
There is no harm done sir, said she, because there is no offence
taken, and so we parted, I with a good bung, and my gentlewoman with
a kiss, which I dare safely swear, she bought as dear as ever she
did thing in her life, for what I found in the purse that I keep to
myself. Thus did I plot devices in my head how to profit myself,
though it were to the utter undoing of anyone: I was the first that
invented the letting fall of the key, which had like to cost me
dear, but it is all one, as good then as now: and thus it was.


How Ned Brown Let Fall a Key.
     Walking up and down Paul's, I saw where a nobleman's brother in
England came with certain gentlemen his friends in at the West door,
and how he put up his purse, as having bought some thing in the
Churchyard: I having an eagle's eye, spied a good bung containing
many shells as I guessed, carelessly put up into his sleeve, which
drave me straight into a mutiny with myself how to come by it. I
looked about me if I could see any of my fellow friends walking
there, & straight I found out three or four trusty foists with whom
I talked and conferred about this purse: we all concluded it were
necessary to have it, so we could plot a means how to catch it. At
last I set down the course thus: as soon as the throng grew great,
and that there was jostling in Paul's for room, I stepped before the
gentleman and let fall a key, which stooping to take up, I staid the
gentleman that he was fain to thrust by me, while in the press two
of my friends foisted his purse, and away they went withal, and in
it there was some twenty pound in gold: presently putting his hand
in his pocket for his handkerchief, he missed his purse, and
suspected that he that let fall the key had it; but suppositions are
vain, and so was his thinking seeing he knew me not, for till this
day he never set eye on his purse.


The Species of Cony-Catchers.
     There are a number of my companions yet living in England, who
being men for all companies, will by once conversing with a man, so
draw him to them, that he shall think nothing in the world too dear
for them, and never be able to part from them, until he hath spent
all he hath.
     If he be lasciviously addicted, they have Aretine's Tables<47>
at their fingers' ends, to feed him on with new kind of filthiness:
they will come in with Rous the French Painter, and what unusual
vein in bawdry he had: not a whore or quean about the town but they
know, and can tell you her marks, and where and with whom she hosts.
     If they see you covetously bent, they will tell you wonders of
the philosophers' stone, and make you believe they can make gold of
goose-grease: only you must be at some two or three hundred pounds
cost, or such a trifling matter, to help to set up their stills, and
then you need not care where you beg your bread, for they will make
you do little better if you follow their prescriptions.
     Discourse with them of countries, they will set you on fire
with travelling, yea what place is it they will not swear they have
been in, and I warrant you tell such a sound tale, as if it were all
Gospel they spake: not a corner in France but they can describe.
Venice, why it is nothing, for they have intelligence from it every
hour, & at every word will come in with Strado Curtizano, and tell
you such miracles of Madam Padilia and Romana Imperia,<48> that you
will be mad till you be out of England. And if he see you are caught
with that bait, he will make as though he would leave you, and feign
business about the Court, or that such a nobleman sent for him, when
you will rather consent to rob all your friends, than be severed
from him one hour. If you request his company to travel, he will say
In faith I cannot tell: I would sooner spend my life in your company
than in any man's in England, but at this time, I am not so provided
of money as I would, therefore I can make you no promise: and if a
man should adventure upon such a journey without money, it were
miserable and base, and no man will care for us. Tut, money say you
(like a liberal young master) take no care for that, for I have so
much land and I will sell it, my credit is so much, and I will use
it: I have the keeping of a Cousin's chamber of mine, which is an
old Counsellor, & he this vacation time is gone down into the
country, we will break up his study, rifle his chests, dive in to
the bottom of his bags, but we will have to serve our turn: rather
than fail, we will sell his books, pawn his bedding and hangings, &
make riddance of all his houshold stuff to set us packing. To this
he listens a little, & says: These are some hopes yet, but if he
should go with you, and you have money & he none, you will domineer
over him at your pleasure, and then he were well set up, to leave
such possibilities in England, and be made a slave in another
country: With that you offer to part halves with him, or put all you
have into his custody, before he should think you meant otherwise
then well with him. He takes you at your offer, and promiseth to
husband it so for you, that you shall spend with the best and yet
not waste so much as you do: which makes you (meaning simply) put
him in trust and give him the purse: Then all a boon voyage into the
low Countries you trudge, so to travel up into Italy, but per varios
casus & tot discrimina rerum,<49> in a town of garrison he leaves
you, runs away with your money, and makes you glad to betake
yourself to provant, and to be a gentleman of a company. If he fear
you will make after him, he will change his name, and if there be
any better gentleman than other in the country where he sojourns,
his name he will borrow, and creep into his kindred, or it shall
cost him a fall, and make him pay sweetly for it in the end, if he
take not the better heed. Thus will he be sure to have one ass or
other afoot, on whom he may prey, and ever to have new inventions to
keep himself in pleasing.
     There is no art but he will have a superficial sight into, and
put down every man with talk. and when he hath uttered the most he
can, he makes men believe that he knows ten times more than he will
put into their heads, which are secrets not to be made common to
every one.
     He will persuade you he hath twenty receipts of love powders:
that he can frame a ring with such a quaint device, that if a wench
put it on her finger, she shall not choose but follow you up and
down the streets.
     If you have an enemy that you would fain be rid of, he'll teach
you to poison him with your very looks. To stand on the top of
Paul's with a burning glass in your hand, and cast the Sun with such
a force on a man's face that walks under, that it shall strike him
stark dead more violently than lightning.
     To fill a letter full of needles, which shall be laid after
such a mathematical order, that when he opens it to whom it is sent,
they shall all spring up and fly into his body as forceably as if
they had been blown up with gunpowder, or sent from a caliver's
mouth like small shot.
     To conclude, he will have such probable reasons to procure
belief to his lies, such a smooth tongue to deliver them, and set
them forth with such a grace, that a very wise man he should be that
did not swallow the gudgeon at his hands.
     In this sort have I known sundry young gentlemen of England
trained forth to their own destruction, which makes me the more
willing to forewarn other of such base companions.
     Wherefore, for the rooting out of these sly insinuating
mothworms, that eat men out of their substance unseen, and are the
decay of the forwardest gentlemen and best wits: it were to be
wished that Amasis' Law<50> were revived, who ordained that every
man at the year's end should give account to the magistrate how he
lived, and he that did not so, or could not make an account of an
honest life, to be put to death as a felon without favour or pardon.
     Ye have about London, that (to the disgrace of gentlemen) live
gentleman-like of themselves, having neither money nor land, nor any
lawful means to maintain them: some by play, and they go a-mumming
into the country all Christmas time with false dice, or if there be
any place where gentlemen or merchants frequent in the city or town
corporate, thither will they, either disguised like young merchants,
or substantial citizens, and draw them all dry that ever deal with
them.
     There are some do nothing but walk up & down Paul's, or come to
men's shops to buy wares, with budgets of writings under their arms,
& these will talk with any man about their suits in law, and
discourse unto them how these and these men's bonds they have for
money, that are the chiefest dealers in London, Norwich, Bristol,
and such like places, & complain that they cannot get one penny. Why
if such a man doth owe it you, (will some man say that knows him) I
durst buy the debt of you, let me get it of him as I can: O sayeth
my budget man, I have his hand and seal to show, look here else, and
with that plucks out a counterfeit bond, (as all his other writings
are,) and reads it to him: whereupon, for half in half they
presently compound, and after he hath that ten pound paid him for
his bond of twenty, besides the forfeiture, or so forth, he says
faith these lawyers drink me as dry as a sieve, and I have money to
pay at such a day, and I doubt I shall not be able to compass it.
Here are all the leases and evidences of my land lying in such a
shire, could you lend me forty pound on them till the next Term, or
for some six months? and it shall then be repaid with interest, or
I'll forfeit my whole inheritance, which is better worth than a
hundred marks a year.
     The wealthy gentleman, or young novice, that hath store of
crowns lying by him, greedy of such a bargain, thinking (perhaps) by
one clause or other to defeat him of all he hath, lends him money,
and takes a fair Statute Merchant<51>of his lands before a judge;
but when all comes to all, he hath no more land in England then a
younger brother's inheritance, nor doth any such great occupier as
he feigneth, know him: much less owe him any money: whereby my
covetous master is cheated forty or fifty pound thick at one clap.
     Not unlike to these are they, that coming to ordinaries about
the Exchange, where merchants do table for the most part, will say
they have two or three ships of coals new come from Newcastle, and
wish they could light on a good chapman, that would deal for them
altogether. What's your price saith one? What's your price? saith
another. He holds them at the first at a very high rate, and sets a
good face on it, as though he had such traffic indeed, but afterward
comes down so low, that every man strives who shall give him earnest
first, and ere he be aware, he hath forty shillings clapped in his
hand, to assure the bargain to some one of them: he puts it up
quietly, and bids them enquire for him at such a sign and place,
where he never came, signifying also his name: when in troth he is
but a cozening companion, and no such man to be found. Thus goes he
clear away with forty shillings in his purse for nothing, and they
unlike to see him any more.


A Merry Jest how Ned Browne's Wife Was Cross-Bitten in her Own Art.
     But here note (gentlemen) though I have done many sleights, and
cross-bitten sundry persons: yet so long goes the pitcher to the
water, that at length it comes broken home. Which proverb I have
seen verified: for I remember once that I supposing to cross-bite a
gentleman who had some ten pound in his sleeve, left my wife to
perform the accident, who in the end was cross-bitten herself, and
thus it fell out. She compacted with a hooker, whom some call a
curber, & having before bargained with the gentleman to tell her
tales in her ear all night, he came according to promise, who having
supped and going to bed, was advised by my wife to lay his clothes
in the window where the hooker's crome might cross-bite them from
him: yet secretly intending before in the night time to steal his
money forth of his sleeve. They being in bed together slept soundly:
yet such was his chance that he suddenly wakened long before her, &
being sore troubled with a lask, rose up and made a double use of
his chamberpot: that done, he intended to throw it forth at the
window, which the better to perform, he first removed his clothes
from thence; at which instant the spring of the window rose up of
the own accord. This suddenly amazed him so, that he leapt back,
leaving the chamber pot still standing in the window, fearing that
the devil had been at hand. By & by he espied a fair iron crome come
marching in at the window, which instead of the doublet and hose he
sought for, suddenly took hold of that homely service in the member
vessel, and so plucked goodman jordan with all his contents down pat
on the curber's pate. Never was gentle angler so dressed, for his
face, his head, and his neck, were all besmeared with the soft sir-
reverence, so as he stunk worse than a jakes farmer<38>. The
gentleman hearing one cry out, and seeing his mess of altogether so
strangely taken away, began to take heart to him, and looking out
perceived the curber lie almost brained, almost drowned, & well near
poisoned therewith: whereat laughing heartily to himself, he put on
his own clothes, and got him secretly away, laying my wife's clothes
in the same place, which the gentle angler soon after took; but
never could she get them again till this day.


Ned Browne's Farewell
     "This (gentlemen) was my course of life, and thus I got much by
villainy, and spent it amongst whores as carelessly: I seldom or
never listened to the admonition of my friends, neither did the fall
of other men learn me to beware, and therefore am I brought now to
this end: yet little did I think to have laid my bones in France: I
thought indeed that Tyburn would at last have shaked me by the neck:
but having done villainy in England, this was always my course, to
slip over into the Low Countries, and there for a while play the
soldier, and partly that was the cause of my coming hither: for
growing odious in and about London, for my filching, lifting,
nipping, foisting and cross-biting, that every one held me in
contempt, and almost disdained my company, I resolved to come over
into France: by bearing arms to win some credit, determining with
myself to become a true man. But as men, though they change
countries, alter not their minds: so given over by God into a
reprobate sense, I had no feeling of goodness, but with the dog fell
to my old vomit, and here most wickedly I have committed sacrilege,
robbed a Church, and done other mischeevous pranks, for which justly
I am condemned and must suffer death: whereby I learn, that revenge
deferred is not quittanced: that though God suffer the wicked for a
time yet he pays home at length; for while I lasciviously led a
careless life, if my friends warned me of it, I scoffed at them, &
if they told me of the gallows, I would swear it was my destiny, and
now I have proved myself no liar: yet must I die more basely and be
hanged out at a window.
     "Oh countrymen and gentlemen, I have held you long, as good at
the first as at the last, take then this for a farewell: Trust not
in your own wits, for they will become too wilful oft, and so
deceive you. Boast not in strength, nor stand not on your manhood so
to maintain quarrels; for the end of brawling is confusion: but use
your courage in defence of your country, and then fear not to die;
for the bullet is an honourable death. Beware of whores, for they be
the sirens that draw men on to destruction, their sweet words are
enchantments, their eyes allure, and their beauties bewitch: Oh take
heed of their persuasions, for they be crocodiles, that when they
weep, destroy. Truth is honourable, and better is it to be a poor
honest man, than a rich & wealthy thief: for the first end is the
gallows, and what a shame is it to a man's friends, when he dies so
basely. Scorn not labour (gentlemen) nor hold not any course of life
bad or servile, that is profitable and honest, lest in giving
yourselves over to idleness, and having no yearly maintenance, you
fall into many prejudicial mischiefs. Contemn not the virtuous
counsel of a friend, despise not the hearing of God's ministers,
scoff not at the magistrates, but fear God, honour your Prince, and
love your country, then God will bless you, as I hope he will do me
for all my manifold offences, and so Lord into thy hands I commit my
spirit:" and with that he himself sprung out at the window and died.
     Here by the way you shall understand, that going over into
France, he near unto Arx<52> robbed a church, & was therefore
condemned, and having no gallows by, they hanged him out at a
window, fastening the rope about the bar: and thus this Ned Browne
died miserably, that all his lifetime had been full of mischief &
villainy, sleightly at his death regarding the state of his soul.
But note a wonderful judgement of God showed upon him after his
death: his body being taken down, & buried without the town, it is
verified, that in the night time there came a company of wolves, and
tore him out of his grave, and eat him up, whereas there lay many
soldiers buried, & many dead carcasses, that they might have preyed
on to have filled their hungry paunches. But the judgments of God as
they are just, so they are inscrutable: yet thus much we may
conjecture, that as he was one that delighted in rapine and stealth
in his life, so at his death the ravenous wolves devoured him, &
plucked him out of his grave, as a man not worthy to be admitted to
the honour of any burial. Thus have I set down the life and death of
Ned Browne, a famous cutpurse and cony-catcher, by whose example if
any be profited, I have the desired end of my labour.
FINIS.


THE DEFENCE OF CONY-CATCHING.


Title Page

THE DEFENCE OF
Conny catching.
OR
A CONFVTATION OF THOSE
two iniurious Pamphlets published by R. G. against
the practitioners of many Nimble-witted
and mysticall Sciences.
By Cuthbert Cunny-catcher, Licentiate in Whit-
tington Colledge.<42>
Qui bene latuit bene vixit, dominatur enim
fraus in omnibus. <53>
Printed at London by A. I. for Thomas Gubbins
and are to be sold by Iohn Busbie. 1592. (4°)


Frontispiece


Frontispiece – A Rabbit with sword and shield


To The Readers
To All my Good Friends Health
     As Plato (my good friends) travelled from Athens to Egypt and
from thence through sundry climes to increase his knowledge: so I as
desirous as he to search the depth of those liberal arts wherein I
was a professor, left my study in Whittington College<54> & traced
the country to grow famous in my faculty, so that I was so expert in
the art of cony-catching by my continual practice that that learned
philosopher Jack Cuttes, whose deep insight into this science had
drawn him thrice through every gaol in England, meeting of me at
Maidstone, gave me the bucklers<55> as the subtlest that ever he saw
in that quaint and mystical form of foolosophy: for if ever I
brought my cony but to crush a pot of ale with me, I was as sure of
all the crowns in his purse, as if he had conveyed them into my
proper possession by a deed of gift with his own hand.
     At dequoy, mumchance, catch-dolt, oure-le-bourse, non est
possible, Dutch noddy or Irish one and thirty<56> none durst ever
make compare with me for excellence: but as so many heads so many
wits, so some that would not stoop a farthing at cards would venture
all the bite in their bung<57> at dice. Therefore had I cheats for
the very sice, of the squariers, langrets, gourds, stop-dice,
highmen, lowmen, and dice barred for all advantages<58>: that if I
fetched in any novice either at tables or any other game of hazard,
I would be sure to strip him of all that his purse had in esse or
his credit in posse<59> ere the simple cony and I parted.
     When neither of these would serve, I had consorts that could
verse, nip, and foist, so that I had a superficial sight into every
profitable faculty. Insomuch that my principles grew authentical,
and I so famous that had I not been crossed by those two peevish
pamphlets, I might at the next midsummer have worn Doctor Storie's
cap for a favour. For I travelled almost throughout all England,
admired for my ingenious capacity, till coming about Exeter, I began
to exercise my art, and drawing in a tanner for a tame cony, as soon
as he had lost two shillings he made this reply. Sirrah, although
you have a livery on your back<60> and a cognizance to countenance
you withal, and bear the port of a gentleman, yet I see you are a
false knave and a cony-catcher, and this companion your setter, and
that before you and I part, I'll prove.
     At these words cony-catcher and setter, I was driven into as
great a maze as if one had dropped out of the clouds, to hear a
peasant cant the words of art belonging to our trade: yet I set a
good face on the matter and asked him what he meant by cony-
catching. Marry (quoth he), although it is your practice, yet I have
for 3 pence bought a little pamphlet that hath taught me to smoke
such a couple of knaves as you be. When I heard him talk of smoking,
my heart waxed cold and I began to gather into him gently. No no
(quoth he), you cannot verse upon me; this book hath taught me to
beware of cross-biting. And so to be brief, he used me courteously,
and that night caused the constable to lodge me in prison, & the
next morning I was carried before the justice, where likewise he had
this cursed book of cony-catching, so that he could tell the secrets
of mine art better than myself: whereupon after strict examination I
was sent to the gaol, & at the sessions, by good hap & some friend
that my money procured me, I was delivered. As soon as I was at
liberty, I got one of these books & began to toss it over very
devoutly, wherein I found our art so perfectly anatomized as if he
had been practitioner in our faculty forty winters before. Then with
a deep sigh I began to curse this R.G. that had made a public spoil
of so noble a science, and to exclaim against that palpable ass
whosoever, that would make any penman privy to our secret sciences.
But see the sequel, I smothered my sorrow in silence, and away I
trudged out of Devonshire & went towards Cornwall, & coming to a
simple ale-house to lodge, I found at a square table hard by the
fire half a dozen country farmers at cards. The sight of these
penny-fathers at play drove me straight into a pleasant passion to
bless fortune that had offered such sweet opportunity to exercise my
wits & fill my purse with crowns, for I counted all the money they
had mine by proper interest. As thus I stood looking on them playing
at cross-ruff, one was taken revoking, whereat the other said: What,
neighbour, will you play the cony-catcher with us? no, no, we have
read the book as well as you. Never went a cup of small beer so
sorrowfully down an ale-knight's belly in a frosty morning as that
word struck to my heart, so that for fear of trouble I was fain to
try my good hap at square play, at which, fortune favouring me, I
won twenty shillings, and yet do as simply as I could, I was not
only suspected, but called cony-catcher and cross-biter. But away I
went with the money and came presently to London, where I no sooner
arrived amongst the crew but I heard of a second part worse than the
first, which drave me into such a great choler that I began to
inquire what this R.G. should be. At last I learned that he was a
scholar and a Master of Arts and a cony-catcher in his kind, though
not at cards, and one that favoured good fellows, so they were not
palpable offenders in such desperate laws: whereupon reading his
books and surveying every line with deep judgement, I began to note
folly in the man, that would strain a gnat and let pass an elephant,
that would touch small scapes, and let gross faults pass without any
reprehension. Insomuch that I resolved to make an apology, and to
answer his libellous invectives, and to prove that we cony-catchers
are like little flies in the grass which live on little leaves and
do no more harm, whereas there be in England other professions that
be great cony-catchers and caterpillars that make barren the field
wherein they bait.
     Therefore, all my good friends vouch of my pains and pray for
my proceedings, for I mean to have a bout with this R.G. and to give
him such a veny that he shall be afraid hereafter to disparage that
mystical science of cony-catching: if not, and that I prove too weak
for him in sophistry, I mean to borrow Will Bickerton's blade, of as
good a temper as Morglay King Arthur's sword was, and so challenge
him to the single combat. But desirous to end the quarrel with the
pen if it be possible, hear what I have learned in Whittington
College.<42>
Yours in cards and dice
Cuthbert Cony-catcher.


The Defence of Cony-Catching.
     I cannot but wonder, Master R.G. what poetical fury made you so
fantastic to write against cony-catchers? Was your brain so barren
that you had no other subject? or your wits so dried with dreaming
of love-pamphlets that you had no other humour left but satirically
with Diogenes to snarl at all men's matters? You never found in
Tully<61> nor Aristotle what a setter or a verser was.
     It had been the part of a scholar, to have written seriously of
some grave subject, either philosophically to have shown how you
were proficient in Cambridge, or divinely to have manifested your
religion to the world. Such trivial trinkets and threadbare trash
had better seemed T.D.<62>, whose brains beaten to the yarking up of
ballads, might more lawfully have glanced at the quaint conceits of
cony-catching and cross-biting.
     But to this my objection methinks I hear your mastership
learnedly reply, Nascimur pro patria:<1> Every man is not born for
himself, but for his country: and that the end of all studious
endeavours ought to tend to the advancing of virtue, or suppressing
of vice in the commonwealth. So that you have herein done the part
of a good subject and a good scholar, to anatomize such secret
villainies as are practised by cozening companions to the overthrow
of the simple people, for by the discovery of such pernicious laws
you seek to root out of the commonwealth such ill and licentious-
living persons as do Ex alieno succo vivere, live of the sweat of
other men's brows, and under subtle shifts of wit abused, seek to
ruin the flourishing estate of England. These you call vipers, moths
of the commonwealth, caterpillars worse than God rained down on
Egypt, rotten flesh which must be divided from the whole.
Ense resecandum est ne pars sincera trahitur.<27>
     This Master R.G. I know will be your answer, as it is the
pretended cause of your injurious pamphlets. And indeed it is very
well done, but greater had your praise been if you had entered into
the nature of more gross abuses, and set down the particular
enormities that grow from such palpable villainies. For truth it is
that this is the iron age<63>, wherein iniquity hath the upper hand,
and all conditions and estates of men seek to live by their wits,
and he is counted wisest that hath the deepest insight into the
getting of gains: everything now that is found profitable is counted
honest and lawful: and men are valued by their wealth, not by their
virtues. He that cannot dissemble cannot live, and men put their
sons nowadays apprentices not to learn trades and occupations but
crafts and mysteries.
     If then wit in this age be counted a great patrimony, and
subtlety an inseparable accident to all estates, why should you be
so spiteful, Master R.G., to poor cony-catchers above all the rest,
sith they are the simplest souls of all in shifting to live in this
over-wise world?
     But you play like the spider that makes her web to entrap and
snare little flies, but weaves it so slenderly that the great ones
break through without any damage. You strain gnats, and pass over
elephants: you scour the pond of a few croaking frogs and leave
behind an infinite number of most venomous scorpions. You decipher
poor cony-catchers, that perhaps with a trick at cards win forty
shillings from a churl that can spare it, and never talk of those
caterpillars that undo the poor, ruin whole Lordships, infect the
commonwealth, and delight in nothing but in wrongful extorting and
purloining of pelf, whenas such be the greatest cony-catchers of
all, as by your leave, Master R.G., I will make manifest.
     Sir-reverence on your worship, had you such a mote in your eye
that you could not see those fox-furred gentlemen that hide under
their gowns faced with foins, more falsehood than all the cony-
catchers in England beside, those miserable usurers (I mean) that
like vultures prey upon the spoil of the poor, sleeping with his
neighbour's pledges all night in his bosom, and feeding upon
forfeits and penalties as the ravens do upon carrion? If his poor
neighbour want to supply his need, either for his household
necessities or his rent at the day, he will not lend a penny for
charity, all his money is abroad, but if he offer him either cow or
sow, mare or horse, or the very corn scarce sprouted out of the
ground to sell, so the bargain may be cheap, though to the beggary
of the poor man, he chops with him straight, and makes the poor cony
fare the worse all the year after. Why write you not of these cony-
catchers Master R.G.?
     Besides if pawns come, as the lease of a house, or the fee-
simple in mortgage, he can out of his furred cassock draw money to
lend: but the old cole hath such quirks and quiddities in the
conveyance, such provisos, such days, hours, nay minutes of payment
that if his neighbour break but a moment, he takes the forfeit, and
like a pink-eyed ferret so claws the poor cony in the burrow that he
leaves no hair on his breech nor on his back ere he parts with him.
Are not these vipers of the commonwealth, and to be exclaimed
against not in small pamphlets but in great volumes?
     You set down how there be requisite setters and versers in
cony-catching, and be there not so, I pray you, in usury? for when a
young youthful gentleman, given a little to lash out liberally,
wanteth money, makes he not his moan first to the broker, as subtle
a knave to induce him to his overthrow as the wiliest setter or
verser in England, and he must be feed to speak to the usurer, and
have so much in the pound for his labour; then he shall have grant
of money and commodities together, so that if he borrow a hundred
pound he shall have forty in silver and threescore in wares, dead
stuff, God wot, as lute-strings, hobby-horses, or (if he be greatly
favoured) brown paper or cloth, and that shoots out in the lash.
Then his land is turned over in statute or recognizance for six
months and six months, so that he pays some thirty in the hundred to
the usurer, beside the scrivener, he hath a blind share: but when he
comes to sell his threescore pound commodities, 'tis well if he get
five and thirty.
     Thus is the poor gentleman made a mere and simple cony, and
versed upon to the uttermost, and yet if he break his day, loseth as
much land as cost his father a thousand marks.
     Is not this cozenage and cony-catching, Master R.G., and more
daily practiced in England, and more hurtful than our poor shifting
at cards, and yet your mastership can wink at the cause? They be
wealthy, but Cuthbert Cony-catcher cares for none of them, no more
than they care for him, and therefore will reveal all. And because,
Master R.G., you were pleasant in examples, I'll tell you a tale of
a usurer, done within a mile of a knave's head, and since the cuckoo
sung last, and it fell out thus.


A Pleasant Tale of an Usurer.
     It fortuned that a young gentleman not far off from Cockermouth
was somewhat slipped behindhand and grown in debt so that he durst
hardly show his head for fear of his creditors, and having wife and
children to maintain, although he had a proper land, yet wanting
money to stock his ground, he lived very bare: whereupon he
determined with himself to go to an old penny-father that dwelt hard
by him and to borrow some money of him, and so to lay his land in
mortgage for the repayment of it.
     He no sooner made the motion but it was accepted, for it was a
goodly lordship worth in rent of assize seven score pound by the
year, and did abut upon the usurer's ground which drew the old churl
to be marvellous willing to disburse money, so that he was content
to lend him two hundred marks for three year according to the
statute, so that he might have the land for assurance of his money.
     The gentleman agreed to that, and promised to acknowledge a
statute staple to him, with letters of defeasance<64>. The usurer
(although he liked this well, and saw the young man offered more
than reason required) yet had a further fetch to have the land his
whatsoever should chance, and therefore he began to verse upon the
poor cony thus.
     Sir (quoth he) if I did not pity your estate, I would not lend
you my money at such a rate, for whereas you have it after ten
pounds in the hundred, I can make it worth thirty. But seeing the
distress you, your wife, and children are in, and considering all
grows through your own liberal nature, I compassionate you the more,
and would do for you as for mine own son; therefore if you shall
think good to follow it, I will give you fatherly advice: I know you
are greatly indebted, and have many unmerciful creditors, and they
have you in suit and I doubt ere long will have some extent against
your lands; so shall you be utterly undone, and I greatly
encumbered. Therefore to avoid all this, in my judgement it were
best for you to make a deed of gift of all your lands without
condition or promise to some one faithful friend or other in whom
you may repose credit, so shall your enemies have no advantage
against you: and seeing they shall have nothing but your bare body
liable to their executions, they will take the more easy and speedy
composition. I think this the surest way, and if you durst repose
yourself in me, God is my witness I would be to you as your father
if he lived. How say you to this compendious tale, Master R.G.,
could the proudest setter or verser in the world have drawn on a
cony more cunningly?
     Well, again to our young gentleman, who simply (with tears in
his eyes to hear the kindness of the usurer) thanked him heartily,
and deferred not to put in practice his counsel, for he made an
absolute deed of gift from wife and children to this usurer of all
his lordship, and so had the two hundred marks upon the plain
forfeit of a bond.
     To be short, the money made him and his merry, and yet he did
husband it so well, that he not only duly paid the interest but
stocked his grounds and began to grow out of debt, so that his
creditors were willing to bear with him. Against the three years
were expired, he made shift by the help of his friends for the
money, and carried it home to the usurer, thanking him greatly and
craving a return of his deed of gift. Nay, soft, sir (saith the old
churl), that bargain is yet to make; the land is mine, to me and
mine heirs forever by a deed of gift from your own hand, and what
can be more sure: take the money if you please, and there is your
bond, but for the lordship, I will enter on it tomorrow: yet if you
will be my tenant, you shall have it before another, and that is all
the favour you shall have of me.
     At this the gentleman was amazed, and began to plead conscience
with him, but in vain, whereupon he went sorrowfully home and told
his wife, who as a woman half lunatic ran with her little children
to his house, and cried out, but bootless: for although they called
him before the chief of the country, yet sith the law had granted
him the fee simple thereof, he would not part withal: so that this
distressed gentleman was fain to become tenant to this usurer, and
for two hundred marks to lose a lordship worth six or seven thousand
pounds. I pray you, was not this an old cony-catcher, Mr. R.G., that
could lurch a poor cony of so many thousands at one time? whether is
our crossing of cards more perilous to the commonwealth than this
cozenage for land? you wink at it, but I will tell all; yet hear out
the end of my tale, for as fortune fell out, the usurer was made a
cony himself.
     The gentleman and his wife smothering this with patience, she
that had a reaching wit & hair brain revenge in her head, counselled
her husband to make a voyage from home & to stay a week or two, and
(quoth she) before you come again you shall see me venture fair for
the land. The gentleman, willing to let his wife practise her wits,
went his way, and left all to his wife's discretion. She after her
husband was four or five days from home, was visited by the usurer,
who used her very kindly, and sent victuals to her house, promising
to sup with her that night, and that she should not want anything in
her husband's absence.  The gentlewoman with gracious acceptance
thanked him, and bade divers of her neighbours to bear him company,
having a further reach in her head than he suspected. For the old
churl coming an hour before supper-time, even as she herself would
wish, for an amorous wehee or two, as old jades whinny when they
cannot wag the tail, began to be very pleasant with his tenant, and
desired her to show him all the rooms in her house, and happily
(saith he) if I die without issue, I may give it to your children,
for my conscience bids me be favourable to you.
     The gentlewoman led him through every part, and at last brought
him into a back room much like a back-house, where she said thus
unto him.
     Sir, this room is the most unhandsomest in all the house, but
if there were a dormer built to it, and these shut windows made bay
windows and glazed, it would make the properest parlour in all the
house: for (saith she) put your head out at this window, and look
what a sweet prospect belongs unto it.
     The usurer mistrusting nothing, thrust out his crafty sconce,
and the gentlewoman shut to the window, and called her maids to
help, where they bound and pinioned the caterpillar's arms fast, and
then stood he with his head into a back-yard, as if he had been on a
pillory, and struggle he durst not for stifling himself. When she
had him thus at the vantage, she got a couple of sixpenny nails and
a hammer, and went into the yard, having her children attending upon
her, every one with a sharp knife in their hands, and then coming to
him with a stern countenance, she looked as Medea did when she
attempted revenge against Jason. The usurer, seeing this tragedy,
was afraid of his life and cried out, but in vain, for her maids
made such a noise that his shriking could not be heard whilst she
nailed one ear fast to the window and the other to the stanchel.
Then began she to use these words unto him.
     Ah, vile and injurious caterpillar, God hath sent thee to seek
thine own revenge, and now I and my children will perform it. For
sith thy wealth doth so countenance thee that we cannot have thee
punished for thy cozenage, I myself will be justice, judge, and
executioner, for as the pillory belongs to such a villain, so have I
nailed thy ears, and they shall be cut off to the perpetual example
of such purloining reprobates, and the executors shall be these
little infants whose right without conscience or mercy thou so
wrongfully detainest. Look on this old churl little babes, this is
he that with his cozenage will drive you to beg and want in your
age, and at this instant brings your father to all this present
misery, have no pity upon him, but you two cut off his ears, and
thou (quoth she to the eldest) cut off his nose, and so be revenged
on the villain whatsoever fortune me for my labour. At this the
usurer cried out, and bade her stay her children, and he would
restore the house & land again to her husband. I cannot believe
thee, base churl, quoth she, for thou that wouldst perjure thyself
against so honest a gentleman as my husband will not stick to
forswear thyself were thou at liberty, and therefore I will mangle
thee to the uttermost. As thus she was ready to have her children
fall upon him, one of her maids came running in and told her her
neighbours were come to supper: Bid them come in, quoth she, and
behold this spectacle. Although the usurer was passing loath to have
his neighbours see him thus tyrannously used, yet in they came, and
when they saw him thus mannerly in a new-made pillory, and his ears
fast nailed, some wondered, some laughed, and all stood amazed till
the gentlewoman discoursed to them all the cozenage, and how she
meant to be revenged: some of them persuaded her to let him go;
others were silent, and some bade him confess: he hearing them
debate the matter, and not to offer to help him, cried out: Why, and
stand you staring on me, neighbours, and will not you save my life?
No, quoth the gentlewoman, he or she that stirs to help thee shall
pay dearly for it, and therefore, my boys, off with his ears: then
he cried out, but stay, and he would confess all, when from point to
point he rehearsed how he had cozened her husband by a deed of gift
only made to him in trust, and there was content to give him the two
hundred marks freely for amends, and to yield up before any man of
worship the land again into his possession, and upon that he bade
them all bear witness. Then the gentlewoman let loose his ears, and
let slip his head, and away went he home with his bloody lugs, and
tarried not to take part of the meat he had sent, but the
gentlewoman & her neighbours made merry therewith, and laughed
heartily at the usage of the usurer. The next day it was bruited
abroad, and came to the ears of the worshipful of the country, who
sat in commission upon it, and found out the cozenage of the usurer,
so they praised the wit of the gentlewoman, restored her husband to
the land, and the old churl remained in discredit, and was a
laughing-stock to all the country all his life after.


Cony-catching Millers, and a Pleasant Tale of a Miller and an Ale-
wife's Boy of Edmonton.
     I pray you, what say you to Monsieur the Miller with the golden
thumb, whether think you him a cony-catcher or no? that robs every
poor man of his meal and corn, and takes toll at his own pleasure,
how many conies doth he take up in a year? for when he brings their
wheat to the mill he sells them meal of their own corn in the
market. I omit Miles the miller's cozenage for wenching affairs, as
no doubt in these causes they be mighty cony-catchers, and mean to
speak of their policy in filching and stealing of meal. For you must
note, that our jolly miller doth not only verse upon the poor and
rich for their toll, but hath false hoppers conveyed under the fall
of his mill, where all the best of the meal runs by, this is, if the
party be by that bringeth the corn, but because many men have many
eyes, the miller will drive them off for their grist for a day or
two, and then he plays his pranks at his own pleasure. I need not
tell that stale jest of the gentleman's miller that kept court and
leet once every week, and used to set in every sack a candle, and so
summon the owners to appear by their names: if they came not, as
they were far enough from that place, then he amerced them, and so
took triple toll of every sack. One night amongst the rest, the
gentleman his master was under the mill and heard all his knavery,
how everyone was called and paid his amerciament: at last he heard
his own name called, and then stepping up the ladder he bade stay,
for he was there to make his appearance. I do imagine that the
miller was blank, and perhaps his master called him knave, but the
fox, the more he is cursed the better he fares, and the oftener the
miller is called thief, the richer he waxeth: and therefore do men
rightly by a by word bid the miller put out, and if he asketh what,
they say a thief's head and a thief's pair of ears, for such grand
cony-catchers are these millers, that he that cannot verse upon a
poor man's sack is said to be born with a golden thumb. But that you
may see more plainly their knavery, I'll tell you a pleasant tale
performed not many years since by a miller in Enfield mill, ten
miles from London, and an ale-wife's boy of Edmonton, but because
they are all at this present alive I will conceal their names, but
thus it fell out.
     An ale-wife of Edmonton who had a great vent for spiced cakes,
sent her son often to Enfield mill for to have her wheat ground, so
that the boy, who was of a quick spirit & ripe wit, grew very
familiar both with the miller and his man, and could get his corn
sooner put in the mill than any boy in the country beside. It
fortuned on a time that this goodwife wanting meal, bade her boy hie
to the mill, and be at home that night without fail, for she had not
a pint of flour in the house. Jack her son, for so we will call his
name, lays his sack on his mare's back, and away he rides singing
towards Enfield: as he rode he met at The Washes<65> with the
miller, and gave him the time of the day, Godfather, quoth he,
whither ride you? To London, Jack, quoth the miller. Oh good
godfather, quoth the boy, tell me what store of grist is at the
mill? marry great store quoth the miller: but Jack if thou wilt do
me an errand to my man, I'll send thee by a token that thou shalt
have thy corn cast on & ground as soon as thou comest. I'll say and
do what you will to be dispatched, for my mother hath neither cakes
nor flour at home: Then, Jack, saith the miller, bid my man grind
thy corn next, by that token he look to my bitch and feed her well.
I will godfather, saith the boy, and rides his way, and marvelled
with himself what bitch it was that he bade his man feed,
considering for two or three years he had used to the mill, and
never saw a dog nor bitch but a little prick-eared sholt that kept
the mill door. Riding thus musing with himself, at last he came to
Enfield, and there he had his corn wound up: as soon as he came up
the stairs, the miller's man, being somewhat sleepy, began to ask
Jack drowsily what news. Marry, quoth the boy, the news is this,
that I must have my corn laid on next: Soft, Jack, quoth the
miller's man, your turn will not come afore midnight, but ye are
always in haste, soft fire makes sweet malt, your betters shall be
served afore you this time. Not so quoth the boy, for I met my
godfather at the Washes riding to London, and told him what haste I
had, and so he bids my grist shall be laid on next, by that token
you must look to his bitch, and feed her well. At that the miller's
man smiled, and said he should be the next, and so rose up and
turned a pin behind the hopper. Jack marked all this, and being a
wily and a witty boy, mused where this bitch should be, and seeing
none began to suspect some knavery, and therefore being very
familiar was bold to look about in every corner while the man was
busy about the hopper; at last Jack turning up a cloth that hung
before the trough spied under the hopper below, where a great poke
was tied with a cord almost full of fine flour, that ran at a false
hole underneath, and could not be spied by any means. Jack, seeing
this, began to suspect this was the miller's bitch that he commanded
his man to feed, and so smiled and let it alone: at last when the
corn was ground off that was in the hopper, Jack laid on his, and
was very busy about it himself, so that the miller's man set him
down and took a nap, knowing the boy could look to the mill almost
as well as himself: Jack all this while had an eye to the bitch, and
determined at last to slip her halter, which he warily performed,
for when his corn was ground and he had put up his meal, he whipped
asunder the cord with his knife that held the poke, and thrust it
into the mouth of his sack: now there was in the poke a bushel and
more of passing fine flour, that the miller's bitch had eaten that
day; as soon as Jack had tied up his sack, there was striving who
should lay on corn next, so that the miller's man waked, and Jack
desiring one to help him up with his corn, took his leave and went
his way, riding merrily homeward, smiling to think how he had
cozened the miller: as he rode, at that same place where he met the
miller outward, he met him homeward. How now Jack quoth the miller,
hast ground? Aye, I thank you, godfather, quoth the boy. But didst
remember my errand to my man, says he; didst bid him look to my
bitch well? Oh godfather quoth the boy, take no care for your bitch;
she is well, for I have her here in my sack, whelps and all: Away
rides Jack at this, laughing, and the miller grinning, but when he
found it true, I leave you to guess how he and his man dealt
together, but how the ale-wife sported at the knavery of her son
when he told her all the jest, that imagine, but howsoever, for all
that Jack was ever welcome to the mill, and ground before any, and
whosesoever sack fed the bitch, Jack scaped ever toll-free, that he
might conceal the miller's subtlety.
     Was not this miller a cony-catcher, Master R.G.? What should I
talk of the baser sort of men whose occupation cannot be upholden
without craft, there is no mystery nor science almost wherein a man
might thrive without it be linked to this famous art of cony-
catching. The ale-wife unless she nick her pots and cony-catch her
guests with stone pots and petty cans, can hardly pay her brewer,
nay, and yet that will not serve, the chalk must walk to set up now
& then a shilling or two too much, or else the rent will not be
answered at the quarter-day, besides hostry, faggots, and fair
chambering,<66> and pretty wenches that have no wages but what they
get by making of beds. I know some tap-houses about the suburbs
where they buy a shoulder of mutton for two groats, and sell it to
their guest for two shillings, and yet have no female friends to sup
withal: let such take heed lest my father's white horse lose saddle
& bridle & they go on foot to the devil on pilgrimage. Tush Master
R.G. God is my witness I have seen chandlers about London have two
pair of weights, and when the searchers come, they show them those
that are sealed, but when their poor neighbours buy wax, they use
them that lack weight. I condemn not all, but let such amend as are
touched at the quick. And is not this flat cony-catching; yes, if it
please your mastership, & worser. Why, the base sort of ostlers have
their shifts, & the crew of St. Patrick's costermongers can sell a
simple man a crab for a pippin. And but that I have loved wine well,
I would touch both the vintner and his bush, for they have such
brewing and tunning, such chopping and changing, such mingling &
mixing, what of wine with water in the quart-pot, and tempering one
wine with another in the vessel, that it is hard to get a neat cup
of wine and simple of itself, in most of our ordinary taverns, & do
not they make poor men conies, that for their current money give
them counterfeit wine.
     What say you to the butcher with his pricks, that hath policies
to puff up his meat to please the eye? is not all his craft used to
draw the poor cony to rid him of his ware? Hath not the draper his
dark shop to shadow the dye and wool of his cloth, and all to make
the country gentleman or farmer a cony? What trade can maintain his
traffic? what science uphold itself? what man live, unless he grow
into the nature of a cony-catcher? Do not the lawyers make long
pleas, stand upon their demurs, and have their quirks and quiddities
to make his poor client a cony: I speak not generally, for so they
be the ministers of justice and the patrons of the poor men's right,
but particularly of such as hold gains their God, and esteem more of
coin than of conscience.


A Pleasant Tale Of Will Sommers.
     I remember by the way a merry jest performed by a fool, yet
wittily hit home at hazard, as blind men shoot the crow.
     King Henry the Eighth of famous memory, walking one day in his
privy garden with Will Sommers his fool, it fortuned that two
lawyers had a suit unto his Majesty for one piece of ground that was
almost out of lease and in the King's gift, and at time put up their
supplication to his Highness, and at that instant one of the
Pantry<67> that had been a long serviture, had spied out the same
land and exhibited his petition for the same gift, so that in one
hour all the three supplications were given to the King, which his
Highness noting, and being as then pleasantly disposed, he revealed
it to them that were by him, how there were three fishes at one
bait, and all gaped for a benefice, and he stood in doubt on whom to
bestow it, and so showed them the supplications: the courtiers spoke
for their fellow, except two that were feed by the lawyers, and they
particularly pleaded for their friends, yielding many reasons to the
King on both sides. At last his Majesty said he would refer the
matter to Will Sommers, which of them his fool thought most worthy
of it should have the land. Will was glad of this, and loved him of
the Pantry well, and resolved he should have the ground, but the
fool brought it about with this pretty jest: Marry quoth he, what
are these? two lawyers? Aye, Will, said the King. Then, quoth the
fool, I will use them as they use their poor clients. Look here,
quoth he, I have a walnut in my hand, and I will divide it among the
three, so Will cracked it, and gave to one lawyer one shell, and to
another the other shell, and to him of the Pantry the meat, so shall
thy gift be, Harry, quoth he, this lawyer shall have good books, and
this, fair promises, but my fellow of the Pantry shall have the
land. For thus deal they with their clients; two men go to two, and
spend all they have upon the law, and at last have nothing but bare
shells for their labour. At this the King and his noblemen laughed,
the Yeoman of the Pantry had the gift, and the lawyers went home
with fleas in their ears by a fool's verdict. I rehearsed this act
to show how men-of-law feed on poor men's purses and make their
country clients oftentimes simple conies. But leaving their common
courses and trivial examples, I will show you, Master R.G., of a
kind of cony-catchers that as yet passeth all these.


Gentlemen Cony-Catchers
     There be in England, but especially about London, certain
quaint, picked, and neat companions, attired in their apparel either
a la mode de France, with a side cloak and a hat of a high block and
a broad brim, as if he could with his head cosmographize the world
in a moment, or else al espagnol, with a straight bombast sleeve
like a quail-pipe, his short cloak, and his rapier hanging as if he
were entering the list to a desperate combat: his beard squared with
such art, either with his moustaches after the lash of lions<68>,
standing as stiff as if he wore a ruler in his mouth, or else nicked
off with the Italian cut, as if he meant to profess one faith with
the upper lip, and another with his nether lip, and then he must be
marquisadoed, with a side peak pendent<69>, either sharp like the
single of a deer<70>, or curtailed like the broad end of a mole
spade. This gentleman, forsooth, haunteth tabling-houses, taverns,
and such places where young novices resort, & can fit his humour to
all companies, and openly shadoweth his disguise with the name of a
traveller, so that he will have a superficial insight into certain
phrases of every language, and pronounce them in such a grace as if
almost he were that countryman born: then shall you hear him vaunt
of his travels and tell what wonders he hath seen in strange
countries: how he hath been at Saint James of Compostella in Spain,
at Madrid in the King's court, and then drawing out his blade he
claps it on the board and swears he bought that in Toledo: then will
he rove to Venice, and with a sigh discover the situation of the
city, how it is seated two leagues from terra firma in the sea, and
speak of Rialto, Treviso and Murano where they make glasses, and to
set the young gentleman's teeth on edge, he will make a long tale of
La Strado Courtizano where the beautiful courtesans dwell,
describing their excellency and what angelical creatures they be,
and how amorously they will entertain strangers. Tush, he will
discourse the state of Barbary<71>, and there to Eschites and
Alcaires<72>, and from thence leap to France, Denmark, and Germany.
After all concluding thus.
     What is a gentleman (saith he) without travel? even as a man
without one eye. The sight of sundry countries made Ulysses so
famous: bought wit is the sweetest, and experience goeth beyond all
patrimonies. Did young gentlemen as well as I know the pleasure &
profit of travel, they would not keep them at home within their
native continent but visit the world, & win more wisdom in
travelling two or three years than all the wealth their ancestors
left them to possess. Ah, the sweet sight of ladies, the strange
wonders in cities, and the divers manners of men and their
conditions were able to ravish a young gentleman's senses with the
surfeit of content, and what is a thousand pound spent to the
obtaining of those pleasures?
     All these novelties doth this pippined braggart boast on, when
his only travel hath been to look on a fair day from Dover cliffs to
Calais, never having stepped a foot out of England, but surveyed the
maps, and heard others talk what they knew by experience. Thus
decking himself like the daw with the fair feathers of other birds,
and discoursing what he heard other men report, he grew so plausible
among young gentlemen that he got his ordinary at the least, and
some gracious thanks for his labour. But haply some amongst many,
tickled with the desire to see strange countries, and drawn on by
his alluring words, would join with him, and question if he meant
ever to travel again. He straight after he hath bitten his peak by
the end, alla Neopolitano, begins thus to reply.
     Sir, although a man of my travel and experience might be
satisfied in the sight of countries, yet so insatiate is the desire
of travelling that if perhaps a young gentleman of a liberal and
courteous nature were desirous to see Jerusalem or Constantinople,
would he well acquit my pains and follow my counsel, I would bestow
a year or two with him out of England. To be brief, if the gentleman
jump with him, then doth he cause him to sell some lordship, and put
some thousand or two thousand pound in the bank to be received by
letters of exchange, and because the gentleman is ignorant, my young
master his guide must have the disposing of it: which he so well
sets out that the poor gentleman never sees any return of his money
after. Then must store of suits of apparel be bought and furnished
every way: at last, he names a ship wherein they should pass, and so
down to Gravesend they go, and there he leaves the young novice,
fleeced of his money and woe-begone, as far from travel as Miles the
merry cobbler of Shoreditch, that swore he would never travel
further than from his shop to the ale-house. I pray you, call you
not these fine-witted fellows cony-catchers, Master R.G.?
     But now sir by your leave a little, what if I should prove you
a cony-catcher Master R.G.? Would it not make you blush at the
matter? I'll go as near to it as the friar did to his hostess's maid
when the clerk of the parish took him at levatum at midnight. Ask
the Queen's players if you sold them not Orlando Furioso for twenty
nobles, and when they were in the country, sold the same play to the
Lord Admiral's men for as much more? Was not this plain cony-
catching, Master R.G.?
     But I hear when this was objected, that you made this excuse:
that there was no more faith to be held with players than with them
that valued faith at the price of a feather: for as they were
comedians to act, so the actions of their lives were chameleon-like,
that they were uncertain, variable, time pleasers, men that measured
honesty by profit, and that regarded their authors not by desert,
but by necessity of time. If this may serve you for a shadow, let me
use it for an excuse of our card cony-catching, for when we meet a
country farmer with a full purse, a miserable miser that either
racks his tenants' rents or sells his grain in the market at an
unreasonable rate: we hold it a devotion to make him a cony in that
he is a caterpillar to others, and gets that by pilling and polling
of the poor that we strip him of by sleight and agility of wit.
     Is there not here resident about London a crew of terrible
hacksters in the habit of gentlemen, well apparelled, and yet some
wear boots for want of stockings, with a lock worn at their left ear
for their mistress' favour, his rapier alla revolto, his poignado>
pendent ready for the stab, and cavilevarst<73> like a warlike
magnifico, yet for all this outward show of pride, inwardly they be
humble in mind and despise worldly wealth, for you shall never take
them with a penny in their purse. These soldados, for under that
profession most of them wander, have a policy to scourge ale-houses,
for where they light in, they never leap out till they have showed
their arithmetic with chalk on every post in the house figured in
ciphers like round Os, till they make the goodman cry O, O, O as if
he should call an Oyez at assize or sessions. Now sir they have
sundry shifts to maintain them in this versing, for either they
creep in with the goodwife and so undo the goodman, or else they
bear it out with great brags if the host be simple, or else they
trip him in some words when he is tipsy that he hath spoken against
some justice of peace or other, or some other great man, and then
they hold him at a bay with that, till his back almost break. Thus
shift they from house to house, having this proverb amongst them:
Such must eat as are hungry, and they must pay that have money. Call
you not these cony-catchers, Master R.G.?
     It were an endless piece of work to discover the abominable
life of brokers, whose shops are the very temples of the devil,
themselves his priests, and their books of account more damnable
than the Alcoran set out by Mahomet: for as they induce young
gentlemen to pawn their lands, as I said before, so they are ready
(the more is the pity that it is suffered) to receive any goods,
howsoever it be come by, having their shops (as they say) a lawful
market to buy and sell in, so that whence grows so many lifts about
London but in that they have brokers their friends to buy whatsoever
they purloin & steal? And yet is the picklock, lift, or hooker that
brings the stolen goods made a flat cony, and used as an instrument
only of their villainy: for suppose he hath lifted a gown or a cloak
or so many parcels as are worth ten pounds, and ventures his life in
hazard for the obtaining of it: the miserable caterpillar the broker
will think he dealeth liberally with him if he give him forty
shillings; so doth he not only maintain felony, but like a thief
cozens the thief. And are not these grand cony-catchers, Master
R.G.?
     I knew not far from Fleet bridge a haberdasher: it were a good
deed to take Paine to tell his name, that took of a boy of seven
year old<74> a rapier worth forty shillings and a stitched taffeta
hat worth ten, and all for five shillings: the gentleman, father to
the child, was sick when necessity drove him thus nigh to lay his
weapon and his bonnet to pawn, and as soon as he recovered, which
was within six weeks after, sent the money, and twelve pence for the
loan, to have the parcels again. But this cut-throat's answer was,
the boy had made him a bill of sale of his hand for a month, and the
day was broken, and he had made the best of the rapier and hat. Was
not this a Jew and a notable cony-catcher, Master R.G.?
     It had been well if you had rolled out your rhetoric against
such a rake-hell. But come to their honest kind of life, and you
shall see how they stand upon circumstances: if you borrow but two
shillings, there must be a groat for the money and a groat for the
bill of sale, and this must be renewed every month, so that they
resemble the box at dice, which being well paid all night will in
the morning be the greatest winner.


A Pleasant Tale How A Holy Brother Cony-catched For A Wife.

     Wer't not a merry jest to have a bout again Master R.G. with
your poetical brethren: amongst the which, one learned hypocrite,
that could brook no abuses in the commonwealth, was so zealous that
he began to put an English she-saint in the Legend<75> for the
holiness of her life: and forgot not so much as her dog, as Toby's
was remembered, that wagged his tail at the sight of his old
mistress. This pure Martinist<76> (if he were not worse) had a
combat between the flesh and the spirit that he must needs have a
wife, which he cunningly cony-catched in this manner.
     First you must understand, that he was a kind of scholastical
companion, nursed up only at grammar school, lest going to the
university, through his nimble wit, too much learning should make
him mad. So he had passed As in praesenti and was gone a proficient
as far as Carmen Heroicum<77>, for he pronounced his words like a
braggart, and held up his head like a malt-horse, and could talk
against bishops, and wish very mannerly the discipline of the
primitive church were restored. Now sir, this gentleman had espied
(I dare not say about Fleet street) a proper maid who had given her
by the decease of her father four hundred pound in money, besides
certain fair houses in the city; to this girl goeth this proper
Greek a-wooing, naming himself to be a gentleman of Cheshire, and
only son and heir to his father, who was a man of great revenues:
and to make the matter more plausible, he had attired his own
brother very orderly in a blue coat and made him his serving-man,
who though he were eldest, yet to advance his younger brother to so
good a marriage was content to lie, cog, and flatter, and to take
any servile pains, to soothe up the matter, insomuch that when her
father-in-law (for her mother was married again, to an honest,
virtuous, and substantial man in Fleet Street or thereabouts) heard
how this young gentleman was a suitor to his daughter-in-law,
careful she should do well, called the serving-man aside, which by
his outward behaviour seemed to be an honest and discreet man, and
began to question with him what his master was, of what parentage,
of what possibility of living after his father's decease, and how
many children he had beside him.
     This fellow, well instructed by his holy brother, without
distrust to the man, simply as he thought, said that he was the son
and heir of one Master &c, dwelling in Cheshire at the manor of &c.,
and that he had a younger brother, but this was heir to all, and
rehearsed a proper living of some five hundred marks a year. The
honest man, knowing divers Cheshire gentlemen of that name, gave
credit to the fellow and made no further inquiry, but gave
countenance to my young master, who by his flattering speeches had
won, not only the maid's favour unto the full, but also the goodwill
of her mother, so that the match shortly was made up, and married
they should be forsooth, and then should she, her father, and her
mother ride home to his father in Cheshire to have sufficient dowry
appointed.
     To be brief, wedded they were, and bedded they had been three
or four nights, and yet for all this fair show the father was a
little jealous, and smoked him, but durst say nothing. But at last,
after the marriage had been past over three or four days, it chanced
that her father and this serving-man went abroad and passed though
St. Paul's Churchyard amongst the stationers, a prentice amongst the
rest, that was a Cheshire man and knew this counterfeit serving-man
and his brother, as being born in the same parish where his father
dwelt, called to him, and said: What, I., how doth your brother, P.?
how doth your father? lives he still? The fellow answered him all
were well, and loath his brother's wife's father should hear
anything, made no stay but departed.
     This acquaintance naming the fellow by his name and asking for
his brother drove the honest citizen into a great maze, and doubted
he, his wife, and his daughter were made conies. Well, he smoothed
all up as if he had heard nothing, and let it pass till he had sent
the man about necessary business, and then secretly returned again
unto the stationer's shop, and began to question with the boy if he
knew the serving-man well that he called to him of late. Aye, marry,
do I, sir, quoth he; I know both him and his brother P. I can tell
you they have an honest poor man to their father, and though now in
his old age he be scarce able to live without the help of the
parish, yet he is well beloved of all his neighbours. The man
hearing this, although it grieved him that he was thus cozened by a
palliard, yet seeing no means to amend it he thought to gird his son
pleasantly, & therefore had divers of his friends and honest wealthy
neighbours to a supper: well, they being at the time appointed come,
come all welcome, who must sit at the board's end but my young
master? and he very coyly bade them all welcome to his father's
house: they all gave him reverent thanks, esteeming him to be a man
of worship and worth. As soon as all were set, and the meat served
in, and the gentleman's serving-man stood mannerly waiting on his
brother's trencher, at last the goodman of the house smiling said:
Son P., I pray you, let your man sit down and eat such part with us
as God hath sent us. Marry quoth Master P. that were well, to make
my man my companion, he is well enough, let him sup with his
fellows. Why sir saith he, in faith be plain, call him brother, and
bid him sit down. Come, cousin I. quoth he, make not strange; I am
sure your brother P. will give you leave. At this Master P. blushed,
and asked his father-in-law what he meant by those words, and
whether he thought his man his brother or no? Aye, by my faith do I
son, quoth he, and account thee no honest man that wilt deny thine
own brother and thy father: for, sir, know I have learned your
pedigree. Alas daughter quoth he, you are well married, for his
father lives of the alms of the parish, and this poor fellow which
he hath made his slave, is his eldest brother. At this his wife
began to weep, all was dashed, and what she thought, God knows. Her
mother cried out, but all was bootless; Master P. confessed the
truth, and his brother sat down at supper, and for all that he had
the wench. I pray you, was not this a cony-catcher, Master R.G.?


A Pleasant Tale Of A Man That Was Married To Sixteen Wives, And How
Courteously His Last Wife Entreated Him.
     But now to be a little pleasant with you, let me have your
opinion what you deem of those amorosos here in England & about
London that (because the old proverb saith change of pasture makes
fat calves) will have in every shire in England a sundry wife, as
for an instance your countryman R.B. Are not they right cony-
catchers? enter into the nature of them, and see whether your pen
had been better employed in discovering their villainies, than a
simple legerdemain at cards. For suppose a man hath but one
daughter, and hath no other dowry but her beauty and honesty, what a
spoil is it for her to light in the hands of such an adulterous and
incestuous rascal? had not her father been better to have lost forty
shillings at cards than to have his daughter so cony-catched and
spoiled forever after? These youths are proper fellows, never
without good apparel and store of crowns, well horsed, and of so
quaint & fine behaviour, & so eloquent, that they are able to induce
a young girl to folly, especially since they shadow their villainy
with the honest pretence of marriage, for their custom is this.
     When they come into the city or other place of credit, or
sometime in a country village, as the fortune of their villainy
leads them, they make inquiry what good marriages are abroad, & on
the Sunday make survey what fair and beautiful maids or widows are
in the parish; then as their licentious lust leads them, whether the
eye for favour or the ear for riches, so they set down their rest, &
sojourn either there or thereabouts, having money at will, and their
companions to soothe up whatsoever damnably they shall protest,
courting the maid or widow with such fair words & sweet promises
that she is often so set on fire that neither the report of others
nor the admonition of their friends can draw them from the love of
the Poligamoi or belswaggers of the country. And when the wretches
have by the space of a month or two satisfied their lust, they wax
weary, & either feign some great journey for awhile to be absent, &
so go & visit some other of his wives, or else if he mean to give
her the bag, he selleth whatsoever he can, and so leaves her spoiled
both of her wealth and honesty, than which there is nothing more
precious to an honest woman. And because you shall see an instance,
I will tell you a pleasant tale performed by our villains in
Wiltshire not long since; I will conceal the parties' names, because
I think the woman is yet alive.
     In Wiltshire there dwelt a farmer of indifferent wealth that
had but only one child, and that was a daughter, a maid of excellent
beauty and good behaviour, and so honest in her conversation, that
the good report of her virtues was well spoken of in all the
country, so that what for her good qualities, & sufficient dowry
that was like to fall to her she had many suitors, men's sons of
good wealth and honest conversation. But whether this maid had no
mind to wed, or she liked none that made love to her, or she was
afraid to match in haste lest she might repent at leisure, I know
not, but she refused all, & kept her still a virgin. But as we see
oftentimes the coyest maids happen on the coldest marriages, playing
like the beetle that makes scorn all day of the daintiest flowers
and at night takes up his lodging in a cowshard, so this maid, whom
we will call Marian, refused many honest and wealthy farmers' sons
and at last lighted on a match that forever after marred her market:
for it fell out thus. One of these notable rogues, by occupation a
tailor, and a fine workman, a reprobate given over to the spoil of
honest maids & to the deflowering of virgins, hearing as he
travelled abroad of this Marian, did mean to have a fling at her,
and therefore came into the town where her father dwelt, and asked
work. A very honest man of that trade, seeing him a passing proper
man and of a very good and honest countenance, and not simply
apparelled, said he would make trial of him for a garment or two,
and so took him into service: as soon as he saw him use his needle
he wondered not only at his workmanship but at the swiftness of his
hand. At last the fellow (whom we will name William) desired his
master that he might use his shears but once for the cutting out of
a doublet, which his master granted, and he used so excellently well
that although his master was counted the best tailor in Wiltshire
yet he found himself a botcher in respect of his new entertained
journeyman, so that from that time forward he was made foreman of
the shop, & so pleased the gentlemen of that shire, that who but
William was talked on for a good tailor in that shire. Well, as
young men and maids meet on Sundays & holy-days, so this tailor was
passing brave, & began to frolic it amongst the maids, & to be very
liberal, being full of silver and gold, & for his personage a
properer man than any was in all the parish, and made afar off a
kind of love to this Marian: who seeing this William to be a very
handsome man began somewhat to affect him, so that in short time she
thought well of his favours, & there grew some love between them,
insomuch that it came to her father's ears, who began to school his
daughter for such foolish affection towards one she knew not what he
was nor whither he would: but in vain, Marian could not but think
well of him, so that her father one day sent for his master, and
began to question of the disposition of his man. The master told the
farmer friendly that what he was he knew not, as being a mere
stranger unto him: but for his workmanship, he was one of the most
excellent both for needle and shears in England; for his behaviour
since he came into his house, he had behaved himself very honestly
and courteously: well apparelled he was, and well moneyed, & might
for his good qualities seem to be a good woman's fellow. Although
this somewhat satisfied the father, yet he was loath a tailor should
carry away his daughter & that she should be driven to live of a
bare occupation whereas she might have landed men to her husbands,
so that he and her friends called her aside and persuaded her from
him, but she flatly told them she never loved any but him, and sith
it was her first love she would not now be turned from it,
whatsoever hap did afterward befall unto her. Her father, that loved
her dearly, seeing no persuasions could draw her from the tailor,
left her to her own liberty, and so she and William agreed together,
that in short time they were married, and had a good portion, and
set up shop, and lived together by the space of a quarter of a year
very orderly. At last satisfied with the lust of his new wife, he
thought it good to visit some other of his wives (for at that
instant he had sixteen alive), and made a scuse to his wife and his
wife's father to go into Yorkshire (which was his native country)
and visit his friends and crave somewhat of his father towards
household. Although his wife was loath to part from her sweet Wil.,
yet she must be content, and so, well horsed and provided, away he
rides for a month or two, that was his furthest day, and down goes
he into some other country to solace himself with some other of his
wives. In this meanwhile, one of his wives that he married in or
about Taunton in Somersetshire had learned of his villainy, and how
many wives he had, and by long travail had got a note of their names
and dwelling, and the hands and seals of every parish where he was
married, and now by fortune she heard that he had married a wife in
Wiltshire, not far from Marlborough: thither hies she with warrants
from the bishop and divers justices to apprehend him, and coming to 
the town where he dwelt, very subtly inquired at her host of his
estate, who told her that he had married a rich farmer's daughter,
but now was gone down to his friends in Yorkshire, and would be at
home again within a week, for he had been eight weeks already from
home. The woman inquired no further for that time, but the next
morning went home to the farmer's house, and desired him to send for
his daughter, for she would speak with her from her husband. The man
straight did so, and she hearing she should have news from her
William, came very hastily. Then the woman said, she was sorry for
her, in that their misfortunes were alike in being married to such a
runagate as this tailor, for (quoth she) it is not yet a year and a
half since he was married to me in Somersetshire. As this went cold
to the old man's heart, so struck it deadly into the mind of Marian,
who desiring her to tell the truth, she out with her testimony, and
showed them how he had at that instant sixteen wives alive. When
they read the certificate, and saw the hands and seals of every
parish, the old man fell a-weeping, but such was the grief of
Marian, that her sorrow stopped her tears, and she sat as a woman in
a trance till at last fetching a great sigh she called God to
witness she would be revenged on him for all his wives, and would
make him a general example of all such graceless runagates. So she
concealed the matter, and placed this her fellow in misfortune in a
kinswoman's house of hers, so secretly as might be, attending the
coming of her treacherous husband, who returned within a fortnight,
having in the space he was absent visited three or four of his
wives, and now meant to make a short cut of the matter, & sell all
that his new wife had, and to travel into some other shire, for he
had heard how his Somersetshire wife had made inquiry after him in
divers places. Being come home he was wonderfully welcome to Marian,
who entertained him with such courtesies as a kind wife could any
ways afford him, only the use of her body she denied, saying her
natural disease was upon her. Well, to be brief, a great supper was
made, and all her friends was bidden, & he every way so welcome as
if it had been the day of his bridal, yea all things was smoothed up
so cunningly, that he suspected nothing less than the revenge
intended against him. As soon as supper was ended, & all had taken
their leave, our tailor would to bed, and his wife with her own
hands helped to undress him very lovingly, and being laid down she
kissed him & said she would go to her father's & come again
straight, bidding him fall asleep the whilst: He, that was drowsy
with travel & drinking at supper, had no need of great entreaty, for
he straight fell into a sound slumber; the whilst she had sent for
his other wife, & other her neighbours disguised, and coming softly
into the parlour where he lay, she turned up his clothes at his feet
& tied his legs fast together with a rope, then waking him, she
asked him what reason he had to sleep so soundly. He, new waked out
of his sleep, began to stretch himself, and galled his legs with the
cord, whereat he wondering said; How now, wife, what's that hurts my
legs; what, are my feet bound together? Marian, looking on him with
looks full of death, made him this answer: Aye, villain, thy legs
are bound, but hadst thou thy just desert, thy neck had long since
been stretched at the gallows, but before thou and I part I will
make thee a just spectacle unto the world for thy abominable
treachery: and with that she clapped her hand fast on the hair of
his head and held him down to the pillow. William, driven into a
wondrous amaze at these  words, said trembling: Sweet wife, what
sudden alteration is this? what mean these words wife? Traitor
(quoth she) I am none of thy wife, neither is this thy wife: & with
that she brought her forth that he was married in Somersetshire,
although thou art married to her as well as to me, and hast like a
villain sought the spoil of fifteen women beside myself, & that thou
shalt hear by just certificate: & with that there was read the bead-
roll of his wives, where he married them, and where they dwelt. At
this he lay mute as in a trance, & only for answer help up his hands
and desired them both to be merciful unto him, for he confessed all
was truth, that he had been a heinous offender, and deserved death.
Tush, saith Marian, but how canst thou make any one of us amends? If
a man kill the father, he may satisfy the blood in the son: if a man
steal, he may make restitution: but he that robs a woman of her
honesty & virginity can never make any satisfaction: and therefore
for all the rest I will be revenged. With that his other wife and
the women clapped hold on him, & held him fast while Marian with a
sharp razor cut off his stones and made him a gelding. I think she
had little respect where the sign was, or observed little art for
the string, but off they went, & then she cast them in his face &
said: Now lustful whoremaster, go & deceive other women as thou hast
done us, if thou canst: so they sent in a surgeon to him that they
had provided, and away they went. The man lying in great pain of
body & agony of mind, the surgeon looking to his wound had much ado
to stanch the blood, & always he laughed heartily when he thought on
the revenge, and bade a vengeance on such sow-gelders as made such
large slits: but at last he laid a blood-plaster to him, & stopped
his bleeding, and to be brief, in time healed him, but with much
pain. As soon as he was whole, and might go abroad without danger,
he was committed to the gaol, and after some other punishment,
banished out of Wiltshire and Somersetshire forever after. Thus was
this lusty cock of the game made a capon, and as I heard, had little
lust to marry any more wives to his dying day.


Cony-Catching Tailors, and a Pleasant Tale of a Tailor, how he Cony-
catched a Gentlewoman, and Was Made Himself a Cony Afterwards by His
Man.
     How like you of this cony-catching Mr. R.G? But because now we
have entered talk of tailors, let me have a bout with them, for they
be mighty cony-catchers in sundry kinds. I pray you what poet hath
so many fictions, what painter so many fancies, as a tailor hath
fashions, to show the variety of his art? changing every week the
shape of his apparel into new forms, or else he is counted a mere
botcher. The Venetian and the galligaskins is stale, and trunk-
slop<78> out of use, the round hose bum-basted close to the breech,
and ruffed about the neck with a curl, is now common to every
cullion in the country, & doublets be they never so quaintly quilted
yet forsooth the swain at plough must have his belly as side as the
courtier, that he may piss out at a button-hole at the least. And
all these strange devices doth the tailor invent to make poor
gentlemen conies: for if they were tied to one fashion, then still
might they know how much velvet to send to the tailor, and then
would his filching abate. But to prevent them, if he have a French
belly, he will have a Spanish skirt, and an Italian wing, seamed and
quartered at the elbows, as if he were a soldado ready to put on an
armour of proof to fight in Mile-end under the bloody ensign of the
Duke of Shoreditch. Thus will the fantastic tailor make poor
gentlemen conies, & ever ask more velvet by a yard and a half than
the doublet in conscience requires. But herein lies the least part
of their cony-catching, for those grand tailors that have all the
right properties of the mystery, which is to be knavish, thievish,
and proud, take this course with courtiers and courtly gentlemen,
the stade outside, inside, lace, drawing out, and making, and then
set down their parcels in a bill, which they so overprice, that some
of them with very pricking up of doublets, have fleeced young
gentleman of whole lordships, & call you not this cony-catching, M.
R.G.? To use the figure pleonasmos<79>, hisce oculis, with these
eyes I have seen tailors' prentices sell as much vails<80> in a week
in cloth of gold, velvet, satin, taffeta, and lace as hath been
worth thirty shillings, and these ears hath heard them scorn when
their vails came but to ten shillings, and yet there were four
prentices in the shop. If the prentices could lurch so mightily,
then what did the master? But you must imagine this was a woman's
tailor, that could in a gown put seventeen yards of ell-broad
taffeta: blest be the French sleeves & breech farthingales that
grants them liberty to cony-catch so mightily. But this I talk of
our London and courtly tailors, but even the poor prick-louse the
country tailor, that hath scarce any more wealth than his thimble,
his needle, his pressing iron and his shears, will stitch as well as
the proudest of that trade in England; they will to snip and snap
that all the reversion goes into hell. Now sir, this hell is a place
that the tailors have under their shop-board, where all their stolen
shreds is thrust, and I pray you, call you not this pilling &
polling and flat cony-catching, Master R.G.? But because you may see
whether I speak truth or no, I'll tell you a merry jest of a tailor
in York, not far from Petergate, done about fourteen year ago, and
thus it fell out.
     In Yorkshire there dwelt a woman's tailor famous for his art,
but noted for his filching, which although he was light-fingered,
yet for the excellency of his workmanship he was much sought to, and
kept more journeymen, than any five in that city did: and albeit he
would have his share of velvet, satin, or cloth of gold, yet they
must find no fault with him lest he half spoiled their garment in
the making. Besides, he was passing proud, and had as haughty a look
as if his father had with the devil looked over Lincoln: his
ordinary doublets were taffeta, cut in the summer upon a wrought
shirt, and his cloak faced with velvet, his stockings of the purest
Granado silk, with a French paned hose of the richest biliment
lace<81>, a beaver hat turfed with velvet, so quaintly as if he had
been some Espagnolo tricked up to go court some quaint courtesan,
insomuch that a plain serving-man once meeting him in this attire
going through Walmgate to take air in the field thought him at the
least some esquire, and off with his hat and gave his worship the
time of the day; this clawed this glorioso by the elbow so that if a
tavern had been by, a pottle of wine should have been the least
reward for a largess to the simple serving-man, but this bowical
huff-snuff, not content to pass away with one worship, began to hold
the fellow in prate, and to question whose man he was. The fellow
courteously making a low cringe said: May it please your Worship, I
serve such a gentleman dwelling in such a place: as thus he answered
him, he spied in the gentleman's bosom a needle and a thread,
whereupon the fellow simply said to him: Fie your Worship's man in
looking this morning to your doublet, hath left a needle and a
thread on your Worship's breast, you had best take if off lest some
think your Worship to be a tailor. The tailor not thinking the
fellow had spoken simply, but frumped him, made this reply: What,
saucy knave, dost thou mock me? what if I be a tailor? what's that
to thee? wer't not for shame I would lend thee a box on the ear or
two: the fellow being plain, but peevish and an old knave, gathering
by his own words that he was a tailor, said, fie, so God help me, I
mock you not, but are you a tailor? Aye marry am I quoth he: Why
then, says the serving-man, all my caps, knees, and worships, I did
to thy apparel, and therefore, master, thank me, for it 'twas
against my will, but now I know thee, farewell good honest
pricklouse, and look not behind you, for if you do, I'll swinge you
with my scabbard of my sword till I can stand over thee: away went
Monsieur Magnifico frowning, and the servingman went into the city
laughing.
     But all this is but to describe the nature of the man, now to
the secrets of his art: all the gentlewomen of the country cried out
upon him, yet could they not part from him because he so quaintly
fitted their humours: at last it so fell out, that a gentlewoman not
far from Ferrybridge had a taffeta gown to make, and he would have
no less at those days than eleven ells of ell-broad taffeta, so she
bought so much, and ready to send it, she said to her husband in
hearing of all her serving-men: What a spite is this, seeing that I
must send always to yonder knave tailor two yards more than is
necessary, but how can we amend us? all the rest are but botchers in
respect of him, and yet nothing grieves me but we can never take him
with it, & yet I and mine have stood by while he hath cut my gown
out: a pleasant fellow that was new come to serve her husband, one
that was his clerk and a pretty scholar, answered, Good mistress
give me leave to carry your taffeta and see it cut out, and if I spy
not out his knavery laugh at me when I come home: marry, I prithee,
do, quoth his M. and mistress, but whatsoever thou seest say nothing
lest he be angry and spoil my gown; let me alone mistress quoth he,
and so away he goes to York, & coming to this tailor found him in
his shop, & delivered him the taffeta with this message, that his
mistress had charged him to see it cut out, not that she suspected
him, but that else he would let it lie long by him and take other
work in hand: the tailor scornfully said he should, & asked him if
he had any spectacles about him? no, quoth the fellow, my sight is
young enough, I need no glasses: if you do put them on quoth he, and
see if you can see me steal a yard of taffeta out of your mistress'
gown: and so taking his shears in hand, he cut it out so nimbly that
he cut three foreparts to the gown, and four side pieces, that by
computation the fellow guessed he had stolen two ells & a half: but
say nothing he durst. As soon as he had done, there came in more
gentlemen's men with work, that the tailor was very busy & regarded
not the serving-man, who seeing the tailor's cloak lying loose,
lifted it away & carried it home with him to his mistress' house,
where he discoursed to his master & his mistress what he had seen, &
how he had stole the tailor's cloak, not to that intent to filch,
but to try an experiment upon him: for master quoth he, when he
brings home my mistress' gown, he will complain of the loss of his
cloak, & then see, do you but tell him that I am experienced in
magic, & can cast a figure, and will tell him where his cloak is
without fail: say but this, sir, and let me alone; they all agreed,
& resolved to try the wit of their young man. But leaving him, again
to our tailor: who when he had dispatched his customers, was ready
to walk with one of them to the tavern, & then missed his cloak,
searched all about, but find it he could not, neither knew he whom
to suspect: so with much grief he passed it over, & when he had
ended the gentlewoman's gown (because she was a good customer of
his) he himself took his nag & rid home withal: welcome he was to
the gentlewoman and her husband, and the gown was passing fit, so
that it could not be amended, insomuch that the gentlewoman praised
it and highly thanked him. Oh mistress (quoth he) though it is a
good gown to you, 'tis an infortunate gown to me, for that day your
man brought the taffeta I had a cloak stolen that stood me but one
fortnight before in four pound, and never since could I hear any
word of it. Truly, said the gentleman, I am passing sorry for your
loss, but that same man that was at your house is passing skilful in
necromancy, and if any man in England can tell you where your cloak
is, my man can: marry, quoth he, and I will give him a brace of
angels for his labour: so the fellow was called and talked with all,
and at his mistress' request was content to do it, but he would have
his twenty shillings in hand, and promised if he told him not where
it was, who had it, and caused it to be delivered to him again, for
his two angels he would give him ten pounds: upon this the tailor
willingly gave him the money, and up went he into a closet like a
learned clerk, and there was three or four hours laughing at the
tailor, he thinking he had been all this while at Caurake. At last
down comes the fellow with a figure drawn in a paper in his hand, &
smiling called for a Bible, and told the tailor he would tell him
who had his cloak, where it was, & help him to it again, so that he
would be sworn on a Bible to answer to all questions that he
demanded of him faithfully: the tailor granted and swore on a Bible:
then he commanded all should go out but his master, his mistress,
the tailor, and himself. Then he began thus: well, you have taken
your oath on the holy Bible, tell me, quoth he, did you not cut
three foreparts for my mistress' gown? At this the tailor blushed &
began to be in a chafe and would have flung out of the door, but the
serving-man said: Nay, never start, man, for before thou goest out
of this parlour, if thou deniest it, I will bring the taffeta thou
stolest into this place wrapped in thine own cloak: & therefore
answer directly to my question lest to your discredit I show you the
trick of a scholar: the tailor, half afraid, said he did so indeed:
and quoth he, did you not cut four side pieces where you have cut
but two? yes all is true quoth the tailor; why then as true it is,
that to deceive the deceiver is no deceit, for as truly as you stole
my mistress' taffeta, so truly did I steal your cloak and here it
is. At this the tailor was amazed, the gentleman and his wife
laughed heartily, & so all was turned to a merriment; the tailor had
his cloak again, the gentlewoman her taffeta, and the serving-man
twenty shillings: was not this pretty and witty cony-catching, M.
R.G.?


Conclusion.
     Thus have I proved to your masterships how there is no estate,
trade, occupation, nor mystery, but lives by cony-catching, and that
our shift at cards, compared to the rest, is the simplest of all, &
yet forsooth you could bestow the pains to write two whole pamphlets
against us poor cony-catchers; think, Mr. R.G., it shall not be put
up except you grant us our request. It is informed us that you are
in hand with a book named The Repentance Of A Cony-catcher, with a
discovery of secret villainies, wherein you mean to discourse at
full the nature of the stripping law, which is the abuse offered by
the keepers of Newgate to poor prisoners, and some that belong to
the Marshalsea. If you do so, ye shall do not only a charitable but
a meritorious deed: for the occasion of most mischief, of greatest
nipping and foisting, and of all villainies, comes through the
extorting bribery of some cozening and counterfeit keepers and
companions that carry unlawful warrants about them to take up men.
Will your Worship therefore stand to your word and set out the
discovery of that, all we of Whittington College will rest your
beadmen. Otherwise look that I will have the crew of cony-catchers
swear themselves your professed enemies forever.
Farewell.
Cuthbert Cony-catcher.
FINIS.


A DISPUTATION BETWEEN A HE CONY-CATCHER AND A SHE CONY-CATCHER.


Title Page

A DISPVTATION
Betweene a Hee Conny-catcher, and a
Shee Conny-catcher, whether a Theefe or a Whoore, is
most hurtfull in Cousonage to the Com-
mon-wealth
DISCOVERING THE SECRET VILLA-
nies of alluring strumpets.
With the Conversion of an English courtesan, reformed
this present year. 1592.
Reade, laugh and learne.
Nascimur pro patria.<1>
R.G.
(Printer's emblem)
Imprinted at London, by A. I. for T. G. and are to be solde at
the west end of Paul's. 1592


The Epistle
To all gentlemen, merchants, appren-
tices and country farmers, health.
     Gentlemen, countrymen, and kind friends, for so I value all
that are honest and enemies of bad actions, although in my books of
cony-catching I have discovered divers forms of cozenings, and
painted out both the sacking and cross-biting laws, which strumpets
use to the destruction of the simple, yet willing to search all the
substance, as I have glanced at the shadow, & to enter into the
nature of villainy, as I have broached up the secrets of vice, I
have thought good to publish this dialogue, or disputation between a
he cony-catcher, and a she cony-catcher, whether of them are most
prejudicial to the commonwealth: discoursing the base qualities of
them both, and discovering the inconvenience that grows to men,
through the lightness of inconstant wantons, who being wholly given
to the spoil, seek the ruin of such as light into their company. In
this dialogue, loving countrymen, shall you find what prejudice
ensues by haunting of whore-houses, what dangers grows by dallying
with common harlots, what inconvenience follows the inordinate
pleasures of unchaste libertines, (not only by their consuming of
their wealth and impoverishment of their goods and lands, but to the
great endangering of their health). For in conversing with them they
aim not simply at the loss of goods and blemish of their good names,
but they fish for diseases, sickness, sores incurable, ulcers
bursting out of the joints, and salt rheums, which by the humour of
that villainy leapt from Naples into France, and from France into
the bowels of England: which makes many cry out in their bones,
whilst goodman surgeon laughs in his purse: a thing to be feared as
deadly while men live, as Hell is to be dreaded after death, for it
not only infecteth the body, consumeth the soul, and wasteth wealth
and worship, but engraves a perpetual shame in the forehead of the
party so abused. Whereof Master Higgins hath well written in his
Mirror of Magistrates<82> in the person of Mempricius exclaiming
against harlots: The verses be these:
Eschew vile Venus' toys, she cuts off age,
And learn this lesson oft, and tell thy friend,
By pox, death sudden, begging, harlots end.
     Besides, I have laid open the wily wisdom of over-wise
courtesans, that with their cunning, can draw on, not only poor
novices, but such as hold themselves masters of their occupation.
What flatteries they use to bewitch, what sweet words to inveigle,
what simple holiness to entrap, what amorous glances, what smirking
œillades, what cringing courtesies, what stretching adieus,
following a man like a bloodhound, with their eyes white, laying out
of hair: what frouncing of tresses, what paintings, what ruffs,
cuffs and braveries, and all to betray the eyes of the innocent
novice: whom when they have drawn on to the bent of their bow, they
strip like the prodigal child and turn out of doors like an outcast
of the world. The crocodile hath not more tears, Proteus, more
shape, Janus more faces, the Hieria<83>, more sundry tunes to entrap
the passengers than our English courtesans, to be plain, our English
whores: to set on fire the hearts of lascivious and gazing
strangers. These common, or rather consuming strumpets, whose
throats are softer than oil, and yet whose steps lead unto death.
They have their ruffians to rifle, when they cannot fetch over with
other cunning, their cross-biters attending upon them, their foists,
their busts, their nips, and such like. Being waited on by these
villains as by ordinary servants, so that who thinks himself wise
enough to escape their flatteries, him they cross-bite; who holds
himself to rule, to be bitten with a counterfeit apparitor, him they
rifle: if he be not so to be versed upon, they have a foist or a nip
upon him, and so sting him to the quick. Thus he that meddles with
pitch, cannot but be defiled, and he that acquainteth himself or
converseth with any of these cony-catching strumpets, cannot but by
some way or other be brought to confusion: for either he must hazard
his soul, blemish his good name, lose his goods, light upon
diseases, or at the least have been tied to the humour of an harlot,
whose quiver is open to every arrow, who likes all that have fat
purses, and loves not any that are destitute of pence. I remember a
monk in diebus illis<84> writ his opinion of the end of an adulterer
thus:
Quatuor his casibus, sine dubio cadet adulter,
Aut hic pauper erit, aut hic subito morietur,
Aut cadet in causum qua debet iudice vinci,
Aut aliquod membrum casu vell crimine perdet.<85>
     Which I Englished thus:
He that to harlots' lures do yield him thrall,
Through sour misfortune to bad end shall fall:
Or sudden death, or beggary shall him chance,
Or guilt before a judge his shame enhance:
Or else by fault or fortune he shall leese
Some member, sure, escaped from one of these.
     Seeing then such inconvenience grows from the caterpillars of
the commonwealth, and that  a multitude of the monsters here about
London, particularly and generally abroad in England, to the great
overthrow of many simple men that are inveigled by their flatteries,
I thought good not only to discover their villainies in a dialogue,
but also to manifest by an example, how prejudicial their life is to
the state of the land: that such as are warned by an instance, may
learn and look before they leap: To that end, kind countrymen, I
have set down at the end of the disputation the wonderful life of a
courtesan, not a fiction, but a truth of one that yet lives, not now
in another form repentant. In the discourse of whose life you shall
see how dangerous such trulls be to all estates that be so simple as
to trust their feigned subtleties: here shall parents learn how
hurtful it is to cocker up their youth in their follies, and have a
deep insight how to bridle their daughters, if they see them any
ways grow wantons: wishing therefore my labours may be a caveat to
my countrymen to avoid the company of such cozening courtesans
Farewell.
R.G.


A disputation between Laurence a foist and Fair Nan a traffic,
whether a whore or a thief is most prejudicial.
.
Laurence. Nan, well met, what news about your Vine Court that you
look so blithe? Your cherry cheeks discovers your good fare, and
your brave apparel bewrays a fat purse: is fortune now of late grown
so favourable to foists, that your husband hath lighted on some
large purchase, or hath your smooth looks linked in some young
novice to sweat for a favour all the bite in his bung,<86> and to
leave himself as many crowns as thou hast got good conditions, and
then he shall be one of Pierce Penniless'<87> fraternity: How is it,
sweet wench, goes the world on wheels, that you tread so daintily on
your tiptoes?
Nan. Why, Laurence, are you pleasant or peevish, that you quip with
such brief girds? Think you a quartern-wind cannot make a quick
sail, that easy lifts cannot make heavy burdens, that women have not
wiles to compass crowns as well as men? Yes & more, for though they
be not so strong in the fists, they be more ripe in their wits: and
'tis by wit that I live and will live, in despite of that peevish
scholar, that thought with his cony-catching books to have cross-bit
our trade. Dost thou marvel to see me thus brisked? fair wenches
cannot want favours, while the world is so full of amorous fools.
Where can such girls as myself be blemished with a threadbare coat
as long as country farmers have full purses, and wanton citizens
pockets full of pence?
Laur. Truth, if fortune so favour thy husband, that he be neither
smoked nor clyed, for I am sure all thy bravery comes by his
nipping, foisting and lifting.
Nan. In faith sir, no. Did I get no more by mine own wit than I reap
by his purchase, I might both go bare & penniless the whole year,
but mine eyes are stalls, & my hands lime twigs<88>, else were I not
worthy the name of a she cony-catcher. Circe had never more charms,
Calypso more enchantments, the Sirens more subtle tunes, than I have
crafty sleights to inveigle a cony, and fetch in a country farmer.
Laurence, believe me, you men are but fools, your gettings is
uncertain, and yet you still fish for the gallows? Though by some
great chance you light upon a good bung, yet you fast a great while
after, whereas, as we mad wenches have our tenants (for so I call
every simple lecher and amorous fox) as well out of term as in term
to bring us our rents, alas, were not my wits and my wanton pranks
more profitable than my husband's foisting, we might often go to bed
supperless for want of surfeiting: and yet I dare swear, my husband
gets a hundred pounds a year by bungs.
Laur. Why, Nan, are you grown so stiff, to think your fair looks can
get as much as our nimble fingers, or that your sacking can gain as
much as our foisting? No, no, Nan, you are two bows down the wind;
our foist will get more than twenty the proudest wenches in all
London.
Nan. Lie a little further & give me some room. What Laurence your
tongue is too lavish, all stands upon proof, and sith I have
leisure, and you no great business, as being now when Paul's is shut
up and all purchases and conies in their burrows, let us to the
tavern and take a room to ourselves, and there for the price of our
suppers, I will prove that women, I mean of our faculty, a traffic,
or as base knaves term us, strumpets, are more subtle, more
dangerous in the commonwealth, and more full of wiles to get crowns
than the cunningest foist, nip, lift, prigs, or whatsoever that
lives at this day.
Laur. Content, but who shall be moderator in our controversies, sith
in disputing pro & contra betwixt ourselves, it is but your yea and
my nay, and so neither of us will yield to other's victories.
Nan. Trust me, Laurence, I am so assured of the conquest, affying so
in the strength of mine own arguments, that when I have reasoned, I
will refer it to your judgment and censure.
Laur. And trust me as I am an honest man, I will be indifferent.
Nan. Oh, swear not so deeply, but let me first hear what you can say
for yourself.
Laur. What? Why more, Nan, than can be painted out in a great
volume, but briefly this. I need not describe the laws of villainy,
because R.G. hath so amply penned them down in the first Part of
Cony-catching, that though I be one of the faculty, yet I cannot
discover more than he hath laid open. Therefore first to the
gentleman foist, I pray you, what finer quality: what art is more
excellent either to try the ripeness of the wit, or the agility of
the hand than that? for him that will be master of his trade, must
pass the proudest juggler alive, the points of leger de main: he
must have an eye to spy the bung or purse, and then a heart to dare
to attempt it, for this by the way, he that fears the gallows shall
never be good thief while he lives: he must as the cat watch for a
mouse, and walk Paul's, Westminster, the Exchange, and such common
haunted places, and there have a curious eye to the person, whether
he be a gentleman, citizen or farmer, and note either where his bung
lies, whether in his hose or pockets, and then dog the party into a
press where his stall with heaving and shoving shall so molest him
that he shall not feel when we strip him of his bung, although it be
never so fast or cunningly couched about him: What poor farmer
almost can come to plead his case at the bar, to attend upon his
lawyers at the bench, but look he never so narrowly to it, we have
his purse, wherein sometimes there is fat purchase, twenty or thirty
pounds: and I pray you, how long would one of your traffics be,
earning so much with your chamber-work? Besides, in fairs and
markets, and in the circuits after judges, what infinite money is
gotten from honest meaning men, that either busy about their
necessary affairs or carelessly looking to their crowns, light
amongst us that be foists: tush, we dissemble in show, we go so neat
in apparel, so orderly in outward appearance, some like lawyers'
clerks, others like serving-men that attended there about their
masters' business, that we are hardly smoked: versing upon all men
with kind courtesies and fair words, and yet being so warily
watchful that a good purse cannot be put up in a fair, but we sigh
if we share it not amongst us, and though the books of cony-catching
hath somewhat hindered us, and brought many brave foists to the
halter, yet some of our country farmers, nay of our gentleman and
citizens, are so careless in a throng of people that they show us
the prey, and so draw on a thief, and bequeath us their purses
whether we will or no: for who loves wine so ill, that he will not
eat grapes if they fall into his mouth, and who is so base, that if
he see a pocket fair before him, will not foist in if he may, or if
foisting will not serve, use his knife and nip? for although there
be some foists that will not use their knives, yet I hold him not a
perfect workman or master of his mystery, that will not cut a purse
as well as foist a pocket, and hazard any limb for so sweet a gain
as gold: how answer you me this brief objection Nan? Can you compare
with either our cunning to get our gains in purchase?
Nan. And have you no stronger arguments goodman Laurence, to argue
your excellency in villainy but this? Then in faith put up your
pipes, and give me leave to speak: your chop-logic hath no great
subtlety for simple: you reason of foisting, & appropriate that to
yourselves, to you men I mean, as though there were not women foists
and nips, as neat in that trade as you, of as good an eye, as fine
and nimble a hand, and of as resolute a heart, yes, Laurence, and
your good mistresses in that mystery: for we without like suspicion
can pass in your walks under the colour of simplicity to
Westminster, with a paper in our hand as if we were distressed
women, that had some supplication to put up to the judges or some
bill of information to deliver to our lawyers when God wot, we
shuffle in for a bung as well as the best of you all, yea, as
yourself Laurence, though you be called king of cutpurses: for
though they smoke you, they will hardly mistrust us, and suppose our
stomach stand against it to foist, yet who can better play the stall
or the shadow than we? for in a thrust or throng if we shove hard,
who is he that will not favour a woman, and in giving place to us,
give you free passage for his purse? Again, in the market, when
every wife hath almost her hand on her bung, and that they cry:
Beware the cutpurse and cony-catchers, then I as fast as the best
with my handbasket as mannerly as if I were to buy great store of
butter and eggs for provision of my house, do exclaim against them
with my hand on my purse, and say the world is bad when a woman
cannot walk safely to market for fear of these villainous cutpurses,
whenas the first bung I come to, I either nip or foist, or else
stall another while he hath stroken, dispatched, and gone: now I
pray you gentle sir, wherein are we inferior to you in foisting? and
yet this is nothing to the purpose. For it is one of our most
simplest shifts: but yet I pray you, what think you when a farmer,
gentleman or citizen come to the term, perhaps he is wary of his
purse, and watch him never so warily, yet he will never be brought
to the blow, is it not possible for us to pinch him ere he pass? he
that is most chary of his crowns abroad, and will cry ware the cony-
catchers, will not be afraid to drink a pint of wine with a pretty
wench, and perhaps go to a trugging-house to ferry out one for his
purpose: then with what cunning we can feed the simple fop, with
what fair words, sweet kisses, feigned sighs, as if at that instant
we fell in love with him that we never saw before: if we meet him in
an evening in the street, if the farmer or other whatsoever be not
so forward as to motion some courtesy to us, we straight insinuate
into his company, and claim acquaintance of him by some means or
other, and if his mind be set for lust, and the devil drive him on
to match himself with some dishonest wanton, then let him look to
his purse, for if he do but kiss me in the street, I'll have his
purse for a farewell, although he never commit any other act at all.
I speak not this only by myself, Laurence, for there be a hundred in
London more cunning than myself in this kind of cony-catching. But
if he come into a house, then let our trade alone to verse upon him:
for first we feign ourselves hungry for the benefit of the house,
although our bellies were never so full, and no doubt the good
pander or bawd, she comes forth like a sober matron, and sets store
of cates on the table, and then I fall aboard on them, and though I
can eat little, yet I make havoc of all, and let him be sure every
dish is well sauced, for he shall pay for a pippin pie that cost in
the market four pence, at one of the trugging-houses xviii pence.
Thus, what is dainty if it be not dear bought? And yet he must come
off for crowns besides, and when I see him draw to his purse, I note
the putting up of it well, and ere we part, that world goes hard if
I foist him not of all that he hath: and then suppose the worst,
that he miss it, am I so simply acquainted or badly provided, that I
have not a friend, which with a few terrible oaths and countenance
set as if he were the proudest soldado that ever bare arms against
Don John of Austria, will face him quite out of his money and make
him walk like a woodcock homeward by Weeping Cross, and so buy
repentance with all the crowns in his purse? How say you to this,
Laurence, whether are women foists inferior to you in ordinary
cozenage or no?
Laur. Excellently well reasoned, Nan, thou hast told me wonders. But
wench, though you be wily and strike often, your blows are not so
big as ours.
Nan. Oh, but note the subject of our disputation, and that is this,
which are more subtle and dangerous to the commonwealth? and to that
I argue.
Laur. Aye and beshrew me, but you reason quaintly, yet will I prove
your wits are not so ripe as ours, nor so ready to reach into the
subtleties of kind cozenage, and though you appropriate to yourself
the excellency of cony-catching, and that you do it with more art
than we men do because of your painted flatteries and sugared words,
that you flourish rhetorically like nets to catch fools, yet will I
manifest with a merry instance a feat done by a foist, that exceeded
any that ever was done by any mad wench in England.
A pleasant tale of a country farmer, that took it in scorn to have
his purse cut or drawn from him, and how a foist served him.
     It was told me for a truth that not long since here in London,
there lay a country farmer, with divers of his neighbours about law
matters, amongst whom, one of them going to Westminster Hall, was by
a foist stripped of all the pence in his purse, and coming home made
great complaint of his misfortune: some lamented his loss, and
others exclaimed against the cutpurses, but this farmer he laughed
loudly at the matter, and said such fools as could not keep their
purses no surer, were well served, and for my part quoth he, I so
much scorn the cutpurses, that I would thank him heartily that would
take pains to foist mine: well says his neighbour, then you may
thank me, sith my harms learns you to beware, but if it be true,
that many things fall out between the cup and the lip, you know not
what hands fortune may light in your own lap: tush quoth the farmer,
here's forty pounds in this purse in gold; the proudest cutpurse in
England win and wear it: as thus he boasted, there stood a subtle
foist by and heard all, smiling to himself at the folly of the proud
farmer, and vowed to have his purse or venture his neck for it, and
so went home and bewrayed it to a crew of his companions, who taking
it in dudgeon that they should be put down by a peasant, met either
at Laurence Pickering's or at Lambeth: let the Blackamoor take heed
I name him not, lest an honourable neighbour of his frown at it, but
wheresoever they met, they held a convocation, and both consulted
and concluded all by a general consent to bend all their wits to be
possessors of this farmer's bung, and for the execution of this
their vow they haunted about the inn where he lay, and dogged him
into divers places, both to Westminster Hall and other places, and
yet could never light upon it: he was so watchful, and smoked them
so narrowly that all their travail was in vain: at last one of them
fled to a more cunning policy, and went and learned the man's name
and where he dwelt, and then hied him to the Compter and entered an
action against him of trespass, damages two hundred pounds: when he
had thus done, he feed the sergeants, and carried them down with him
to the man's lodging, wishing them not to arrest him till he
commanded them: well agreed they were, and down to the farmer's
lodging they came, where were a crew of foists, whom he had made
privy to the end of his practice stood waiting, but he took no
knowledge at all of them, but walked up and down: The farmer came
out, and went to Paul's, The cutpurse bade stay, and would not yet
suffer the officers to meddle with him, till he came into the west
end of Paul's Churchyard, and there he willed them to do their
office, and they stepping to the farmer, arrested him: The farmer,
amazed, being amongst his neighbours, asked the sergeant at whose
suit he was troubled? At whose suit soever it be, said one of the
cutpurses that stood by, you are wronged honest man, for he hath
arrested you here in a place of privilege, where the sheriffs nor
the officers have nothing to do with you, and therefore you are
unwise if you obey him: tush says another cutpurse, though the man
were so simple of himself, yet shall he not offer the church so much
wrong as by yielding to the mace, to abolish Paul's liberty, and
therefore I will take his part, and with that he drew his sword:
another took the man and haled him away, the officer he stuck hard
to him, and said he was his true prisoner, and cried clubs: The
prentices arose, and there was a great hurlyburly, for they took the
officer's part, so that the poor farmer was mightily turmoiled
amongst them, and almost haled in pieces: whilst thus the strife
was, one of the foists had taken his purse away and was gone, and
the officer carried the man away to a tavern, for he swore he knew
no such man, nor any man that he was indebted to: as then they sat
drinking of a quart of wine, the foist that had caused him to be
arrested sent a note by a porter to the officer that he should
release the farmer, for he had mistaken the man, which note the
officer showed him and bade him pay his fees and go his ways: the
poor countryman was content with that, and put his hand in his
pocket to feel for his purse, and God wot there was none, which made
his heart far more cold than the arrest did, and with that, fetching
a great sigh, he said, alas masters I am undone, my purse in this
fray is taken out of my pocket, and ten pounds in gold in it besides
white money. Indeed said the sergeant, commonly in such brawls the
cutpurses be busy, and I pray God the quarrel was not made upon
purpose by the pickpockets: well, says his neighbour, who shall
smile at you now? The other day when I lost my purse you laughed at
me. The farmer brook all, and sat malcontent, and borrowed money of
his neighbours to pay the sergeant, and had a learning, I believe,
never after to brave the cutpurse.
     How say you to this, Mistress Nan, Was it not well done? What
choice-witted wench of your faculty, or she foist, hath ever done
the like? tush, Nan, if we begin once to apply our wits, all your
inventions are follies towards ours.
Nan. You say good goodman Laurence, as though your subtleties were
sudden as women's are, come but to the old proverb, and I put you
down, 'Tis as hard to find a hare without a meuse, as a woman
without a 'scuse, and that wit that can devise a cunning lie can
plot the intent of deep villainies: I grant this fetch of the foist
was pretty, but nothing in respect of that we wantons can compass,
and therefore to quit your tale with another, hear what a mad wench
of my profession did of late to one of your faculty.
A passing pleasant Tale, how a whore Cony-catched a Foist
     There came out of the country a foist, to try his experience
here in Westminster Hall, and stroke a hand or two, but the devil a
snap he would give to our citizen foists, but wrought warily, and
could not be fetched off by no means, and yet it was known he had
some twenty pounds about him, but he had planted it so cunningly in
his doublet that it was sure enough for finding. Although the city
foists laid all the plots they could, as well by discovering him to
the gaolers as other ways, yet he was so politic, that they could
not verse upon him by any means, which grieved them so, that one day
at a dinner, they held a council amongst themselves how to cozen
him, but in vain, till at last a good wench that sat by undertook
it, so they would swear to let her have all that he had: they
confirmed it solemnly, and she put it in practice thus: she subtly
insinuated herself into this foist's company, who seeing her a
pretty wench, began after twice meeting to wax familiar with her and
to question about a night's lodging: after a little nice loving &
bidding, she was content for her supper and what else he would of
courtesy bestow upon her, for she held it scorn she said, to set a
salary price on her body: the foist was glad of this, and yet he
would not trust her, so that he put no more but ten shillings in his
pocket, but he had above twenty pounds twilted in his doublet. Well,
to be short, suppertime came, and thither comes my gentle foist, who
making good cheer, was so eager of his game that he would straight
to bed by the leave of dame bawd, who had her fee too, and there he
lay till about midnight, when three or four old hacksters whom she
had provided upon purpose came to the door and rapped lustily: Who
is there? says the bawd looking out of the window: Marry, say they,
such a justice, and named one about the city that is a mortal enemy
to cutpurses: who is come to search your house for a Jesuit and
other suspected persons: alas sir says she I have none here: well
quoth they, open the door: I will says she, and with that she came
into the foist's chamber, who heard all this, and was afraid it was
some search for him, so that he desired the bawd to help him that he
might not be seen: why then quoth she step into this closet: he
whipped in hastily, and never remembered his clothes. She locked him
in safe, and then let in the crew of rake-hells, who making as
though they searched every chamber, came at last into that where his
leman lay, and asked her what she was? She as if she had been
afraid, desired their Worships to be good to her, she was a poor
country maid come up to the term: and who is that, quoth they, that
was in bed with you? None forsooth says she. No says one, that is a
lie, here is the print of two, and besides, wheresoever the fox is,
here is his skin, for this is his doublet and hose: then down she
falls upon her knees and says indeed it was her husband: Your
husband quoth they, nay, that cannot be so minion, for why then
would you have denied him at the first: With that, one of them
turned to the bawd and did question with her what he was, and where
he was. Truly sir says she, they came to my house and said they were
man and wife, and for my part I know them for no other: And he being
afraid, is indeed to confess the truth, shut up in the closet. No
doubt, if it please your Worships, says one rake-hell I warrant you
he is some notable cutpurse or pickpocket that is afraid to show his
face. Come and open the closet, and let us look on him: nay, sir,
says she, not for tonight, I beseech your worship, carry no man out
of my house: I will give my word he shall be forthcoming tomorrow
morning: Your word dame bawd says one, 'tis not worth a straw: you
hussy that says ye are his wife, ye shall go with us, and for him
that we may be sure he may not start, I'll take his doublet, hose
and cloak, and tomorrow I'll send them to him by one of my men. Were
there a thousand pounds in them, there shall not be a penny
diminished: The whore kneeled down on her knees and feigned to cry
pitifully, and desired the justice which was one of her companions
not to carry her to prison: yes, hussy quoth he, your mate and you
shall not tarry together in one house, that you may make your tales
all one: and therefore bring her away, and after ye dame bawd see
you lend him no other clothes, for I will send his in the morning
betimes, and come you with him to answer for lodging him. I will sir
says she, and so away goes the wench & her companions laughing, and
left the bawd and the foist: as soon as the bawd thought good, she
unlocked the closet and cursed the time that ever they came in her
house: now, quoth she, here will be a fair ado, how will you answer
for yourself? I fear me I shall be in danger of the cart:<89> well
quoth he, to be short, I would not for forty pounds come afore the
justice: marry no more would I quoth she, let me shift if you were
conveyed hence, but I have not a rag of man's apparel in the house:
why quoth he, seeing it is early morning, lend me a blanket to put
about me, and I will 'scape to a friend's house of mine: Then leave
me a pawn, quoth the bawd: alas I have none says he, but this ring
on my finger: why that quoth she, or tarry while the justice comes:
so he gave it her, took the blanket and went his ways, whither I
know not but to some friend's house of his. Thus was this wily foist
by the wit of a subtle wench, cunningly stripped of all that he had,
and turned to grass to get more fat.
Nan. How say you to this device, Laurence? Was it not excellent?
What think you of a woman's wit if it can work such wonders?
Laur. Marry I think my mother was wiser than all the honest women of
the parish besides.
Nan. Why then belike she was of our faculty, and a matron of my
profession, nimble of her hands, quick of tongue, and light of her
tail: I should have put in sir-reverence, but a foul word is good
enough for a filthy knave.
Laur. I am glad you are so pleasant, Nan, you were not so merry when
you went to Dunstable: but indeed I must needs confess that women
foists, if they be careful in their trades, are (though not so
common) yet more dangerous than men foists. Women have quick wits,
as they have short heels, and they can get with pleasure what we
fish for with danger: but now giving you the bucklers<55> at this
weapon, let me have a blow with you at another.
Nan. But before you induce any more arguments, by your leave in a
little by-talk, you know, Laurence, that though you can foist, nip,
prig, lift, courb and use the black art, yet you cannot cross-bite
without the help of a woman, which cross-biting now-a-days is grown
to a marvellous profitable exercise: for some cowardly knaves, that
for fear of the gallows leave nipping and foisting, become cross-
bites, knowing there is no danger therein but a little punishment,
at the most the pillory, and that is saved with a little unguentum
aureum<90>. As for example, Jack Rhoades is now a reformed man:
whatsoever he hath been in his youth, now in his latter days he is
grown a corrector of vice, for whomsoever he takes suspicious with
his wife, I warrant you he sets a sure fine on head, though he hath
nothing for his money but a bare kiss, and in this art we poor
wenches are your surest props and stay. If you will not believe me,
ask poor A.B. in Turnmill Street what a saucy signor there is, whose
purblind eyes can scarcely discern a louse from a flea, and yet he
hath such insight into the mystical trade of cross-biting, that he
can furnish his board with a hundred pounds worth of plate? I doubt
the sand-eyed ass will kick like a Western prig if I rub him on the
gall, but 'tis no matter if he find himself touched and stir;
although he boasts of the chief of the clergy's favour, yet I'll so
set his name out that the boys at Smithfield bars shall chalk him on
the back for a cross-bite: Tush, you men are fops in fetching
novices over the coals: Hearken to me, Laurence; I'll tell thee a
wonder. Not far from Hoxton, perhaps it was there, and if you think
I lie, ask Master Richard Chot, and Master Richard Strong, two
honest gentlemen that can witness as well as I, this proof of a
woman's wit. There dwelt here sometimes a good ancient matron that
had a fair wench to her daughter, as young and tender as a morrow-
mass priest's<91> leman: her, she set out to sale in her youth, and
drew on sundry to be suitors to her daughter, some wooers, and some
speeders, yet none married her, but of her beauty they made a
profit, and inveigled all, till they had spent upon her what they
had, and then, forsooth, she and her young pigeon turned them out of
doors like prodigal children: she was acquainted with Dutch &
French, Italian and Spaniard, as well as English, & at last, as so
often the pitcher goes to the brook that it comes broken home, my
fair daughter was hit on the master vein, and gotten with child: 
now the mother to colour this matter to save her daughter's
marriage, begins to wear a cushion under her own kirtle, and to
feign herself with child, but let her daughter pass as though she
ailed nothing: when the forty weeks were come, & that my young
mistress must needs cry out forsooth, this old B. had gotten
housewives answerable to herself, and so brought her daughter to
bed, and let her go up and down the house, and the old crone lay in
childbed as though she had been delivered, and said the child was
hers, and so saved her daughter's 'scape. Was not this a witty 
wonder Master Laurence, wrought by an old witch, to have a child in
her age, and make a young whore seem an honest virgin: tush, this is
little to the purpose, if I should recite all, how many she had
cozened under the pretence of marriage: well, poor plain Signor See,
you were not stiff enough for her, although it cost you many crowns
and the loss of your service. I'll say no more; perhaps she will
amend her manners. Ah, Laurence, how like you of this gear? In
cross-biting we put you down, God wot it is little looked to in and
about London, and yet I may say to thee, many a good citizen is
cross-bit in the year by odd Walkers abroad: I heard some named the
other day as I was drinking at the Swan in Lambeth Marsh: But let
them alone, 'tis a foul bird that defiles their own nest, and it
were a shame for me to speak against any good wenches or boon
companions, that by their wits can wrest money from a churl. I fear
me R.G. will name them too soon in his Black Book, a pestilence on 
him. They say he hath there set down my husband's pedigree, and
yours too, Laurence: if he do it, I fear me your brother-in-law
Bull<22> is like to be troubled with you both.
Laur. I know not what to say to him, Nan; he hath plagued me
already. I hope he hath done with me, and yet I heard say he would
have a bout at my nine bowls<92>. But leaving him as an enemy of our
trade, again to our disputation. I cannot deny, Nan, but you have
set down strange precedents of women's prejudicial wits, but yet
though you be cross-bites, foists and nips, yet you are not good
lifts, which is a great help to our faculty, to filch a bolt of
satin or velvet.
Nan. Stay thee a word; I thought thou hadst spoken of R.B. of Long
Lane and his wife: take heed, they be parlous folks, and greatly
acquainted with keepers and gaolers: therefore meddle not you with
them, for I hear say R.G. hath sworn, in despite of the brazil
staff, to tell such a foul tale of him in his Black Book, that it
will cost him a dangerous jaunt.
Laur. Nan, Nan, let R.G. beware, for had not an ill fortune fallen
to one of his friends R.B., he could take little harm.
Nan. Who is that Laurence?
Laur. Nay I will not name him.
Nan. Why then I prithee what misfortune befell him?
Laur. Marry Nan, he was strangely washed of late by a French barber,
and had all the hair of his face miraculously shaved off by the
scythe of God's vengeance, insomuch that some said he had that he
had not, but as hap was howsoever his hair fell off it stood him in
some stead when the brawl was of late, for if he had not cast off
his beard and so being unknown, it had cost him some knocks, but it
fell out to the best.
Nan. The more hard fortune that he had such ill hap, but hasty
journeys breed dangerous sweats, and the physicians call it the
alopecia. Yet omitting all this, again to where you left.
Laur. You have almost brought me out of my matter, but I was talking
about the lift, commending what a good quality it was, and how
hurtful it was, seeing we practise it in mercers' shops, with
haberdashers of small wares, haberdashers of hats and caps, amongst
merchant tailors for hose and doublets, and in such places getting
much gains by lifting, when there is no good purchase abroad for
foisting.
Nan. Suppose you are good at the lift, who be more cunning that we
women in that we are more trusted, for they little suspect us, and
we have as close conveyance as you men: though you have cloaks, we
have skirts of gowns, handbaskets, and the crowns of our hats, our
plackets, and for a need, false bags under our smocks, wherein we
can convey more closely than you.
Laur. I know not where to touch you, you are so witty in your
answers, and have so many starting-holes, but let me be pleasant
with you a little, what say you to prigging or horse-stealing? I
hope you never had experience in that faculty.
Nan. Alas simple sot, yes and more shift to shun the gallows than
you.
Laur. Why 'tis impossible.
Nan. In faith, sir, no, and for proof, I will put you down with a
story of a mad merry little dapper fine wench who at Spilsby fair
had three horses of her own or another man's to sell: as she, her
husband and another good fellow walked them up and down the fair,
the owner came and apprehended them all, and clapped them in prison.
The gaoler not keeping them close prisoners, but letting them lie
all in a chamber, by her wit she so instructed them in a formal tale
that she saved all their lives thus. Being brought the next morrow
after their apprehension before the justices, they examined the men
how they came by those horses, and they confessed they met her with
them, but where she had them they knew not: Then was my pretty pet
brought in, who being a handsome trull, blushed as if she had been
full of grace, and being demanded where she had the horses, made
this answer, may it please your worships, this man, being my
husband, playing the unthrift as many more have done was absent from
me for a quarter of a year, which grieved me not a little, insomuch
that desirous to see him, and having intelligence he would be at
Spilsby fair, I went thither even for pure love of him on foot, and
being within some ten miles of the town, I waxed passing weary, and
rested me often, and grew very faint. At last there came riding by
me a serving-man in a blue coat, with three horses tied one at
another's tail, which he led as I guessed, to sell at the fair: the
serving-man, seeing me so tired, took pity on me, and asked me if I
would ride on one of his empty horses, for his own would not bear
double: I thanked him heartily, and at the next hill got up, and
rode till we came to a town within three miles of Spilsby, where the
serving-man alighted at a house, and bade me ride on afore, and he
would presently overtake me: Well, forward I rode half a mile, and
looking behind me could see nobody, so being alone, my heart began
to rise, and I to think on my husband: As I had rid a little
farther, looking down a lane I saw two men coming lustily up as if
they were weary, & marking them earnestly, I saw one of them was my
husband, which made my heart as light as before it was sad, so
staying for them, after a little unkind greeting betwixt us, for I
chid him for his unthriftiness, he asked me where I had the horse,
and I told him how courteously the serving-man had used me: Why then
says he, stay for him: nay quoth I, let's ride on, and get you two
up on the empty horses, for he will overtake us ere we come at the
town: he rides on a stout lusty young gelding: so forward we went,
and looked often behind us, but our serving-man came not: At last we
coming to Spilsby alighted, & broke our fast, and tied our horses at
the door, that if he passed by, seeing them, he might call in: after
we had broke our fast, thinking he had gone some other way, we went
into the horse-fair and there walked our horses up and down to meet
with the serving-man, not for the intent to sell them. Now, may it
please your Worship, whether he had stolen the horses from this
honest man or no, I know not, but alas, simply I brought them to the
horse-fair, to let him that delivered me them have them again, for I
hope your Worships doth imagine, if I had stolen them as it is
suspected, I would never have brought them into so public a place to
sell, yet if the law be any way dangerous for the foolish deed,
because I know not the serving-man it is, I must bide the
punishment, and as guiltless as any here. And so, making a low
curtsy, she ended, the justice holding up his hand and wondering at
the woman's wit that had cleared her husband and his friend, and
saved herself without compass of law. How like you of this,
Laurence; cannot we wenches prig well?
Laur. By God, Nan, I think I shall be fain to give you the
bucklers<125>.
Nan. Alas, good Laurence, thou art no logician, thou canst not
reason for thyself, nor hast no witty arguments to draw me to an
exigent, and therefore give me leave at large to reason for this
supper: remember the subject of our disputation, is this positive
question, whether whores or thieves are most prejudicial to the
commonwealth? Alas, you poor thieves do only steal and purloin from
men, and the harm you do is to imbolish men's goods and bring them
to poverty. This is the only end of men's thievery, and the greatest
prejudice that grows from robbing or filching: So much do we by our
theft, and more by our lechery, for what is the end of whoredom but
consuming of goods and beggary? And besides perpetual infamy, we
bring young youths (sic) to ruin and utter destruction: I pray you
Laurence whether had a merchant's son having wealthy parents better
light upon a whore than a cutpurse, the one only taking his money,
the other bringing him to utter confusion? For if the foist light
upon him, or the cony-catcher, he loseth at the most some hundred
pounds, but if he fall into the company of a whore, she flatters
him, she inveigles him, she bewitcheth him, that he spareth neither
goods nor lands to content her, that is only in love with his coin:
if he be married, he forsakes his wife, leaves his children,
despiseth his friends, only to satisfy his lust with the love of a
base whore, who, when he hath spent all upon her, and he brought to
beggary, beateth him out like the prodigal child, and for a small
reward, brings him, if to the fairest end, to beg, if to the second,
to the gallows; or at the last and worst, to the pox or as
prejudicial diseases. I pray you, Laurence when any of you come to
your confession at Tyburn, what is your last sermon that you make?
that you were brought to that wicked and shameful end by following
of harlots, for to that end do you steal to maintain whores, and to
content their bad humours. Oh Laurence enter into your own thoughts,
and think what the fair words of a wanton will do, what the smiles
of a strumpet will drive a man to act, into what jeopardy a man will
thrust himself for her that he loves, although for his sweet
villainy, he be brought to loathsome leprosy. Tush, Laurence, they
say the pox came from Naples, some from Spain, some from France, but
wheresoever it first grew, it is so surely now rooted in England
that, by S. Sith, it may better be called a morbus Anglicus than
Gallicus,<93> and I hope you will grant all these French favours
grew from whores: besides, in my high loving or rather creeping, I
mean where men and women do rob together, there always the woman is
most bloody, for she always urgeth unto death, and though the men
would only satisfy themselves with the parties' coin, yet she endeth
her theft in blood, murdering parties so deeply as she is malicious.
I hope gentle Laurence, you cannot contradict these reasons they be
so openly manifestly probable. For mine own part, I hope you do not
imagine but I have had some friends besides poor George my husband:
alas, he knows it, and is content like an honest simple suffragan,
to be co-rival with a number of other good companions, and I have
made many a good man, I mean a man that hath a household, for the
love of me to go home and beat his poor wife, when God wot I mock
him for the money he spent, and he had nothing for his pence but the
waste beleavings of others' beastly labours. Laurence, Laurence, if
concubines could inveigle Solomon, if Delilah could betray Sampson,
then wonder not if we more nice in our wickedness than a thousand
such Delilahs, can seduce poor young novices to their utter
destructions. Search the gaols; there you shall hear complaints of
whores, look into the spitals and hospitals; there you shall see men
diseased of the French marbles<94> giving instruction to others that
are said, to beware of whores: be an auditor or ear-witness at the
death of any thief, and his last testament is: Take heed of a whore:
I dare scarce speak of Bridewell because my shoulders tremble at the
name of it, I have so often deserved it, yet look but in there, and
you shall hear poor men with their hands in their pigeon-holes<95>
cry: Oh fie upon whores, when Fowler gives them the terrible lash:
examine beggars that lie lame by the highway, and they say they came
to that misery by whores. Some threadbare citizens that from
merchants and other good trades grow to be base informers and
knights of the post<32> cry out when they dine with Duke
Humphrey<96>: O, what wickedness comes from whores. prentices that
runs from their masters, cries out upon whores. Tush, Laurence, what
enormities proceeds more in the commonwealth than from whoredom? But
sith 'tis almost supper-time, and mirth is the friend to digestion,
I mean a little to be pleasant. I pray you, how many bad profits
again grows from whores? Bridewell would have very few tenants, the
hospital would want patients and the surgeons much work, the
apothecaries would have surfling water and potato-roots lie dead on
their hands, the painters could not dispatch and make away their
vermilion, if tallow-faced whores used it not for their cheeks: How
should Sir John's broadsmen do if we were not? Why Laurence, the
Galley would be moored and the Blue Boar so lean, that he would not
be man's meat if we of the trade were not to supply his wants: do
you think in conscience the Peacock could burnish his fair tail were
it not the whore of Babylon and suchlike makes him lusty with
crowns? no no, though the Talbot hath bitten some at the game, yet
new fresh huntsmen shake the she crew out of the couples. What
should I say more Laurence, The suburbs should have a great miss of
us, and Shoreditch would complain to Dame Anne a Cleare if we of the
sisterhood should not uphold her jollity: Who is that, Laurence,
comes in to hear our talk? O 'tis the boy, Nan, that tells us supper
is ready. Why then, Laurence, what say you to me? Have I not proved
that in foisting and nipping we excel you, that there is none so
great inconvenience in the commonwealth as grows from whores, first
for the corrupting of youth, infecting of age, for breeding of
brawls, whereof ensues murder, insomuch that the ruin of many men
comes from us, and the fall of many youths of good hope, if they
were not seduced by us, do proclaim at Tyburn, that we be the means
of their misery: you men thieves touch the body and wealth, but we
ruin the soul, and endanger that which is more precious than the
world's treasure: you make work only for the gallows, we both for
the gallows and the devil, aye and for the surgeon too, that some
lives like loathsome lazars, and die with the French marbles<94>.
Whereupon I conclude that I have won the supper.
Laur. I confess it, Nan, for thou hast told me such wondrous
villainies, as I thought never could have been in women, I mean of
your profession: why, you are crocodiles when you weep, basilisks
when you smile, serpents when you devise, and devils' chiefest
brokers to bring the world to destruction. And so, Nan, let's sit
down to our meat and be merry.
Thus countrymen, you have heard the disputation between these two
cozening companions wherein I have shaked out the notable villainy
of whores, although Mistress Nan this good oratress, hath sworn to
wear a long Hamburg knife to stab me, and all the crew have
protested my death: and to prove they meant good earnest, they
beleaguered me about in the Saint John's Head within Ludgate: being
at supper, there were some fourteen or fifteen of them met, and
thought to have made that the fatal night of my overthrow but that
the courteous citizens and apprentices took my part, and so two or
three of them were carried to the Compter, although a gentleman in
my company was sore hurt. I cannot deny but they begin to waste away
about London, and Tyburn (since the setting out of my book) hath
eaten up many of them: and I will plague them to the extremity. Let
them do what they dare with their bilbo blades; I fear them not. And
to give them their last adieu, look shortly, countrymen, for a
pamphlet against them called The Black Book containing four new laws
never spoken of yet: the creeping law of petty thieves, that rob
about the suburbs, the limiting law, discoursing the orders of such
as follow judges, in their circuits and go about from fair to fair.
The jugging law, wherein I will set out the disorders at nine-holes
and rifling, how they are only for the benefit of the cutpurses. The
stripping law, wherein I will lay open the lewd abuses of sundry
gaolers in England. Beside, you shall see there what houses there be
about the suburbs and town's end that are receivers of cutpurses'
stolen goods, lifts, and suchlike. And lastly, look for a bead-roll
or catalogue of all the names of the foists, nips, lifts and
priggers in and about London, and although some say I dare not do
it, yet I will shortly set it abroach, and whosoever I name or
touch, if he think himself grieved I will answer him before the
honourable Privy Council.


The Conversion of an English courtesan
     Sith to discover my parentage would double the grief of my
living parents, and revive in them, the memory of my great amiss,
and that my untoward fall, would be a dishonour to the house from
whence I came. Sith to manifest the place of my birth would be a
blemish (through my beastly life so badly misled) to the shire were
I was born: sith to discourse my name might be holden a blot in my
kindred's brow, to have a sinew in their stock of so little grace. I
will conceal my parents, kin, and country, and shroud my name with
silence, lest envy might taunt others for my wantonness. Know
therefore I was born about threescore miles from London of honest
and wealthy parents, who had many children, but I their only
daughter, and therefore the jewel wherein they most delighted, and
more, the youngest of all, and therefore the more favoured: for
being gotten in the waning of my parents' age, they doted on me
above the rest, and so set their hearts the more on fire. I was the
fairest of all, and yet not more beautiful than I was witty,
insomuch that being a pretty parrot, I had such quaint conceits, and
witty words in my mouth that the neighbours said I was too soon
wise, to be long old. Would to God, either the proverb had been
authentical, or their sayings prophecies; then had I by death in my
nonage, buried many blemishes that my riper years brought me to. For
the extreme love of my parents, was the very efficient cause of my
follies, resembling herein the nature of the ape, that ever killeth
that young one which he loveth most, with embracing it too
fervently. So my father and mother, but she most of all, although he
too much, so cockered me up in my wantonness, that my wit grew to
the worst, and I waxed upwards with the ill weeds: whatsoever I did,
be it never so bad, might not be found fault withal, my father would
smile at it and say 'twas but the trick of a child, and my mother
allowed of my unhappy parts, alluding to this profane and old
proverb, An untoward girl makes a good woman
     But now I find, in sparing the rod they hate the child, that
over-kind fathers make unruly daughters. Had they bent the wand
while it had been green, it would have been pliant, but I, ill-grown
in my years, am almost remediless. The hawk that is most perfect for
the flight and will, seldom proveth haggard and children that are
virtuously nurtured in youth will be honestly matured in age: fie
upon such as say, young saints, old devils: it is no doubt a
devilish and damnable saying, for what is not bent in the cradle,
will hardly be bowed in the saddle. Myself am an instance, who after
I grew to be six years old was set to school, where I profited so
much that I write and read excellently well, played upon the 
virginals, lute & cithern, and could sing prick-song<97> at the
first sight, insomuch as by that time I was twelve years old, I was
holden for the most fair and best qualitied young girl in all that
country, but with this, bewailed of my well-wishers, in that my
parents suffered me to be so wanton.
     But they so tenderly affected me, and were so blinded with my
excellent qualities that they had no insight into my ensuing
follies. For I growing to be thirteen year old, feeling the reins of 
liberty loose on mine own neck, began with the wanton heifer<98> to
aim at mine own will, and to measure content, by the sweetness of
mine own thought, insomuch, that pride creeping on, I began to prank
myself with the proudest, and to hold it in disdain, that any in the
parish, should exceed me in bravery. As my apparel was costly, so I
grew to be licentious, and to delight to be looked on, so that I
haunted and frequented all feasts and weddings, & other places of
merry meetings, where, as I was gazed on of many, so I spared no
glances to survey all with a curious eye-favour. I observed Ovid's
rule right: Spectatum veniunt, veniunt spectentur ut ipsi.<99>
     I went to see & be seen, and decked myself in the highest
degree of bravery, holding it a glory when I was waited on with many
eyes to make censure of my birth. Beside, I was an ordinary
dancer<100>, and grew in that quality so famous that I was noted as
the chiefest thereat in all the country, yea, and to soothe me up in 
these follies, my parents took a pride in my dancing, which
afterward proved my overthrow and their heart-breaking.
     Thus, as an unbridled colt, I carelessly led forth my youth and
wantonly spent the flower of my years, holding such maidens as were
modest, fools, and such as were not as wilfully wanton as myself,
puppies, ill brought up and without manners: growing on in years, as
tide nor time tarrieth no man, I began to wax passion-proud, and
think her not worthy to live that was not a little in love: that as
divers young men began to favour me for my beauty, so I began to
censure of some of them partially, and to delight in the multitude
of many wooers, being ready to fall from the tree before I was come
to the perfection of a blossom: which an uncle of mine seeing, who
was my mother's brother, as careful of my welfare as nigh to me in
kin, finding fit opportunity to talk with me, gave me this wholesome
exhortation.
A Watchword to Wanton Maidens.
     “Cousin, I see the fairest hawk hath oftentimes the sickest
feathers, that the hottest day hath the most sharpest thunders; the
brightest sun, the most sudden shower, & the youngest virgins, the
most dangerous fortunes: I speak as a kinsman, and wish as a friend:
the blossom of a maiden's youth, (such as yourself) hath attending
upon it many frosts to nip it, and many cares to consume it, so that
if it be not carefully looked unto, it will perish before it come to
any perfection.
     “A virgin's honour, consisteth not only in the gifts of nature,
as to be fair and beautiful, though they be favours that grace
maidens much: for as they be glistering, so they be momentary, ready
to be worn with every winter's blast, and parched with every
summer's sun: There is no face so fair but the least mole, the
slenderest scar, the smallest brunt of sickness will quickly
blemish.
     “Beauty, cousin, as it flourisheth in youth, so it fadeth in
age, it is but a folly that feedeth man's eye, a painting that
nature lends for a time, and men allow on for a while, insomuch that
such as only aim at your fair looks, tie but their loves to an
apprenticeship of beauty: which broken either with cares, misfortune
or years, their destinies are at liberty, and they begin to loathe
you, and like of others.
Forma bonum fragile est quantumque accedit ad annos
Fit minor et spacio carpitur ipsa suo<101>
     “Then cousin, stand not too much on such a slippery glory, that
is as brittle as glass; be not proud of beauty's painting, that
hatched by time, perisheth in short time: neither are women the more
admirable of wise men for their gay apparel, though fools are fed
with gauds: for a woman's ornaments, is the excellency of her
virtues: and her inward good qualities, are of far more worth than
her outward braveries: embroidered hair, bracelets, silks, rich
attire and such trash do rather bring the name of a young maid in
question, than add to her fame any title of honour.
     “The Vestal Virgins were not reverenced of the senators for
their curious clothing, but for their chastity. Cornelia<102> was
not famous for ornaments of gold, but for excellent virtues.
Superfluity in apparel, showeth rather lightness of mind than it
importeth any other inward good quality: and men judge of maidens'
rareness by the modesty of their raiment, holding it rather garish
than glorious, to be tricked up in superfluous and exceeding
braveries. Neither cousin, is it seemly for maids to jet abroad, or
to frequent too much company.
     “For she that is looked on by many cannot choose but be hardly
spoken of by some, for report hath a blister on her tongue, and
maidens' actions are narrowly measured. Therefore would not the
ancient Romans, suffer their daughters, to go any further than their
mothers' looks guided them. And therefore Diana is painted with a
tortoise under her feet, meaning that a maid should not be a
straggler, but like the snail, carry her house on her head, and keep
at home at her work, for to keep her name without blemish, and her
virtues from the slander of envy.
     “A maid that hazards herself in much company, may venture the
freedom of her heart by the folly of her eye: for so long the pot
goes to the water, that it comes broken home, and such as look much
must needs like at last: the fly dallies with a flame, but at length
she burneth, flax and fire put together will kindle, a maid in
company of young men shall be constrained to listen to the wanton
allurements of many cunning speeches: If she hath not either with
Ulysses tasted of Moly<103>, or stopped her ears warily, she may
either be enticed with the Sirens or enchanted by Circes: youth is
apt to yield to sweet persuasions, and therefore cousin, think 
nothing more dangerous than to gad abroad: neither cousin do I allow
this wanton dancing in young virgins: 'tis more commendation for
them to moderate their manners, than to measure their feet, and
better to hear nothing than to listen unto unreverent music: Silence
is a precious jewel, and nothing so much worth as a countenance full
of chastity: light behaviour is a sign of lewd thoughts, and men
will say, there goes a wanton that will not want one, if a place and
person were agreeable to her desires: if a maiden's honour be
blemished, or her honesty called in question, she is half
deflowered, and therefore had maidens need to be chary, lest envy
report them for unchaste. Cousin I speak this generally, which if
you apply particularly to yourself, you shall find in time my words
were well said.”
     I gave him slender thanks, but with such a frump that he
perceived how light I made of his counsel: which he perceiving,
shaked his head, and with tears in his eyes departed. But I whom
wanton desires had drawn in delight, still presumed in my former
follies, and gave myself either to gad abroad, or else at home to
read dissolute pamphlets, which bred in me many ill-affected wishes,
so that I gave leave to love and lust to enter into the centre of my
heart, where they harboured till they wrought my final and fatal
prejudice.
     Thus leading my life loosely, and being soothed up with the
applause of my too kind and loving parents, I had many of every
degree that made love unto me, as well for my beauty, as for the
hope of wealth that my father would bestow upon me: sundry suitors I
had, and I allowed of all, although I particularly granted love to
none, yielding them friendly favours, as being proud I had more
wooers than any maid in the parish beside: amongst the rest there
was a wealthy farmer that wished me well, a man of some forty years
of age, one too worthy for one of so little worth as myself, and him
my father, mother, and other friends would have had me match myself
withal: but I that had had the reins of liberty too long in mine own
hands, refused him and would not be ruled by their persuasions, and
though my mother with tears entreated me to consider of mine own
estate, & how well I sped if I wedded with him, yet carelessly I
despised her counsel, and flatly made answer that I would none of
him: which though it pinched my parents at the quick, yet rather
than they would displease me, they left me in mine own liberty to
love. Many there were beside him, men's sons of no mean worth, that
were wooers unto me, but in vain: either my fortune or destiny drove
me to a worse end, for I refused them all, and with the beetle,
refusing to light on the sweetest flowers all day, nestled at night
in a cowshard.
     It fortuned that as many sought to win me, so amongst the rest
there was an odd companion that dwelt with a gentleman hard by, a
fellow of small reputation, and of no living, neither had he any
excellent qualities but thrumming on the gittern, but of pleasant
disposition he was, and could bawl out many quaint & ribaldrous jigs
& songs, and so was favoured of the foolish sect for his foppery.
This shifting companion, suitable to myself in vanity, would oft-
times be jesting with me, and I so long dallying with him, that I
began deeply (oh, let me blush at this confession) to fall in love
with him, and so construed of all his actions that I consented to my
own overthrow: for as smoke will hardly be concealed, so love will
not be long smothered, but will bewray her own secrets: which was
manifest in me, who in my sporting with him so bewrayed my affection
that he spying I favoured him, began to strike when the iron was hot
and to take opportunity by the forehead: and one day finding me in a
merry vein, began to question with me of love: which although at the
first I slenderly denied him, yet at last I granted, so that not
only I agreed to plight him my faith, but that night meeting to have
farther talk, I lasciviously consented that he cropped the flower of
my virginity. When thus I was spoiled by such a base companion, I
gave myself to content his humour, and to satisfy the sweet of mine
own wanton desires. Oh, let me here breathe, and with tears bewail
the beginning of my miseries, and to exclaim against the folly of my
parents, who by too much favouring me in my vanity in my tender
youth laid the first plot of my ensuing repentance: Had they with
one correction chastised my wantonness, and suppressed my foolish
will with their grave advice, they had made me more virtuous and
themselves less sorrowful. A father's frown is a bridle to the
child, and a mother's check is a stay to the stubborn daughter. Oh,
had my parents in over-loving me not hated me, I had not at this
time cause to complain. Oh, had my father regarded the saying of the
wise man, I had not been thus woe-begone.
     If thy daughter be not shamefast hold her straitly, lest she
abuse herself through overmuch liberty.
     Take heed of her that hath an unshamefast eye, & marvel not if
she trespass against thee.
     The daughter maketh the father to watch secretly, and the
carefulness he hath for her taketh away his sleep.
     In her virginity, lest she should be deflowered in her father's
house.
     If therefore thy daughter be unshamefast in her youth,
keep her straitly, lest she cause thine enemies to laugh thee
to scorn, and make thee a common talk in the city, and defame
thee among the people, and bring thee to public shame.<104>
     Had my parents with care considered of this holy counsel, and
levelled my life by the loadstone of virtue, had they looked
narrowly into the faults of my youth, and bent the tree while it was
a wand, and taught the hound while he was a puppy, this blemish had
never befortuned me, nor so great dishonour had not befallen them.
Then by my example let all parents take heed, lest in loving their
children too tenderly they subvert them utterly, lest in manuring
the ground too much with the unskilful husbandman, it wax too fat
and bring forth more weeds than flowers, lest cockering their
children under their wings without correction, they make them
careless and bring them to destruction: as their nurture is in
youth, so will their nature grow in age. If the palm-tree be
suppressed while it is a scion, it will contrary to nature be
crooked when it is a tree.
Quo semel est imbuta recens servabit odorem testa diu. <105>
     If then virtue be to be engrafted in youth, lest they prove
obstinate in age, reform your children betimes both with correction
and counsel, so shall you that are parents glory in the honour of
their good endeavours: but leaving this digression, again to the
looseness of mine own life, who now having lost the glory of my
youth, and suffered such a base slave to possess it, which many men
of worth had desired to enjoy, I waxed bold in sin & grew shameless,
insomuch he could not desire so much as I did grant: whereupon,
seeing he durst not reveal it to my father to demand me in marriage,
he resolved to carry me away secretly, and therefore wished me to
provide for myself, and to furnish me every way both with money and
apparel, hoping, as he said, that after we were departed, and my
father saw we were married and that no means was to amend it, he
would give his free consent, and use us as kindly and deal with us
as liberally as if we had matched with his goodwill. I that was apt
to any ill, agreed to this, and so wrought the matter that he
carried me away into a strange place, and then using me awhile as
his wife, when our money began to wax low, he resolved secretly to
go into the country where my father dwelt, to hear not only how my
father took my departure but what hope we had of his ensuing favour:
Although I was loath to be left alone in a strange place, yet I was
willing to hear from my friends, who no doubt conceived much heart-
sorrow for my unhappy fortunes, so that I parted with a few tears
and enjoined him, to make all the haste he might to return. He being
gone, as the eagles always resort where the carrion is, so the bruit
being spread abroad of my beauty, and that at such an inn lay such a
fair young gentlewoman, there resorted thither many brave young
gentlemen, and cutting companions that, tickled with lust, aimed at
the possession of my favour, and by sundry means sought to have a
sight of me: which I easily granted to all, as a woman that counted
it a glory to be wondered at by many men's eyes, insomuch that,
coming amongst them, I set their hearts more and more on fire, that
there rose divers brawls who should be most in my company: being
thus haunted by such a troop of lusty rufflers, I began to find mine
own folly, that had placed my first affection so loosely, and
therefore began as deeply to loathe him that was departed, as erst I
liked him when he was present, vowing in myself though he had the
spoil of my virginity, yet never after should he triumph in the
possession of my favour, and therefore began I to affection these
new-come guests, and one above the rest, who was a brave young
gentleman, and no less addicted unto me than I devoted unto him, for
daily he courted me with amorous sonnets, and curious proud letters,
and sent me jewels, and all that I might grace him with the name of
my servant: I returned him as loving lines at last, and so contented
his lusting desire that secretly and unknown to all the rest, I made
him sundry nights my bedfellow, where I so bewitched him with sweet
words that he began deeply to dote upon me, insomuch that selling
some portion of land that he had, he put it into ready money, and
providing horse and all things convenient, carried me secretly away,
almost as far as Bath. This was my second choice, and my second
shame: thus I went forward in wickedness and delighted in change,
having left mine old love to look after some other mate more fit for
her purpose: how he took my departure when he returned I little
cared, for now I had my content, a gentleman, young, lusty and
endued with good qualities, and one that loved me more tenderly than
himself: thus lived this new-entertained friend and I together
unmarried, yet as man and wife for awhile, so lovingly as was to his
content and my credit: but as the tiger though for awhile she hide
her claws, yet at last she will reveal her cruelty, and as the agnus
castus leaf when it looks most dry, is the most full of moisture, so
women's wantonness is not qualified by their wariness, nor does
their chariness for a month, warrant their chastity forever, which I
proved true, for my supposed husband, being every way a man of
worth, could not covertly hide himself in the country, though a
stranger, but that he fell in acquaintance with many brave gentlemen
whom he brought home to his lodging, not only to honour them with
his liberal courtesy but also to see me, being proud if any man of
worth applauded my beauty. Alas poor gentleman, too much bewitched
by the wiliness of a woman, had he deemed my heart to be a harbour
for every new desire, or mine eye a suitor to every new face, he
would not have been so fond as to have brought his companions into
my company, but rather would have mewed me up as a hen, to have kept
that several to himself by force which he could not retain by
kindness: but the honest minded novice little suspected my change,
although I God wot placed my delight, in nothing more than the
desire of new choice, which fell out thus:
     Amongst the rest of the gentlemen that kept him company, there
was one that was his most familiar, and he reposed more trust and
confidence in him than in all the rest: this gentleman began to be
deeply enamoured of me, and showed it by many signs which I easily
perceived, and I whose ear was pliant to every sweet word, and who
so allowed of all that were beautiful, affected him no less, so that
love prevailing above friendship, he broke the matter with me, and
made not many suits in vain before he obtained his purpose, for he
had what he wished, and I had what contented me. I will not confess
that any of the rest had some seldom favours, but this gentleman was
my second self, and I loved him more for the time at the heel than
the other at the heart, so that although the other youth bare the
charges and was made Sir Pay-for-all, yet this new friend was he
that was master of my affections: which kindness betwixt us was so
unwisely cloaked, that in short time it was manifest to all our
familiars, which made my supposed husband to sigh, and others to
smile, but he that was hit with the horn was pinched at the heart.
Yet so extreme was the affection he bare to me that he had rather 
conceal his grief than any way make me discontent, so that he
smothered his sorrow with patience, and brooked the injury with
silence, till our loves grew so broad before, that it was a wonder
to the world: whereupon one day at dinner, I being very pleasant
with his chosen friend and my choice lover, I know not how, but
either by fortune or it may be some set match, there was by a
gentleman, there present a question popped in about women's passions
and their mutability in affections, that the controversy was
defended pro and contra with arguments whether a woman might have a
second friend or no? At last it was concluded, that love and
lordship brooks no fellowship, and therefore none so baseminded to
bear a rival. Hereupon arose a question about friends that were put
in trust, how it was a high point of treason, for one to betray
another, especially in love, insomuch that one gentleman at the
board, protested by a solemn oath, that if any friend of his, made
privy and favoured with the sight of his mistress whom he loved,
whether it were his wife or no, should secretly seek to encroach
into his room and offer him the dishonour to partake his love, he
would not use any other revenge but at the next greeting stab him
with his poignado, though he were condemned to death for the action.
All this fitted for the humour of my supposed husband, and struck
both me and my friend into a quandary, but I scornfully jested at
it, whenas my husband, taking the ball before it fell to the ground,
began to make a long discourse what faithless friends they were that
would fail in love, especially where a resolved trust of the party
beloved was committed unto them: and hereupon to make the matter
more credulous, and to quip my folly, and to taunt the baseness of
his friend's mind, that so he might with courtesy both warn us of
our wantonness, and reclaim us from ill, he promised to tell a
pleasant story, performed as he said, not long since in England, and
it was to this effect.
A pleasant discourse how a wise wanton by her husband's gentle
warning became to be a modest matron
     There was a gentleman (to give him his due) an esquire here in
England, that was married to a young gentlewoman, fair and of a
modest behaviour, virtuous in her looks, howsoever she was in her
thoughts, and one that every way with her dutiful endeavour and
outward apparance of honesty did breed her husband's content,
insomuch that the gentleman so deeply affected her, as he counted 
all those hours ill spent which he passed not away in her company:
besotting so himself in the beauty of his wife that his only care
was to have her every way delighted: living thus pleasantly
together, he had one special friend amongst the rest whom he so
dearly affected, as ever Damon did his Pythias, Pylades his Orestes,
or Titus his Gisippus<106>, he unfolded all his secrets in his
bosom, and what passion he had in his mind that either joyed him or
perplexed him, he revealed unto his friend & directed his actions
according to the sequel of his counsels, so that they were two
bodies and one soul. This gentleman for all the inward favour shown
him by his faithful friend, could not so withstand the force of
fancy, but he grew enamoured of his friend's wife, whom he courted
with many sweet words and fair promises, charms that are able to
enchant almost the chastest ears, and so subtly couched his
arguments, discovered such love in his eyes, and such sorrow in his
looks that despair seemed to sit in his face, and swore that if she
granted not him le don du merci<107>, the end of a lover's sighs,
then would present his heart as a tragic sacrifice to the sight of
his cruel mistress: the gentlewoman waxing pitiful, as women are
kind-hearted and are loath gentlemen should die for love, after a
few excuses, let him dub her husband knight of the forked
order<108>, and so to satisfy his humour, made forfeit of her own
honour. Thus these two lovers continued by a great space in such
pleasures as unchaste wantons count their felicity, having
continually such opportunity to exercise their wicked purpose, sith
the gentleman himself did give them free liberty to love, neither
suspecting his wife or suspecting his friend: at last, as such
traitorous abuses will burst forth, it fell so out, that a maid who
had been an old servant in the house began to grow suspicious, that
there was too much familiarity between the mistress and her master's
friend, and upon this watched them divers times so narrowly, that at
last she found them more private than either agreed with her
master's honour, or her own honesty, and thereupon revealed it one
day unto her master: he little credulous of the light behaviour of
his wife, blamed the maid, and bade her take heed lest she sought to
blemish her virtues with slander, whom he loved more tenderly than
his own life: the maid replied, that she spake not of envy to him,
but of mere love she bare unto him, and the rather that he might
shadow such a fault in time, and by some means prevent it, lest if
others should note it as well as she, his wife's good name and his
friend's should be called in question: At these wise words spoken by
so base a drudge as his maid, the gentleman waxed astonished, and
listened to her discourse, wishing her to discover how she knew or
was so privy to the folly of her mistress, or by what means he might
have assured proof of it: she told him that her own eyes were
witnesses, for she saw them unlawfully together, and please you sir
quoth she, to feign yourself to go from home, and then in the back
house to keep you secret, I will let you see as much as I have
manifested unto you: upon this the master agreed, and warned his
maid not so much as to make it known to any of her fellows. Within a
day or two after, the gentleman said he would go a-hunting, and so
rise very early, and causing his men to couple up his hounds, left
his wife in bed and went abroad: as soon as he was gone a mile from
the house he commanded his men to ride afore, and to start the hare
and follow the chase, and we will come fair and softly after: they
obeying their master's charge, went their ways, and he returned by a
back way to his house and went secretly to the place where his maid
and he had appointed. In the meantime, the mistress thinking her
husband safe with his hounds, sent for her friend to her bedchamber,
by a trusty servant of hers, in whom she assured that was a secret
pander in such affairs, and the gentleman was not slack to come, but
making all the haste he could, came and went into the chamber,
asking for the master of the house very familiarly: the old maid
noting all this, as soon as she knew them together, went and called
her master, and carried him up by a secret pair of stairs to her
mistress' chamber door, where peeping in at a place that the maid
before had made for the purpose, he saw more than he looked for, and
so much as pinched him at the very heart, causing him to accuse his
wife for a strumpet and his friend for a traitor: yet for all this,
valuing his own honour more than their dishonesty, thinking if he
should make an uproar, he should but aim at his own discredit, and
cause himself to be a laughing game to his enemies, he concealed his
sorrow with silence, and taking the maid apart, charged her to keep
all secret, whatsoever she had seen, even as she esteemed of her own
life, for if she did bewray it to any, he himself would with his
sword make an end of her days, and with that, putting his hand in
his sleeve, gave the poor maid six angels to buy her a new gown. The
wench, glad of this gift, swore solemnly to tread it underfoot, and
sith it pleased him to conceal it, never to reveal it as long as she
lived: upon this they parted, she to her drudgery and he to the
field to his men where after he had killed the hare, he returned
home, and finding his friend in the garden, that in his absence had
been grafting horns in the chimneys, and entertained him with his
wonted familiarity, and showed no bad countenance to his wife, but
dissembled all his thoughts, to the full. As soon as dinner was
done, and that he was gotten solitary by himself, he began to
determine of revenge, but not as every man would have done, how to
have brought his wife to shame & her love to confusion, but he
busied his brains how he might reserve his honour inviolate, reclaim
his wife, and keep his friend: meditating a long time how he might
bring all this to pass, at last a humour fell into his head, how
cunningly to compass all three, and therefore he went & got him
certain slips, which are counterfeit pieces of money, being brass, &
covered over with silver, which the common people call slips: having
furnished himself with these, he put them in his purse, and at night
went to bed as he was wont to do, yet not using the kind familiarity
that he accustomed: notwithstanding, he abstained not from the use
of her body, but knew his wife as aforetimes, and every time he
committed the act with her, he laid the next morning in the window a
slip where he was sure she might find it, and so many times as it
pleased him to be carnally pleasant with his wife, so many slips he
still laid down upon her cushionet. This he used for the space of a
fortnight, till at last his wife, finding every day a slip, or
sometime more or less, wondered how they came there, and examining
her waiting-maids, none of them could tell her anything touching
them, whereupon she thought to question with her husband about it,
but being out of her remembrance, the next morning as he & she lay
dallying in bed it came into her mind, and she asked her husband if
he laid those slips on her cushioned, that she of late found there,
having never seen any before. Aye marry did I, quoth he, and I have
laid them there upon special reason, and it is this. Ever since I
have been married to thee, I have deemed thee honest, and therefore
used and honoured thee as my wife, parting coequal favours betwixt
us as true loves, but of late finding the contrary, & with these
eyes seeing thee play the whore with my friend in whom I did repose
all my trust, I sought not as many would have done, to have revenged
in blood, but for the safety of mine own honour, which otherwise
would have been blemished by thy dishonesty, I have been silent, and
have neither wronged my quondam friend, nor abused thee, but still
do hold bed with thee, that the world should not suspect anything,
and to quench the desire of lust I do use thy body, but not so
lovingly as I would a wife, but carelessly as I would a strumpet,
and therefore even as to a whore, so I give thee hire, which is for
every time a slip, a counterfeit coin: which is good enough for such
a slippery wanton, that will wrong her husband that loved her so
tenderly: and thus will I use thee for the safety of mine own honour
till I have assured proof that thou becomest honest: And thus with
tears in his eyes, and his heart ready to burst with sighs, he was
silent, when his wife, stricken with remorse of conscience, leaping
out of her bed in her smock, humbly confessing all, craved pardon,
promising if he should pardon this offence which was new begun in
her, she would become a new reformed woman, and never after so much
as in thought, give him any occasion of suspicion of jealousy: The
patient husband not willing to urge his wife, took her at her word,
and told her that when he found her so reclaimed, he would as afore
he had done, use her lovingly and as his wife, but till he was so
persuaded of her honesty, he would pay her still slips for his
pleasure, charging her not to reveal anything to his friend, or to
make it known to him that he was privy to their loves. Thus the
debate ended, I guess, in some kind greeting, and the gentleman went
abroad to see his pastures, leaving his wife in bed full of sorrow
and almost rending her heart asunder with sighs. As soon as he was
walked abroad, the gentleman his friend came to the house and asked
for the goodman: the pander that was privy to all their practices,
said, that his master was gone abroad to see his pastures, but his
mistress was in bed: why then says he, I will go and raise her up:
so coming into the chamber and kissing her, meaning as he was wont
to have used other accustomed dalliance, she desired him to abstain,
with broken sighs & her eyes full of tears: he, wondering what
should make her thus discontent, asked her what was the cause of her
sorrow, protesting with a solemn oath, that if any had done her
injury, he would revenge it, were it with hazard of his life: She
then told him, scarce being able to speak for weeping, that she had
a suit to move him in, which if he granted unto her, she would hold
him in love and affection without change next her husband forever:
he promised to do whatsoever it was: then says she, swear upon a
bible you will do it without exception: with that he took a bible
that lay in the window & swore, that whatsoever she requested him to
do, were it to the loss of his life, he would without exception
perform it. Then she, holding down her head and blushing, began
thus. I need not quoth she make manifest how grossly and grievously
you and I have both offended God and wronged the honest gentleman my
husband and your friend, he putting a special trust in us both, &
assuring such earnest affiance in your unfeigned friendship that he
even committeth me, his wife, his love, his second life, into your
bosom: this love have I requited with inconstancy, in playing the
harlot, that faith that he reposeth in you, have you returned with
treachery and falsehood, in abusing mine honesty and his honour, now
a remorse of conscience toucheth me for my sins, that I heartily
repent, and vow ever hereafter to live only to my husband, and
therefore my suit is to you, that from henceforth you shall never so
much as motion any dishonest question unto me, nor seek any unlawful
pleasure or conversing at my hands: This is my suit, and hereunto I
have sworn you, which oath if you observe as a faithful gentleman, I
will conceal from my husband what is past, and rest in honest sort
your faithful friend forever: at this she burst into tears, and
uttered such sighs, that he thought for very grief her heart would
have clave asunder. The gentleman, astonished at this strange
metamorphosis of his mistress, sat a good while in a maze, and at
last taking her by the hand, made this reply, so God help me, fair
sweeting, I am glad of this motion, and wondrous joyful that God
hath put such honest thoughts into your mind, & hath made you the
means to reclaim me from my folly: I feel no less remorse than you
do in wronging so honest a friend as your husband, but this is the
frailness of man: and therefore to make amends I protest anew, never
hereafter so much as in thought, as to motion you of dishonesty,
only I crave you be silent: she promised that and so they ended. And
so for that time they parted: at noon the gentleman came home, and
cheerfully saluted his wife and asked if dinner were ready, and sent
for his friend, using him wonderfully familiarly, giving him no
occasion of mistrust, and so pleasantly they passed away the day
together: at night, when his wife and he went to bed, she told him
all what had passed between her and his friend, and how she had
bound him with an oath, and that he voluntarily of himself swore as
much, being heartily sorry that he had so deeply offended so kind a
friend: the gentleman commended her wit, and found her afterward a
reclaimed woman, she living so honestly that she never gave him any
occasion of mistrust. Thus the wise gentleman reclaimed with silence
a wanton wife, and retained an assured friend.
     At this pleasant tale all the board was at a mutiny, and they
said the gentleman did passing wisely that wrought so cunningly for
the safety of his own honour, but highly exclaiming against such a
friend as would to his friend offer such villainy, all condemning
her that would be false to so loving a husband. Thus they did
diversely descant, & passed away dinner, but this tale wrought
little effect in me, for as one past grace, I delighted in change,
but the gentleman that was his familiar and my paramour was so
touched that never after he would touch me dishonestly, but
reclaimed himself, abstained from me, and became true to his friend.
I, wondering that according to his wonted custom he did not seek my
company, he and I being one day in the chamber alone, and he in his
dumps, I began to dally with him, and to ask him why he was so
strange, and used not his accustomed favours to me. He solemnly made
answer that though he had played the fool in setting his fancy upon
another man's wife, & in wronging his friend, yet his conscience was
now touched with remorse: & ever since he heard the tale afore
rehearsed he had vowed in himself never to do my husband the like
wrong again: my husband, quoth I, he is none of mine; he hath
brought me from my friends, and keeps me here unmarried, and
therefore am I as free for you as for him, & thus began to grow
clamorous because I was debarred of my lust. The gentleman, seeing
me shameless, wished me to be silent, and said: although you be but
his friend, yet he holds you as dear as his wife, and therefore I
will not abuse him, neither would I wish you to be familiar with any
other, seeing you have a friend that loves you so tenderly: much
good counsel he gave me, but all in vain, for I scorned it, and
began to hate him, and resolved both to be rid of him and my
supposed husband, for falling in with another familiar of my
husband's, I so inveigled him with sweet words that I caused him to
make a piece of money to steal me away, and so carry me to London,
where I had not lived long with him, ere he seeing my light
behaviour, left me to the world, and to shift for myself. Here by my
example may you note the inconstant life of courtesans and common
harlots, who after they have lost their honesty, care not who grow
into their favour nor what villainy they commit: they fancy all as
long as crowns last, and only aim at pleasure and ease: They cleave
like caterpillars to the tree, and consume the fruit where they
fall; they be vultures that prey on men alive, and like the serpent
sting the bosom wherein they are nourished. I may best discourse
their nature because I was one of their profession, but now being
metamorphosed, I hold it meritorious for me to warn women from being
such wantons, and to give a caveat to men lest they addict
themselves to such straggling strumpets as love none though they
like all, but affectionate only for profit, and when he hath spent
all, they beat him out of doors with the prodigal child. But
stopping here till occasion serve me fitter to discover the manner
of courtesans, to myself, who now being brought to London and left
here at random, was not such a house-dove while any friend stayed
with me, but that I had visited some houses in London that could
harbour as honest a woman as myself: whenas therefore I was left to
myself, I removed my lodging and got me into one of those houses of
good hospitality whereunto persons resort commonly called a
trugging-house, or to be plain, a whore-house, where I gave myself
to entertain all companions, sitting or standing at the door like a
stall, to allure or draw in wanton passengers, refusing none that
would with his purse purchase me to be his, to satisfy the
disordinate desire of his filthy lust: now I began not to respect
personage, good qualities, to the gracious favour of the man when
eye had no respect of person, for the oldest lecher was as welcome
as the youngest lover, so he brought meat in his mouth; otherwise I
pronounced against him:
Si nihil attuleris ibis Homere foras<109>
     I waxed thus in this hell of voluptuousness, daily worse &
worse, yet having, as they term it, a respect to the main chance, as
near as I could to avoid diseases, and to keep myself brave in
apparel, although I paid a kind of tribute to the bawd, according as
the number and benefit of my companions did exceed, but never could
I be brought to be a pickpocket or thievish by any of their
persuasions, although I wanted daily no instructions to allure me to
that villainy: for I think nature had wrought in me a contrary
humour, otherwise my bad nurture and conversing with such bad
company had brought me to it: marry in all their vices I carried a
brazen face & was shameless, for what ruffian was there in London
that would utter more desperate oaths than I in mine anger? what to
spit, quaff, or carouse more devilishly or rather damnable than
myself? and for beastly communication, Messalina of Rome<110> might
have been waiting-maid: Besides, I grew so grafted in sin that
consuetu[de]o peccandi tollebat sensum peccati, custom of sin, took
away the feeling of the sin, for I so accustomably used myself to
all kind of vice, that I accounted swearing no sin: whoredom, why I
smiled at that, and could profanely say, that it was a sin which God
laughed at: gluttony I held good fellowship, & wrath, honour and
resolution: I despised God, nay in my conscience I might easily have
been persuaded there was no God: I contemned the preachers, and when
any wished me to reform my life, I bade away with the Puritan, and
if any young woman refused to be as vicious every way as myself, I
would then say, Gip fine soul, a young saint will prove an old
devil. I never would go to the church, and sermons, I utterly
refused, holding them as needless tales told in a pulpit: I would
not bend mine ears to the hearing of any good discourse, but still
delighted in jangling ditties of ribaldry.
     Thus to the grief of my friends, hazard of my soul and
consuming of my body, I spent a year or two in this base and bad
kind of life, subject to the whistle of every desperate ruffian,
till on a time there resorted to our house a clothier, a proper
young man, who by fortune, coming first to drink, espying me, asked
me if I would drink with him: there needed no great entreaty, for as
then I wanted company, and so clapped me down by him, and began very
pleasantly to welcome him: the man, being of himself modest and
honest, noted my personage and judicially reasoned of my
strumpetlike behaviour, and inwardly, as after he reported unto me,
grieved that so foul properties were hidden in so good a proportion,
and that such rare wit and excellent beauty was blemished with
whoredom's base deformity: insomuch that he began to think well of
me, and to wish that I were as honest as I was beautiful. Again, see
how God wrought for my conversion, since I gave myself to my loose
kind of life I never liked any so well as him, insomuch that I began
to judge of every part, and methought he was the properest man that
ever I saw: thus we sat, both amorous of other, I lasciviously, & he
honestly: at last he questioned with me what country woman I was and
why, being so proper a woman, I would beseem to dwell or live in a
base ale-house, especially in one that had a bad name: I warrant he
wanted no knavish reply to fit him, for I told him the house was as
honest as his mother's: marry, if there were in it a good wench or
two that would pleasure their friends at a need, I guessed by his
nose what porridge he loved, and that he hated none such: well,
seeing me in that voice, he said little, but shaked his head, paid
for the beer, and went his way, only taking his leave of me with a
kiss, which methought was the sweetest that ever was given me: as
soon as he was gone I began to think what a handsome man he was, and
wished that he would come and take a night's lodging with me:
sitting in a dump to think of the quaintness of his personage till
other companions came in that shaked me out of that melancholy, but
as soon again as I was secret to myself, he came into my
remembrance.
     Passing over thus a day or two, this clothier came again to our
house, whose sight cheered me up, for that spying him out at a
casement, I ran down the stairs and met him at the door and heartily
welcomed him, & asked him if he would drink: I come for that purpose
says he, but I will drink no more below, but in a chamber: marry sir
quoth I, you shall, and so brought him into the fairest room. In
there sitting together drinking: at last the clothier fell to
kissing and other dalliance, wherein he found me not coy: at last
told me that he would willingly have his pleasure of me, but the
room was too lightsome, for of all things in the world he could not
in such actions away with a light chamber: I consented unto him, and
brought him into a room more dark, but still he said it was too
light: then I carried him into a farther chamber, where drawing a
buckram curtain afore the window, and closing the curtains of the
bed, I asked him smiling if that were close enough. No, sweet love,
says he the curtain is thin, & not broad enough for the window;
peradventure some watching eye may espy us. My heart misdoubts, & my
credit is my life: good love if thou hast a more close room than
this, bring me to it: why then quoth I follow me, & with that I
brought him into a back loft, where stood a little bed only
appointed to lodge suspicious persons, so dark that at noondays it
was impossible for any man to see his own hands: How now sir quoth
I, is not this dark enough? He sitting him down on the bedside,
fetched a deep sigh, & said, indifferent, so, so, but there is a
glimpse of light in at the tiles. Somebody may by fortune see us: in
faith no quoth I, none but God: God says he, why can God see us
here? good sir quoth I, why I hope you are not so simple, but God's
eyes are so clear and penetrating that they can pierce through walls
of brass, and that were we enclosed never so secretly, yet we are
manifestly seen to him and alas quoth he sweet love, if God see us
shall we not be more ashamed to do such a filthy act before him than
before men? I am sure thou art not so shameless but thou wouldst
blush & be afraid to have the meanest commoner in London see thee in
the action of thy filthy lust, and dost thou not shame more to have
God the maker of all things see thee, who revengeth sin with death,
he whose eyes are clearer than the sun, who is the searcher of the
heart, and holdeth vengeance in his hands to punish sinners?
Consider, sweet love, that if man and wife would be ashamed to have
any of their friends see them in the act of generation, or
performing the rights of marriage which is lawful, and allowed
before God, yet for modesty do it in the most covert they may, then
how impudent or graceless should we be, to fulfil our filthy lust
before the eyes of the Almighty, who is greater than all kings or
princes on the earth. Oh, let us tremble that we but once durst have
such wanton communication in the hearing of his divine Majesty, who
pronounceth damnation for such as give themselves over to adultery.
     It is not possible, saith the Lord, for any whoremaster or
lascivious wanton to enter into the kingdom of God: for such sins
whole cities have sunk, kingdoms have been destroyed: and though God
suffereth such wicked livers to escape for a while, yet at length he
payeth home, in this world with beggary, shame, diseases or infamy,
and in the other life with perpetual damnation: weigh but the
inconvenience that grows through thy loose life, thou art hated of
all that are good, despised of the virtuous, and only well thought
of, of reprobates, rascals, ruffians, and such as the world hates,
subject to their lust and gaining thy living at the hands of every
diseased lecher. Oh what a miserable trade of life is thine that
livest of the vomit of sin, in hunting after maladies: but suppose,
while thou art young thou art favoured of thy companions, when thou
waxest old, and that thy beauty is faded, then thou shalt be loathed
and despised, even of them that professed most love unto thee: then
good sister, call to mind the baseness of thy life, the heinous
outrage of thy sin, that God doth punish it with the rigour of his
justice: oh thou art made beautiful, fair and well formed, and wilt
thou then by thy filthy lust make thy body, which if thou be honest
is the temple of God, the habitation of the devil? Consider this,
and call to God for mercy, and amend thy life: leave this house, and
I will become thy faithful friend in all honesty, and use thee as
mine own sister: at this such a remorse of conscience, such a
fearful terror of my sin struck into my mind that I kneeled down at
his feet, and with tears besought him he would help me out of that
misery, for his exhortation had caused in me a loathing of my wicked
life, and I would not only become a reformed woman, but hold him as
dear as my father that gave me life: whereupon he kissed me with
tears, and so we went down together, where we had further
communication, and presently he provided me another lodging, where I
not only used myself so honestly, but also was so penitent every day
in tears for my former folly, that he took me to his wife: and how I
have lived since, and loathed filthy lust, I refer myself to the
majesty of God, who knoweth the secrets of all hearts.
     Thus countrymen I have published the conversion of an English
courtesan, which if any way it be profitable either to forewarn
youth or withdraw bad persons to goodness, I have the whole end of
my desire, only craving every father would bring up his children
with careful nurture, and every young woman respect the honour of
her virginity.
FINIS


NOTES


A Notable Discovery of Cozenage

1. Nascimur pro patria: "We are born for our country."
2. Omnia sub sole vanitas: "All is vanity under the sun"
(Ecclesiastes.).
3. Patres patriæ: "Fathers of the country."
4. With a langret, cut contrary to the vantage, will cross-bite a
card cater tray: i.e., will swindle a victim by throwing a four and
a three with dice which have been cut in such a way that they are
not exactly cubical, and so will fall with the smaller face on top.
5. Quis nisi mentis inops ollatum respuit aurum: "Who but a madman
rejects money."
6. Vie and Revie: to raise and re-raise the stakes.
7. Summum ius: "The greatest force of the law."
8. Cum multis aliis quæ nunc præscribere longum est: "With many
others which would be too long to describe now."
9. Multa latent quæ non patent: "Many things are hidden that are not
seen."
10. No cozen to grime with his stop dice: i.e. No victim to swindle
with his loaded dice.
11. Polyphemus: a savage man-eating giant in the ninth book of
Homer's Odyssey
12. By his ownes: A minced oath = by his (Jesus') wounds.
13.A shamless woman etc: Proverbs 22:26
14. Si quis: A public notice advertising lost property or wanted
men.
15. Exordium: The beginning or introduction of a speech or court
plea.
16. Neapolitan favour: Syphilis, the first major outbreak of which
in Europe was at the siege of Naples, 1495.
17. Parators and sumners: Minor court officials.
18. The Arches: An ecclesiastical court (still in existence) which
dealt with religious and moral matters, including adultery,
illegitimacy, etc.
19. Venus in vinis, ignis in igne fuit: "Love and wine together are
like adding fuel to fire" (Ovid, The Art of Love).
20. gogs nownes: A minced oath = God's (Jesus') wounds.
21 Fallere fallentem non est fraus: "It's no sin to cheat the
cheaters."
22. Bull: Samuel Bull, hangman of London.
23. Ne Hercules contra duos: "Not even Hercules (could win a fight)
against two."
24. Jack Drum: Jack (or John or Tom) Drum's entertainment was to be
dragged into the house, beaten and thrown out again. See
Shakespeare: All's Well that Ends Well, iii. 6. A comedy called Jack
Drum's Entertainment by John Marston was performed several times in
1599-1600 and published in 1601.
The Second Part of Cony-Catching

25. Mallem non esse quam non prodesse patriae: "Better not to live
than not to be of service to my country."
26. ?? ?????? [to prepon]: "Fittingly."
27. Immedicabile vulnus, Ense resecandum est ne pars sincera
trahitur: "The infected part which cannot be cured must be cut away,
lest it infect the healthy parts." Ovid, Metamorphoses Bk. 1 l. 190-
91.
28. Summum bonum: "Greatest good."
29. Keep him at hard meat: Feed the horse on hay and oats while
keeping him stabled, rather than on grass in a field where it could
be seen.
30. The slop of a man's hose: The wide parts of a pair of baggy
breeches
31. An Act to avoid Horse Stealing, 31 Eliz c. 12 (1592).
32. Knights of the post: Fellows who could be hired at the posts
outside the Courts of Law to swear anything or go bail for any one.
33. Benevolentiam captare: "To persuade by flattery."
34. Bathyllus: A bad poet who tried to pass off as his own, a poem
by Virgil.
35. Neckverse: The beginning of Psalm 50/51 Miserere mei, Deus,
secundum misericordiam tuam; et secundum multitudinem miserationum
tuarum, dele iniquitatem meam. ("Have mercy on me, O God, according
to thy great mercy. And according to the multitude of thy tender
mercies blot out my iniquity.") This was the prayer of those about
to be executed.
36. Lento gradu: "By slow degrees."
37. The Accidence: Part of a grammar textbook dealing with parts of
speech and their inflections. The eight parts are verbs, nouns,
pronouns, adverbs, adjectives, prepositions, articles, and
conjunctions.
38. Jakes farmers: Contractors who carried off the human excrement
from the city's privies and cesspits.
39. With advantage: with a little extra, as a tip
40. Upon their pantofles: On their dignity.
41. Mittimus: A warrant to imprison a named person.

The Third and Last Part of Cony-Catching

42. Whittington College: Newgate Prison, which was first built when
Dick Whittington was mayor of London.
43. Their journey westward, but not of their return: They travelled
from Newgate to Tyburn, and were hanged.

The Black Book's Messenger

44. He leapt at a daisy: He was hanged.
45. Senex Fornicator: A dirty old man.
46. Colman hedge: A garden in Fenchurch St. near the church of St.
Catherine Coleman, where street-walkers were wont to take their
clients.
47. Aretine's Tables: I Modi, an album of erotic engravings by
Marcantonio Raimondi with text by Pietro Aretino.
48. Strado Curtizano: The Street of the Courtesans; Madam Padilia
and Romana Imperia: Famous courtesans.
49. per varios casus & tot discrimina rerum: "Through various
adventures and many dangerous things" Virgil, Aeneid I. 204.
50. Amasis' Law: Amasis was Pharaoh of Egypt 570 BC – 526 BC."It was
Amasis too who established the law that every year each one of the
Egyptians should declare to the ruler of his district, from what
source he got his livelihood, and if any man did not do this or did
not make declaration of an honest way of living, he should be
punished with death. Now Solon the Athenian received from Egypt this
law and had it enacted for the Athenians, and they have continued to
observe it, since it is a law with which none can find fault."
Herodotus, Histories 2.177.
51. Statute merchant: "A bond of record, acknowledged before the
chief magistrate of a trading town, giving to the obligee power of
seizure of the land of the obligor if he failed to pay his debt at
the appointed time." OED.
52. Arx: A small village in southwestern France.
The Defence of Cony-Catching
53. Qui bene latuit bene vixit, dominatur enim fraus in omnibus: "He
who lives hidden, lives well, for falsehood rules over all"
54. Marginal Note: Newgate builded by one Whittington.
55. Give you the bucklers: Confess that you have won. A buckler was
a small shield, often offered as a prize in a tourney
56. Marginal Note: The names of such games as cony-catchers use.
57. Marginal Note: All the money in their purse.
58. Squariers, langrets, gourds, stop-dice, highmen, lowmen, and
dice barred for all advantages: Types of rigged dice
59. All that his purse had in esse or his credit in posse: All that
his purse actually held or what he could borrow.
60. Marginal Note: Some cony-catchers wear noblemen's livery, as W.
Bickerton and others.
61. Tully: Cicero, the Roman orator, whose full name was Marcus
Tullius Cicero.
62. T.D.: Thomas Deloney 1543–1600, novelist and ballad-writer.
63. Iron age: The Greek writer Hesiod (c. 600 B.C.) wrote of five
ages of mankind; the Golden age, a time of peace and plenty, the the
Silver, Bronze and Heroic ages, each worse than the previous one;
and finally the Iron age, in which we are now living, a time of toil
and misery, and constant selfishness, strife, crime and violence.
64. Promised to acknowledge a statute staple to him, with letters of
defeasance: To lend money under a bond, witnessed before the mayor
of the town, allowing the lender to seize the property of the debtor
if the debt was not repaid.
65. The Washes: A former ford, in the area now called Enfield Wash
66. Hostry: Sticks used for kindling; Faggots: Bundles of firewood;
Fair chambering: Expensive hanging, bedclothes etc.
67. The Pantry: The division of the King's Household which dealt
with the provision, cooking and serving of food. 
68. Lash of lions: Lions' whiskers
69. Marquisadoed, with a side peak pendent: Having no beard but long
moustaches or long side whiskers hanging down.
70. Single of a deer: a deer's tail.
71. Barbary: The North Coast of Africa
72. Alcaires: Cairo in Egypt
73. Cavilavarst: ? Perhaps a misprint for cavalierest i.e. most like
a cavalier, or strutting gallant.
74. Marginal note: A boy of vii years old to make a bill of sale.
75. The Legend: The Golden Legend, a compendium of lives of the
saints, a book very popular in the late Mediaeval and early modern
period
76. Martinist: A follower of "Martin Marprelate", the pseudonymous
author of several works attacking the bishops of the Church of
England, published in 1588-89 until their printer was discovered and
executed.
77. As in praesenti: A rule in Latin grammar for forming certain
verb tenses; Carmen Heroicum: "Song of Heroes", an example given in
Latin grammars of the period.
78. Galligaskins: A kind of wide hose or breeches. Trunk-slops: Full
bag-like breeches covering the hips and upper thighs, and sometimes
stuffed with wool or the like, worn in the 16th and early 17th c.
79. Pleonasmos: Elaborate speech; using more words than are
necessary to describe something.
80. Vails: Additional rewards or perquisites of an employment: as
here, the right to sell the offcuts of cloth left over after making
a garment.
81. Granado silk: From Granada in Spain; Paned: Made of strips of
different coloured cloth sewn together; Biliment: Costly lace used
for trimming garments.

A Disputation between a He Cony-catcher and a She Cony-catcher.
82. The Mirror of Magistrates: The Mirror for [not of] Magistrates
is a collection of poems about the lives of various historical
figures. It had several editions from rival printers during the
second half of the sixteenth Century; one was written mostly by John
Higgins.
83. Hieria: The Hyena from Pliny's days was said to counterfeit
men's voices in order to entrap them and others (though not to
sing),—"In the Hyena itself there is a certain magical virtue,
attributing a wonderful power thereto, in transporting the mind of
man or woman, and ravishing their senses so as that it will allure
them unto her very strangely." (Natural History, B. 28, c. 8 trans.
Philemon Holland)  But qy.—odd as the misprint is, is it a blunder
for Sirens, Greek mythological creatures resembling women, who with
their singing enchanted sailors, and then ate them? The context
'tunes' and 'passengers' suggests this.
84. diebus illis: Those days.
85. Quatuor hic casibus etc: This quatrain has been attributed to
St. Augustine of Hippo, but is probably not by him.
86. All the bite in his bung: All the money in his purse.
87: Pierce Penniless: The protagonist of Pierce Penniless, His
Supplication to the Devil, a story by Thomas Nashe published in
1592, wherein Pierce laments the misfortunes which have brought him
to destitution.
88. Lime twigs: Twigs smeared with bird-lime, a sticky substance
used to catch birds, which stick to it when they perch, and cannot
fly away, and so are taken.
89: In danger of the cart: To which criminals were tied to be
flogged though the streets.
90. Unguentum aureum: "Golden grease" i.e. a bribe.
91. Morrow-mass priest: A priest appointed to celebrate the first
mass of the day very early in the morning. The task usually fell to
the most junior priest of the parish or community.
92. Have a bout at my nine bowls: = bowl at my skittles i.e. try to
knock me down.
93. morbus Anglicus: English disease; Gallicus: French.
94. French marbles: Syphilis
95. pigeon-holes: Holes in a pillory-like structure used to hold men
while being flogged.
96. To dine with Duke Humphrey: To go without dinner.
97. Prick-song: music pricked or noted down; when opposed to plain
song, it meant counter-point, as distinguished from mere melody.
98. A wanton heifer: Hosea 4:16. "For Israel hath gone astray like a
wanton heifer: now will the Lord feed them, as a lamb in a spacious
place."
99. Spectatum veniunt, veniunt spectentur ut ipsi: "They come to
watch; they come to be looked at themselves" Ovid, Art of Love, Book
1 l. 90.
100. An ordinary dancer: one very accurate in her steps.
101. Forma bonum fragile est quantumque accedit ad annos
Fit minor et spacio carpitur ipsa suo "Beauty is a fleeting boon; it
fades with the passing years, and the longer it lives, the more
surely it dies." Ovid, Art of Love, Book 3 l. 132-3.
102. Cornelia: Presumably Cornelia Africana (c. 190–c.100 BC)
daughter of Scipio Africanus, who defeated Hannibal, and mother of
the Gracchi, who pressed for reform of Roman corruption. She is
remembered as a prototypical example of a virtuous Roman woman.
(Julius Caesar's first wife was also called Cornelia.)
103. Moly: A magic herb with the aid of which Ulysses resisted the
spells of the witch Circe, who turned all his men into swine.
(Homer, Odyssey, Book 10.)
104. Sirach (Ecclesiasticus) 12.10-11; 42. 9-11.
105. Quo semel est imbuta recens servabit odorem testa diu."The jar
will long retain the odour of the liquor with which, when new, it
was once saturated" Horace, Epistles, Book 1 Epistle 2, (to Lollius)
l. 69-70.
106. Damon & Pythias, Pylades & Orestes, Titus & Gisippus: Famously
devoted friends from classical mythology.
     Pythias was accused of plotting against the tyrannical
Dionysius I of Syracuse. Pythias requested Dionysius that he be
allowed to settle his affairs on the condition that he leave his
friend, Damon, as a hostage, so if Pythias did not return, Damon
would be executed. Eventually, Pythias returned to face execution to
the amazement of Dionysius, who because of the sincere trust and
love of their friendship, then let both Damon and Pythias go
free.[Cicero, De Officiis]
     Orestes was the son of Agamemnon, king of Mycenae, and
Clytemnestra who murdered him when he came home from Troy. Pylades
was the companion and friend of Orestes, and helped him in his
wanderings and attempts to avenge his father. [Aeschylus, The
Oresteia]
     There are different versions of the story of Titus and
Gisippus, either that one gave the other his wife Sophronia because
of his greater love for her; or that one confessed to a murder for
which the other had been condemned. [Boccaccio, Decameron. 10.8;
Shakespeare, The Two Gentleman of Verona  (with the names changed to
Valentine and Proteus)]
107. Le don de merci: "The gift of compassion."
108. Knight of the Forked Order: A man whose wife or mistress was
unfaithful was said to wear horns or antlers—hence the joke that
cuckoldry was an order of Knighthood, whose emblem was a pair of
(forked) antlers.
109. Si nihil attuleris ibis Homere foras: "If Homer came without
money, he would be driven out." Ovid, Art of Love, Book 2 l.297
110. Messalina: Wife of the Roman emperor Claudius, notorious for
her sexual voracity.


GLOSSARY
Of obsolete words, or words used in an obsolete sense

Aconiton: A deadly poison prepared from the plant Aconitum napellus
(monkshood or wolfsbane)
Affiance: Absolute confidence or trust.
Affying: Trusting
Alla revolto : Carried upside down, with the hilt below the point
Alopecia: Baldness caused by illness
Ambuscado: Ambush
Amerced; amerciament: Fined; a fine
Amort: Dejected, vexed
Angel: A gold coin worth 10 shillings
Artificial: Artful, clever
Bait: Food
Baited: Fed
Bandore: A musical instrument resembling a guitar, used as a bass
accompaniment
Basil: An iron ring fastened around the ankle of a prisoner
Belswagger: A swaggering pimp or bully
Bewray: To betray, expose
Bilbo blade: A sword made in Bilbao, in Spain
Blackjack: A leather drinking vessel
Blind: Secluded, out of the way
Bombast: Cotton, or cotton-wool used for padding out clothes.
Bowed: Of a coin, bent; such a coin was given as a token of
affection
Brack: : A flaw in the weaving of cloth
Braves: Boastful or threatening behaviour
Brazil: An exceptionally hard wood
Brisk: To dress finely
Bruit: Something spoken of widely
Caliver: A kind of harquebus or musket
Cap-case: A travelling bag
Caterpillar: An extortioner, one who preys on others.
Cates: provisions
Cautels: Tricks, deceits
Cly: To take, seize
Cocker: To spoil or pamper a child
Cole: A swindler
Commodity: Benefit
Compter: A small prison run by the sheriff, used to hold debtors and
petty offenders.
Contemn: To despise
Copesmate: A colleague or accomplice, especially of a thief or
swindler
Cowshard: A pat of cow-dung
Crome: A hook
Cross: A small coin, which had a cross stamped on the reverse side
Cullion: A low-class scoundrel or ruffian
Cushionet: a pin-cushion
Cuttle-bung: a knife for cutting purses
Decipher: To show
Delay: Occupy, use up
Descant: To discourse, make a statement
Dicker: A package of ten hides
Drab: A whore
Drift: A course of action
Dump: A state of bewilderment or depression
Exigent: A summons to attend court under pain of outlawry.
Fadge: Suitable
Fairing: A gift or free sample
Featly: Neatly, elegantly
Figging: Thieving
Flax-wife: A woman who makes a living by preparing or spinning flax
into linen thread.
Foins: Marten fur
Forfend: Prevent, avoid
Frump: A derisive snort.
Garded: (Of garments) with ornamented fringes or hems
Gauds: Flashy finery of any kind
Gins: Equipment
Gird: A jibe or sarcastic crack at someone
Gittern: A musical instrument resembling a guitar.
Gran: A rustic or yokel
Hackster: A prostitute or thief (or both).
Haggard: A wild and untameable hawk, also used of an unbiddable
woman.
Handsel: A small gift of money
Headboroughs: Local police or watchmen
Hippocras: Spiced wine
Hippocras: Spiced wine
Holp: Helped
Huff-snuff: A hectoring braggart
Imbolish: To steal, make off with
Incestuous: Adulterous or immoral
Jet: Prance or swagger
Lamback: A heavy blow
Lask: Diarrhoea.
Leese: Lose
Legerdemain: Nimbleness or skill with the hands
Leman: A lover or mistress
Levatum : Comforting
List: To want or desire to do something
Mark: Thirteen shillings and four pence i.e. two-thirds of a pound.
Marshal-man: An official of the royal court or of the Mayor of
London, whose function it was to walk ahead of the coach in
procession in order to clear the way
Mate: Used contemptuously for a man
Meuse: An opening or gap in a fence or hedge through which a. hare
can escape when pursued
Mithridate: An antidote to all poisons
Mouthfair: Handsome
Mutiny: A dispute or quarrel
Nappy Ale: Strong, well flavoured ale
Nick: To hammer up the bottom of a metal container so as to reduce
the amount it will hold
Noble: A gold coin worth (in Greene's day) ten shillings
Nonage: Childhood
Oeillade: An amorous glance or ogle
Ordinary: An eating-house where a set meal could be had at a fixed
price; the meal itself
Pair: A pack of cards
Palliard: A beggar or vagabond
Pelf: Money or possessions, regarded as the root of all evil.
Penny-father: A miser
Pillow-bere: a pillow case
Placket: A pocket on the inside of a skirt or petticoat.
Poignado : A dagger
Pottle: Half a gallon
Prank: To show oneself off
Pranker: Thieves' slang for a lively horse
Provant: Soldier's rations
Quean: A whore
Quittanced: Cancelled, discharged
Several: Exclusive
Shells: Money
Sholt: A cur dog
Shore: A curve shot
Shot: The bill
Shruff dust: Powdered cinders.
Sice: The six on a die.
Simple: A medicinal herb
Sir-reverence: An expression used before, or instead of, a word or
words considered offensive.
Sith: Since
Smoke: To detect, find out
Snout-fair: Pretty
Soldados: Soldiers of fortune.
Spanish pip: Syphilis
Speed of: To succeed in obtaining.
Speeder: One who is successful in love
Stade: A kind of cloth
Stale, stall: A decoy; something (or someone) who distracts the
attention of a victim
Stanchel: The upright of a window-frame.
Starting-hole: Literally, a hole in which a hunted animal can hide;
metaphorically, a loophole, or "get-out."
Surfling water: A liquid cosmetic
Swinge: To beat someone with a club
Tabling Houses: Taverns or houses where backgammon was played
Term: A session of the law courts
Termer: A litigant in court
Toy: A lively tune or song
Traffic: A whore
Train: A deceitful trick
Treacher: A treacherous person
Trug: A whore
Trugging-house: A brothel
Twilted: Sewn in
Vent: The business of selling a commodity
Veny: A thrust or wound in fencing
Verse: To swindle
Virginals: A musical instrument resembling a small piano
Wehee: The sound of a whinnying horse
Yarking up: Preparing
Younker: A young man


The Complete Cony-catcher

-136-

