THE
HISTORY
OF THE
HUMAN HEART:
OR, THE
ADVENTURES
OF A
YOUNG GENTLEMAN.

Anonymous

First published 1759.
Published by the Ex-classics Project, 2018
http://www.exclassics.com
Public Domain



(Title page)

THE
HISTORY
OF THE
HUMAN HEART:
OR, THE
ADVENTURES.
OF A
YOUNG GENTLEMAN.

(Publishers emblem)
LONDON:
Printed for J. FREEMAN, near Ludgate.
MDCCXLIX.



The Introduction.

As I am fully convinced, that the following sheets have so much real
merit and intrinsic excellence, as to meet with a favourable reception
from the present judicious age, and the esteem of all future
generations, so it is very natural to suppose, that in a century or
two hence, the then learned world may be very desirous to be
acquainted with the character of the author of so celebrated a piece;
therefore, to anticipate their curiosity, and to prevent the injury
which my memory may suffer from the attempts of less able writers, and
above all to gratify my own itch of fame, the reader must excuse me,
if, before I enter upon the history of the great Camillo, I say
something of myself, and commence my own historian; since, according
to the old saying, it's best to christen one's own child first; and
that I have the example of so many ancient and modern authors of great
note, who have not been ashamed to trumpet their own praise, and
relate the most important transactions of their lives; the great Cæsar
wrote his commentaries, and by his pen erected monument to his name,
which has outlived, some thousand years, that raised by his sword, and
the famous consulate of Cicero, in spite of his repeated requests to
his friends, to remember it in their writings, had been sunk in
eternal oblivion, if he had not been so kind to himself, as to have
taken every possible opportunity to celebrate it in his own works. But
why should I search into the annals of antiquity for examples of this
kind, when I have that of the great Laureate of the age to justify my
proceedings, who by writing his own life, has convinced the world,
that modesty is not always necessary in an author of merit: but to
tell you the truth, whether I had such great authorities, or not, I
believe I should be tempted to take my own way, and therefore, without
any further apology, I proceed.

The reader must know then, that the author of the following history
was born in the mountains of Wales, and of course, has as good blood
in his veins as any man in England: it's true, he does not pretend to
be an aboriginal taffy, and owes the purity of his blood only to the
height of the mountain on which he first drew breath; for his father
was born in Scotland, and descended of an ancient family in the
highland part of that kingdom, remarkable for many great qualities,
but for none so much, as being possessed of that eminent faculty,
known by the name of the second sight, which they enjoyed for many
centuries, in a very high degree, and had lately improved it by
matching with a Lapland family, likewise endued with the same
discerning power. This gentleman, the author's father, by some
accident, not material enough to be enquired into, left his own
country, travelled into England, and married a Lancashire witch, who,
I have often heard say, was descended on the mother's side, from a
very noble, knowing, and honest family in the province of Munster in
Ireland; and from this match sprung your humble servant the author.

It's easy to conclude, from this part of his genealogy, that he
himself is a gentleman nobly born, and that besides the advantages of
acquired learning, he is endued with the hereditary virtue of his
ancestors, viz. the second sight; but you must know, that this same
faculty, valuable as it is, and though it has been long in the family,
yet has been productive of no very great estate; for the author, upon
the death of his father and mother, which happened when he was about
sixteen or seventeen years of age, found his patrimony so low, as to
oblige him to convert his hereditary faculty into ready money for the
support of his dignity; in short; not to mince the matter, the poor
second-sighted gentleman, was obliged to set up fortune-teller. He
practised first in his native country, Wales, and gained some
reputation by discovering of stray spoons, rings, watches, &c. But the
practice of borrowing horses and other cattle is so common amongst the
Welsh, and I was so often asked questions on that subject, which it
was dangerous to answer, that I thought proper to change the scene of
action, and come up to London, where I expected to find more fools,
more money, and less danger of being detested when I chanced to
deliver oracles without the impulse of my second-sighted spirit, which
was far from being at my command so often as I could wish it: for the
reader must know the nature of this faculty is this; the person
possessed of it, at some particular times, not stated, sees, in spite
of himself, certain visions or appearances of men or things, from
whence he judges of events that are to happen to the persons of whom
he has seen such apparitions, but knows nothing of what is either past
or to come, but the single accident of which he has had the vision; so
that it is no wonder, if notwithstanding my being endued with this
visionary power, I was as much to seek in answering the many questions
asked me, as a fortune-teller, as if I had no such thing; however, as
it sometimes helped me out at a dead-lift, it served to establish my 
reputation, and the weakness and credulity of my customers enabled me
to keep up the farce, to the great increase of my fortune. I lived in
London for several years, predicted to persons of all ranks, and hit
so oddly upon many things, that at last I began really to fancy myself
an oracle. But in the height of my grandeur, my great talents brought
me into a scrape, which ruined my trade of prediction, and involved in
my fall the whole profession: the affair was this; I was one morning
telling fortunes to several ladies; for these, were my chief
customers, where I spied amongst them a good comely woman, wife to a
great man in the ministry; she had dressed herself like a tradesman's
wife, and intended to try my skill by this disguise; however, I knew
her person, and some secrets in her family, which she believed all the
world ignorant of; when it came to her turn to be served, I treated
her with the respect due to her real quality, which very much
disconcerted her, withdrew with her into another room, and told her
some passages of secret history, which made her swear I dealt with the
Devil. I at last directed her to a house where she should find her
spouse at such an hour in bed with a lady of her acquaintance. She
paid me handsomely for my intelligence, and as the Devil would have
it, went to the house, and, much about the time predicted, found her
husband in a very warm conversation with a female friend.

The discovery produced a squabble between the statesman and his
spouse; but as things of that kind are not very uncommon, the breach
was soon made up, though at the expense of the conjurer; for the lady,
after the reconciliation, having acquainted her Lord with the manner
of her being directed to that discovery, he conceived such an aversion
to all the tribe, that in two days after, he brought in a bill to the
House of Lords, making it highly penal for any man to pretend to any
more knowledge than a peer is commonly possessed of, which certainly
excludes all pretences to the knowledge of future events or
witchcraft. The bill met with but little opposition in either House,
there being but few conjurers returned that parliament, and I had the
mortification to see myself stripped of my means of living, without
the least provision being made for me in the Act. With the little I
had saved, which was indeed but little, I set out on my travels over
Europe, expecting to meet with better reception abroad; but unhappily
for me, the character of my country in general was at that time so
opposite to that of a conjurer, that I was laughed at by everybody
wherever I mentioned my profession; a prophet out of Nazareth, was not
so great a contradiction to the Jews, as a conjuror out of England:
one impudent Frenchman told me I might as well expect a musician from
Norway, a painter from Siberia, or a dancing-master from Holland. In
short, though my trade was legal, at least tolerated, and as much in
esteem by all ranks of people, as it formerly had been in England, yet
the prejudice conceived against my country, and the utter
impossibility which all foreigners supposed of an Englishman being
capable of foreseeing future events, however plainly discernible by
other persons, wrought so much in my prejudice, that I was obliged to
give over all thoughts of living in that manner, at least, as a
master. Therefore I associated myself with an Italian of the
profession, who soon discovered talents in me, which his contempt of
my country had hindered him from expecting.

This gentleman was a Rosicrucian philosopher, and skilled in all the
mysteries of that learned society, but professed the particular study
of astrology, in which he was the greatest adept living. I met with
him at Paris, and having by the help of my second-sight, given him
warning of an accident which happened to him, in clearer terms than he
had discovered by the help of the stars, he conceived a great notion
of my abilities, and entertained an uncommon friendship for me, which
he testified by inviting me to accompany him on a tour he was then
about to make to most of the courts of Europe, promising to defray all
charges. My inquisitive disposition, and the little connection I had
with any particular spot of earth, determined me to embrace his offer.

Accordingly we set out, and in a little time became so much engaged in
a friendly intercourse, that the Italian concealed nothing from me,
and prevailed on me to be initiated into the mysteries of the
Rosicrucian sect, by which means I became master of many rare secrets,
both in art and nature. In about a twelve-month's time, I was
acquainted with the Cabala, and could perform things infinitely beyond
the power of the natural man. The Italian concealed from me but one
thing, which by the rules of the order he was at liberty only to
communicate upon his death-bed, to such brother of the order, as
should be with him at that time. As he was an old man, and could not
expect by the course of nature to live long, he begged me to stay with
him constantly, that I might enjoy that great secret, which was the
most valuable of all he possessed. I loved my friend much, but my
desire to be possessed of this nostrum, which I flattered myself was
no less than the philosopher's stone, made me very eager for his
death. I watched him close for near three years, in which time we
visited all the courts of Germany, Italy, and Spain, and made many
very curious observations. At last the hour of his dissolution
approached; the philosopher took his bed, and knew his last moments to
be near at hand. Then calling me to him, and expressing the most
unfeigned tenderness for me, told me he was now about to teach me the
last and finishing mystery of their sect, and convey to me a power
which would make me for ever happy. Then raising himself from his bed,
he performed some ceremonies peculiar to our order, and repeated in my
ear certain cabalistical words, which he made me repeat after him, and
fix in my memory. Now, my son, says he, as soon as I am laid in my
grave, you are to form a talisman from these words, which I have now
learned you, which will have this wonderful effect, that by it you can
discover any past transaction you want to know, with all the motives
and circumstances attending it. It has no power of representing
futurity, but by it you may see things past, how long so ever since
they were transacted, as clearly as if they passed before your eyes,
from whence you may draw a fund of knowledge, infinitely superior to
all you can gain by the deepest and most successful searches into
futurity. You can try no experiment till I am gone, for the cabalistic
words will have no effect till I am buried.

I heard him with seeming patience, but was heartily vexed to find,
that instead of the philosopher's stone, which I suspected he was
possessed of, I had been let into a secret, which, at best, could only
gratify a vain curiosity, and wished the philosopher and his talisman
at the Devil, as I thought all the time I had been with him lost,
since I had not obtained the main thing, which was the object of all
my wishes. However, I was obliged to be contented with what I had
learned. The old man died, and left me all his books, and some ready
money he was possessed of, which enabled me to prosecute my travelling
humour a year or two longer, which I did, without so much as once
thinking on making my talisman, so little I accounted it: however,
being returned to England a year or two ago, and all my ready money
gone, cast about in my own mind, how to make the great knowledge I was
possessed of subservient to my subsistence; I had some valuable
secrets in physic, which I thought would be useful in a country, where
half the people are pleased to be sick, and pay great sums for being
cured of imaginary ailments; but I found, as there were fashionable
diseases, so the doctor must be in fashion likewise; otherwise his
knowledge avails him little; and as I could not prescribe myself into
vogue, for want of some physical badges which are not so easily come
at, I was obliged to drop my notions of living by the sick; and
meeting one day in a coffee-house, not a mile from Charing-Cross, a
certain folio author vapouring about in a dress and equipage, much
different from what I formerly knew him in, I had the curiosity to
know what could be the reason of the mighty change. I asked a
gentleman of my acquaintaince, how my old friend was enabled to
support all that grandeur? He told me, by writing; and named me
several pieces he had fathered since I left England, which had raised
him so much in the esteem of the public, that the government had
settled a pension on him, only to avoid him meddling with political
matters. I knew the creature's talents, and could not but suppose some
other event must have concurred to his advancement, and therefore
then, and not till then, I bethought myself of my talisman to satisfy
me in this particular. I went home immediately and made it, and
performing the first experiment upon my old acquaintance the author, I
had my curiosity satisfied in every transaction of his life, and from
it took the hint of turning author myself, since with the help of my
talisman, I had one advantage in relating past events, which no author
ever had, and consequently concluded, I think rationally, that I might
make a very good living of my friend's last secret.

Full of this project, I consulted an honest book-seller on the subject
I should write upon, for all subjects treating of matters past are
alike to me; and was advised above all things to deal in characters,
such as lives, memoirs, &c., especially if I could interline them with
scandal, and render them entertaining. These, says he, will always go
down with the town, when neither morals, politics, nor divinity, are
once peeped into: with this view, I cast my eye on the ministry; but
found by my talisman, if I spoke truth, I should run a worse risk, 
than by renewing my old trade of fortune-telling, and therefore
declined meddling with that class of men. I ranged through almost all
professions before I could pitch upon a proper subject; at last,
falling accidentally into company with Camillo at a coffee-house, I
observed such a medley in his conversation, and so many peculiarities
in his temper, that I concluded the history of him would be
entertaining.

With this thought, I applied him to my talisman, and at one view saw
every transaction of his life, from his conception to the present
minute. The scene pleased myself, and consequently I concluded it
would please the town. Therefore I sat down and wrote out the first
rough draft of it. However, as a young author, I was a little doubtful
to appear in print without the advice of some wise friend, who would
be at the trouble of reading, or hearing it read. Therefore in the
first place, I came home one evening earlier than ordinary, and called
up my landlady, who is a good-natured grave old woman, to my
apartment, I treated her with a pot of hot, and told her I had got a
book, which I would entertain her with, if she would lend me her ear.
She accepted of my offer, and sat down on one side of the fire, I on
the other, and a very judicious tabby cat posted herself in the
middle; then I began to read my labours, concluding, if I should raise
the laugh of my present audience, it was morally impossible, but I
should succeed with the public.

You may be sure I read with all the emphasis of an author, and lost
nothing by the manner of my delivery, which made my old landlady every
now and then chuckle her old sides. I must own, however, that in some
particular parts, caught my old woman a-nodding, which was a signal to
me to put a mark for amendment. These passages I either left out or
enlivened, till I brought it to such perfection, on a third reading,
as to gain my good landlady to hear it out without once yawning.

This gave me courage, and I was about to commit it to the press, when
a worthy gentleman, an acquaintance of the old woman, desired the
favour of a sight of the manuscript; I gave it him, and with my
permission, he has subjoined notes, moral, historical, and critical,
which he says, must greatly enhance the value of the book; I know they
enlarge the bulk, and that is a considerable advantage of itself; but
he tells me seriously, that as I have, in the history of Camillo,
traced every event from its natural source in the soul, and by that
means discovered the various and surprising effects of the passions,
habits and affections of the human heart, in a manner quite new, the
subject would admit of many serious and moral reflections, which the
natural mercury of my disposition made me overlook, and therefore he
thought that defect best supplied by notes and commentaries, which has
this advantage, that the serious turn, which they must naturally have,
does not interfere with the humour of the narration, and may without
hurt to the history itself, be overlooked by such as have not a taste
that way, but may be useful to minds disposed to moralise. I submitted
to my friend's advice, and now present it to the public, fully
persuaded, that by it I shall transmit my name to future ages, and
reap a yet more solid advantage, that of lining my now almost empty
pocket with some golden images of his sacred majesty, which are the
best amulets against all manner of earthly evils.


Chapter I.

Camillo, the father of the hero of the following pages, was
representative of a very ancient and honourable family in Shropshire,
and possessed of an estate, free from all original sin, of the yearly
rent of two thousand pounds. He had a genteel person, a noble
carriage, and was endued with every accomplishment, whether natural or
acquired, which adorns the fine gentleman; and had but two prevailing
foibles, to hinder him from being the most complete person of the age.
These were, a hasty passionate temper, impatient of the smallest
degree of contradiction, and a more than ordinary amorous disposition.
These were his predominant passions, which had grown up with him from
his youth, and had taken too deep root to be eradicated in a more
adult age; when reason and experience taught him, that the one soured
all his other enjoyments, and the other led him into many indecent
irregularities, unbecoming his station in life, and inconsistent with
his calmer notions of honour and morality. However, he had a fine
estate, was a good economist, and at certain intervals, when free from
the dominion of his passionate foible, betrayed a great deal of good-
nature, and a very social disposition, which atoned in some measure
for his hasty outrages, on less guarded occasions, and procured him a
large share of the esteem of his neighbours, by whom he was courted
for an ally.

Amongst the many fair ladies who dressed, danced, and ogled for his
heart, none bid so fair for the prize, as the beautiful Florinda; she
was just turned of eighteen, had a fine shape, a delicate complexion,
black hair, and two charming black eyes where the little god of love
kept constant revels. Her temper was meek and engaging, and her
constitution amorous, which a moist palm, and a wanton leer in the
eye, were strong indications of. She had all the accomplishments of
art, befitting a woman of quality, and knew how to make the most of
all these advantages. Add to all this, she was possessed of an estate
of a thousand a year, which lay contiguous to that of Camillo. In
short, I need only add, that a match between this accomplished pair
was soon completed, to the great joy of both families, and the greater
mortification of many of both sexes, who had been angling some years
for one or other of the hearts of the now happy couple.

This match was solemnized at  in Shropshire, on the 4th of August,
1685, a year memorable for the defeat of the Monmouth rebellion. And
from this day I date the exigence of Camillo the younger. For my
talisman represented him to me as in being twenty minutes and fifteen
seconds after ten in the morning of that day. Though his conception
did not take place till twenty-five minutes after twelve at night. He
had the first perception of his existence, while yet in his father's
custody; and was possessed of no other idea, nor sensibly of change of
place for many days after. For though from the first moment of his
being he had all the parts and organs of a perfect animal, yet the
several members and component parts were so small, and of a texture so
infinitely delicate, that they were capable of performing no function
sufficient to inform the soul of the connection between them, or
furnish it with any new ideas.

For about fourteen hours<1> this miniature of man, whose life is only
discoverable by the microscope, swam in a limpid aromatic liquid; and
at the end of that time, when the bride and bridegroom were laid in
bed, the double entendres of the knowing matrons wittily played off,
and the officious guests withdrawn, the longing pair with lips joined
to lips, and limbs with limbs entwined, begun the amorous battle; and
when short breathed sighs, and soul mingling raptures proclaimed the
ecstatic minute, the young Camillo shifted sides, and nimbly skipped
into the ovaria of his mother<2>, where he found a proper nidus to
support his little body, and enlarge the rudiments of future manhood.
For two or three days he was tossed to and fro in his new habitation,
without knowing where to fix, but at last, took root, in his proper
soil, like any other plant; and by this situation enjoyed a kind of
vegetable life<3>, which he had not before. But still the soul was
ignorant of this change of state, and remained wrapped up in its first
perception till the end of forty-two days, when the several members of
the body were unfolded from the filaments in which they originally
lay, acquired a firmer texture, and were capable of so much extension
as to perform their several function; then the soul perceived its mode
of existence, and that it was united to an organized body, to which it
was capable of giving motion, and making it subservient to preserve
that being, of which it had now a more distinct idea.

Immediately on this discovery it takes its seat on the pineal gland.
There it erects its imperial throne, and by its trusty ministers, the
animal spirits, governs this little machine<4>, and obliges the
several organs to perform their several functions, according to the
mechanic laws to which they are subject.

For several weeks after this, the soul had no other perceptions, but
that of itself and the body, and its necessary union with that body,
and the pleasure resulting from the reflection on that existence
employed all its thoughts. But when his mother was about four months
gone, an accident happened, which disturbed the profound reverie, in
which he constantly lived. As women have a great deal of curiosity, so
Florinda had her share of this passion, and being then in London, must
needs go to see the Duke of Monmouth beheaded; whether the lady was
infected with any party spirit, which made her enter too deeply into
the tragic scene which the now beheld, I know not, or if it was only
the natural sympathy of her disposition, but she was so shocked when
the executioner gave the fatal blow, that she shrieked out, and
immediately fainted away, and continued senseless for some time. On
the first approach of fear<5>, Florinda's soul, equally solicitous
about the infant she carried, dispatched a large quantity of animal
spirits to support the foetus, which so alarmed the young soul, and
impressed it with such a notion of danger, that it was unable to
command the spirits under its proper direction, and put it into such a
flutter, that the tender organs of the body were very much disordered,
and retained as long as it lived the effects of that surprise, and
rendered the young Camillo naturally a coward. It was sometime before
either the mother, or the foetus, recovered their former equanimity.
The mother did in a few days, but the infant had now got a new idea to
exercise its thinking faculty, that of fear, which recurred as often
as the smallest disorder happened to the mother, and gave him many
uneasy moments in his dark mansion.

However, he went on to increase in bulk and strength, according to the
mixed laws of the animal and vegetable economy, to which he was
subject, till about the sixth month, when a fresh accident gave him
new cause of uneasiness. Camillo chanced to be called some days from
home, and Florinda made a young lady, a kinswoman of hers, her
bedfellow for that time. This lady was young and frolicsome, and one
night, when undressed for going to bed, playing some wanton tricks to
make Florinda laugh, she discovered a certain promontory about her,
more naturally coveted by a man than a woman, but as the latter have
sometimes very strange longings in their pregnancy, Florinda, casting
her eyes on that seldom seen spot, was seized with an irresistible
desire to taste it. She endeavoured to check the thought as soon as
conceived, but in vain, the more she strove to banish the unnatural
idea, the more it haunted her imagination. She grew very restless, and
communicated her anxiety to the unborn infant, who wished and longed,
it knew not for what, but still was sensible something was wanting to
remove its uneasiness, little knowing at that time that what was so
much its own and its mother's wishes, was destined for purposes much
different from what its present notion of things could suggest.
Florinda bore a great deal of pain, and grew so much out of order,
that her life began to be in danger; the husband came home, and tried
all means in his power to pick the secret out of his wife, what it was
she longed for: for by the symptoms the physicians guessed that to be
the disease. But she, ashamed of her unnatural appetite, and knowing
it impossible to be gratified, even if she revealed it, kept an
obstinate silence: for, though she had heard of mem who had parted
with a slice of their buttocks to satisfy a loved wife's longing, yet
she could not imagine her young friend would part with a bit from a
part so sensible, to gratify her capricious taste; so she languished
for some time, and at last, by the help of some old woman's receipt,
became pretty well again. These were the most material occurrences of
the life of young Camillo, while he remained in his mixed state of
animal and vegetable life. But about nine months and ten days after
his entrance into these dark regions, his head, which till now was
specifically lighter than the rest of the body, and by that means
enabled to keep uppermost in the liquid sea which environed him,
became all of a sudden specifically heavier, upon which he reeled
about like a man that was drunk, and tumbled head-foremost to the
bottom of his watery habitation. He was very uneasy in that posture,
and spurned and sprawled to get to his old situation, but to no
purpose, his head would still be downmost by the mere force of
gravitation. These struggles gave the fair Florinda some presages of
her approaching minute; upon which all the house was alarmed, and
Mother Midnight, with all the female gossips who had kept her
reckoning for her, were summoned to her aid. Young Camillo in an hour
or two grew very obstreperous, and resolved at all events to get out
of his prison; his attempts to extricate himself grew more frequent
and longer; at last, by a happy tumble, he pitched head foremost
against the portal of his enclosure, Mother Midnight was on the watch
for such an event, catched fast hold of him, and dragged him, now half
spent with fatigue, to this world of care and trouble. Though in a
warm room, yet he no sooner felt a change of air, than it affected him
with pain, on which he set up a piteous cry, not that he was sorry he
got out of the dilemma, in which he had been plunged for some hours
before, but because he felt actual pain, which was increased by the
officious tenderness of the old operator, out of whose hands he
thought he could never be got; however in a few minutes after the
admiration of his parts and features was over among the company, he
was dressed and laid by his mother, and fell into a sound sleep, but
not till he had sucked for some time a piece of a boiled pig; for he
was observed, when he came into the world, to be constantly gaping,
which informed Goody Midnight that the mother had longed. She was
asked what it was, and named something that could not be got, but not
quite so unnatural as what she really wished for, therefore the boiled
pig, which is a cure in such cases, was given young master; he sucked
it greedily, and by degrees it stopped the motion of his little chops;
he loved pig all his life after, though not half so well as he did
that instead of which it was substituted; but he did not know the
difference for some years after, and happy for him had he always been
able to make the exchange.

When he waked from his first sleep, he found the difference between
his present and past state. Before, the machine of his body drew its
nourishment from the mother by constant and uninterrupted vegetable
laws; the juices flowed from her into their proper vessels, and
supplied the wants of nature in a manner quite different from the laws
to which it was now subject, and in such manner, that the soul never
felt any want or decay of aliment; but now the case is altered, the
nourishment must be received at the mouth, the lungs begin to play,
and assist the other organs in their several operations, food is
received into the stomach, must lie there some time to be concocted
and digested, before it is fit to be secreted by the finer vessels
through which it is to pass in the form of chyle, blood, &c. and in
its course supply the parts that are continually flying off by
insensible perspiration. The animal spirits, the great agents of life,
are constantly flying off, and require a fresh supply from sleep; in
short, everything in his present state was in constant fluctuation,
and wants and supplies follow one another by perpetual succession.
When he waked, that moisture, which kept the organs of the mouth
supple, was wanting, and the glands of the throat were no longer able,
without a fresh supply, to defray the expense of chyle sufficient to
lubricate the passage of the gullet; this want produced a powerful
irritation, and set little master a-squalling; upon which the good
nurse in waiting, took him up and suckled him from a bottle; this
afforded pleasure equal to the pain he had before felt, and stilled
his crying; and from this minute began the appetite of thirst, and the
idea of something liquid always occurred, as often as he found the
former irritation, occasioned by the dryness of his mouth. As for
hunger, it was some days before he knew anything of the matter, for
the good people about him were all so fond of the little brat, that
they were always a-stuffing him; sometimes he swallowed what they
gave, purely to save himself from being choked with their kindness;
but for the most part, the moisture he found in everything they
offered, brought back to his mind the pleasant idea he felt when he
quenched his first thirst, for that reason he swallowed as much as his
little stomach would hold; but when he was a month or two old, and had
been put to the hands of a nurse who was none of the most careful, he
was left for some hours either without nipple or spoonmeat, by which
means his stomach became empty, and he felt a gnawing at it, by the
operation of the coats upon one another this gave him pain, and set
him into a violent fit of crying, which brought nurse to his
assistance, who immediately stuffed him with pap, which allayed the
irritation, and gave him an idea of hunger and refreshment.

Thus little master is furnished with a brace of appetites, which of
themselves were sufficient to employ the whole soul, hitherto
possessed of few other ideas, but such as arose from the impressions
of fear he had received in the womb; and the successive reflection on
these two appetites and their effects, for some time put out of his
head the abstracted reflection on his existence, which had chiefly
employed the soul in its former amphibious state: for while Camillo
was supplied with nipple and pap enough, he was always pleased, and
would laugh and crow, to the great pleasure of his mamma and her
friends; however, he had his moments of mortification arising from the
temperature of his blood, and his timid disposition. His blood, by
inheritance from his father, was naturally warm, and of a fiery thin
texture, consequently easily put in motion by any internal accident.
This made him very fretful; if he found himself disposed for the
nipple, and if it was not immediately put into his mouth, he fell into
a passion, and would put himself into as high an agitation as if the
greatest injury had been done him. One day, master was inclined for
his bottle, nurse, in putting it to his mouth, happened to turn aside
her head, and so disappointed its going in, this put him in such a
fret, there was no pacifying him; at last it came into her head to
pull the skirt of her coat over her face, and roar at him; as this was
an object he had never seen before, and come upon him at unaware, it
gave him such a panic, that he stopped his crying immediately. Nurse
seeing so great success from the first attempt, used it often on like
occasions, which made the soul of poor Camillo as timorous as a hunted
hare; and truly he passed his time but indifferently for the year he
was at breast, because his passionate temper set him often a-crying,
and that as often produced Raw-head and Bloody-bones<6>, so that he
was in continual alarms.

The next misfortune was the loss of his favourite nipple, which
heartily vexed him, nor would it have been possible to comfort him for
the loss of it, if they had not put some bitter stuff upon the tit,
which gave him a dislike to it ever after; this source of grief was
succeeded by the pain of cutting his teeth, which cost him many an
uneasy hour, however he came through that, and all the other diseases
incident to children, pretty tolerably, but as they happened when he
was between three and four years of age, and pretty close upon the
back of one another, they obtained him a degree of indulgence to his
natural temper, which was very prejudicial, and which continued so
long, that to its natural bent, was added the force of a strong habit,
so that young Camillo was truly the plague of the nursery, by his
peevish passionate disposition.

His father saw and was sorry for it, having experienced in himself the
unhappy effects of that fiery temper. When he was about four years
old, and pretty well recovered from the effects of the small-pox, his
father resolved by correction to check that waspishness, but found him
so much a slave to fear, that he durst not even dare to threaten him;
for whenever he dreaded anything, he fell into such a panic, as
endangered his life or senses, for everything that displeased him, had
one or other of these effects, either to put him into a violent
passion, or throw him into an universal tremor and despondency of
spirit; there was no medium between these two passions; they
alternately possessed him with almost equal force, though that of fear
seemed to be rather the strongest, as it produced the most dangerous
effects. Camillo remained for three years longer in the nursery, where
nothing material happened to him, except his hearing all the old
stories of witches, spirits, and apparitions, which furnished him with
a new class of imaginary objects for his timid disposition to work
upon. At this time he discovered a strong retentive memory, and gave
all the signs of a quick and lively apprehension. His Father now
thought it high time to take him out of the hands of the women, and
put him under the direction of a tutor, who by mere accident proved to
be something more than a pedagogue; for to a thorough knowledge of the
classics, and all other branches of polite literature, he added an
extensive acquaintance with men and manners, and was perfectly versed
in the rise, progress, and effects of the passions and habits of the
human heart, and therefore a fit person to enlarge the understanding,
and cultivate the mind of youth, and such a one as young Camillo
wanted in a particular manner, as he was under the dominion of two of
the basest passions that can taint humanity, viz. rage, and fear; and
these so strongly rooted as to be part of his natural constitution,
and receiving daily strength from the crasis<7> of his blood and an
early habitude, begot by indulgence.

It was a little strange at first for Camillo to see himself deprived
of the officious tenderness of the women, and put amongst a class of
people, whose looks did not promise him so much indulgence as he had
been used to; but Philotis, for that was the name of his tutor, soon
dissipated his fears, and treated him with a mildness peculiar to
himself, endeavouring by that means to win upon his affections, that
he might come at the bottom of his disposition, without that disguise
which he knew severity would beget. Nay, even for near a month he
carried his indulgence further than the women would have done, and
observed in that time the several changes and motions of his natural
temper, and formed from thence rules for his conduct in freeing it
from the deformities which had been allowed to grow up with it. He
soon discovered his predominant foibles, anger and timidity, and as
these two could not be safely played against each other, he chose to
nurse up a third, which he intended to use as a curb upon both. This
was pride, with its first offspring shame. By giving him a high
opinion of himself, it was easy to beget pride, especially since the
women had been pretty industrious in forming this habit, though
without any good design; when he had pushed him up pretty high, then
he made him understand that there were certain things inconsistent
with the good sense, &c. of a young gentleman of his rank, which gave
him a notion of shame, when he did anything that tended to rob him of
his fancied merit and excellence. The tutor took care to find frequent
subjects of mortification, in order to give him a more quick and
lively sense of shame, and when he had by slow degrees brought this
passion to a tolerable degree of strength; he applied it first to his
timidity, and shamed him out of some of the grossest effects of his
fearfulness. He then attacked his passionate foible with the same
weapon; and in both cases, by painful application and great patience,
he got these ugly habits pretty much under subjection, but could never
totally erase them, since they were in some measure owing to his
natural constitution, which it was not in his power entirely to alter.

This worthy gentleman not only studied to root out what acquired
habits he found in the mind of his pupil, but by the same means, and
with the same diligence, he trained up all the social affections, and
took more pains to cultivate his morals, and make him acquainted with
himself, in all his relations to society, than to teach him the
languages, or other speculative sciences, which, however, he did not
neglect in their proper seasons, though subordinate to the grand
affair, the cultivation of his mind. But he took a method quite
different from most tutors, for he kept his pupil from seven till the
age of eleven, without putting a Latin book into his hands. He
employed all that time in forming his tender ductile mind, and
learning him his mother tongue, which he taught him grammatically.
This last task alone, was sufficient for the first two or three years;
after which, he taught him the history of his own country; and
inculcated that part of it, which his understanding could comprehend,
so strongly, that he knew at eleven years of age, more of the ancient
and modern state of England, than some fellows of colleges do at this
day. At about eleven years of age, he gave him the Latin accidence,
and as he was perfectly master of grammar before, he learned that
language with as much ease as the ladies do French. In a word, before
he was fourteen, he was master of the classics, had read some
mathematics, and not a little natural philosophy; and knew as much of
ethics and useful morality, as could be expected from one of twice his
years.

Though I believe my readers would have excused me if I had not dwelt
so long upon my hero's infant state, yet I must not omit an adventure
or two, which happened to Camillo when he was yet but a child.

As he never was permitted to go to a public school, but received all
his education from Philotis, at his father's house, we are not to
suppose he idled away his hours of study, however, he would now and
then rob an orchard, and play some other such unlucky pranks, as
children are wont to do. But the decorum he was obliged to observe,
and the little company he was permitted to keep with other boys,
confined him within narrower bounds than others generally are; so that
he was a long time ignorant of many things which youth at school learn
to their great misfortune. For Camillo seldom saw anything so young as
himself, except his sisters, the eldest of whom was a year younger
than he. With these he lived as children do, sometimes in good humour,
and at other times quarrelling with them, but his eldest sister was
more his favourite than the others; with her he would share his
sweetmeats, lend her his toys, and when not in his passionate fit, was
truly fond of her. This sister and he, when he was about ten years of
age, chanced to be in the cherry-garden, and Miss would needs get up
into a tree (which was easy to climb) to pull some fine cherries she
saw a-top. Camillo would have gone up himself, but Miss, being in
somewhat a hoity-toity humour, would not permit him, but bid him stay
below, and take up the fruit as she tossed them down. She accordingly
went up, and he took his post underneath, and while the young lady
stood with her feet on two different branches at some distance from
each other, the youth happening to look up, saw something in his
sister's make, much different from his own, for hitherto he imagined
the whole difference of her sex consisted in the dress. This strange
scene drew his attention so much, that he stood gaping, without
minding the cherries which his sister threw down; she observing his
negligence, cried out to him, "How now brother, what's the matter? You
let the cherries fall to the ground, I shall lose half of them in the
grass; what is it you are staring at?" "Staring at!" replied Camillo,
"at such a sight as I never saw before; why you have got a great cut
at the bottom of your belly; I wonder you do not get a plaster to it,
I am sure it must be sore." with that Miss, who had been taught from
her cradle to hide that piece of goods, changed her posture as quick
as possible, and came down from the tree blushing and crying. As she
cried and whimpered, poor Camillo was confirmed in his suspicion, that
she really had a wound, and very naturally endeavoured to comfort her,
telling her mamma, would give her some of her plaster, which would
soon make it well. This vexed the girl more than before, and she flung
from him in a violent passion. He was then in one of his good natured
fits, and was sorry to think sister Nancy was hurt, and that she would
not speak to him, and so fell a-crying. In the interim his tutor came
into the garden, and espying his pupil all in tears, he kindly asked
the matter; "Indeed," says Camillo sobbing"poor sister Nancyhas got
a great wound in herbelly,you may almost put your finger in it; I
saw it when the was up in the cherry tree,I am afraid she will die of
it, and besides, she will not speak to me, since I told her of it, but
is gone crying to the nursery." Philotis could not help laughing at
the natural simplicity of the boy, and said to him, smiling, "Do not
you concern yourself about that wound, it is healed I warrant you by
this time; but Camillo, added he, you should not peep under women's
petticoats, none but impudent naughty boys do that; however, do not do
so again, and I will make your sister Nancy be friends with you, she
only cries because you looked up her coats." "Why then, was it not for
the wound she cried?" (returned Camillo) "Sure if I had such, I should
cry my heart out; but may not I look at the mark, sir, when, it is
well?" "No, said the tutor, you rogue, you must never look at anything
of the kind.""Never," replied the boy, "that's strange! I am sure, if
I was hurt, I would let her look as much as she pleased." Philotis was
glad to change the discourse, lest he should he obliged to come to an
explanation, which he chose to avoid. However the wound ran strong in
Camillo's head, and the more so, when the moment he set eyes upon any
of the maids, they would burst out a laughing: for Miss Nancy had told
her mother of the accident, in the presence of some of them, and one
of them was so imprudent as to jeer him with it, and carry on a
conversation which undeceived him, and let him into an idea of the
difference of sexes, that is, into such a notion<8> as let him know
that what he saw was no hurt, but a mark which distinguished girls
from boys.

Young Camillo had now got a sight of what his mother longed for, and
was seized with a violent curiosity to be better acquainted with it;
though he did not know, why or wherefore: he had a strong inclination
to be peeping under his sister's petticoats, and the more they opposed
him, the more he was inclined to do it; however, this was merely the
effect of curiosity; he had no purpose, but to survey the structure of
an object which was quite new to him, without being capable of
guessing at its real use or intrinsic excellence. He wanted to see it,
and all its appurtenances, both outside and inside, for much the same
reasons, as he would that of a rattle, or any other toy; and as he
found it difficult to gratify this inclination, his desire became more
eager, and the whim could never be out of his head, he was always
thinking of it: for it's the nature of curiosity<9>, that opposition
whets it, and makes it more violent, in which it differs from most of
the passions.

But after some attempts, to oblige Miss Nancy to satisfy his
curiosity, for which he was severely beat, he was obliged to conceal
his inclinations, and content himself with ruminating upon what was so
much the object of his wishes. He remained in this state of anxious
uncertainty for some time longer, but chance, and the imprudence of
one of the maids, gave him a small hint of the matter, which he soon
improved to a perfect knowledge.

As Camillo was much addicted to passion and fear, the system of his
nerves were affected and greatly relaxed, which made his parents
believe, that he would very soon be visited by the palsy, from a
tremor he was observed to have in his hands. The physicians were
consulted on a case so uncommon in a person of his years; and they
very judiciously recommended the frequent use of the cold bath. It
happened to be the latter end of spring when he entered into this
regimen, and every morning he was raised out of bed, put into a
bathing tub which stood in the kitchen, and one of the maids was
directed to dry him when he came out, and rub him all over with a
flesh-brush till his skin was put in a glow of heat. It happened,
while the maid was rubbing him in this manner one morning, with his
face turned to a large fire, the heat of the fire, and the friction of
the parts, caused an erection in little master; which the maid
observing, waggishly said, "Hey! My little Camillo? It will not be
long before you know Madge from a cut; my life for it in a year or two
you will be the plague of all the maids in the manor." "Know Madge
from a cut!" returned Camillo, "what is that you say, Peg: what do you
mean by Madge, who is she?" "Go, you fool, you," said she, "do not you
remember what you mistook in the cherry-garden for a cut?" "O! Dear!"
replied he, "is that called Madge? But how can you tell that I shall
know more of it soon; will you let me see your Madge? For sister Nancy
will not let me have a peep at hers." "No, you young rogue, you,"
answers Peg, "I will not; see Poll (turning to another of the maids
then in the kitchen) how soon nature begins to work! Will not this
(turning to little master) make your teeth water; in three or four
years more, I warrant he will be looking after your Madge in good
earnest." At this instant some of the men-servants came in, which
broke off the chat about Madge, and young Camillo was dressed;
however, he had learned so much from this conversation, that a certain
mark he had about him, was designed for some use or purpose relating
to that other mark in the maids, which they had christened by the name
of Madge; and as an erection was the cause of this discourse, as often
as that happened the other idea occurred, and in a little time
further, the last brought on the former, which might be said to be the
first stage of the grosser appetite: however his ideas of it were
entirely confused, and the emotions he felt on these occasions were
caused by the connection of the ideas, and not by the connection of
the things themselves, of which he had not the least conception; and
found no other attraction in himself, but that the thoughts of his
former curiosity was attended with a tickling itch in certain parts,
which created a foolish kind of sensation, mixed with pleasure and
uneasiness.

In a month or two after this, when he was between eleven and twelve
years of age, he chanced to accompany his mother in a visit she made a
neighbouring family, who had several children bred up at the boarding-
school, and now at home on account of the Whitsun holidays. The eldest
boy of this family was about the age of Camillo, and they soon grew
fond of one another, so that the mother was prevailed on to leave
Camillo to divert himself with this new companion, till he returned to
the seminary. The boys were both pleased with this indulgence, and
masters were made bedfellows: they chanced both to awake pretty early
the first morning, and entered into a conversation, which in the end
proved very entertaining to young Camillo; for by it he learned the
school-boy's vice, which was the second stage of the lustful appetite,
and he wanted now nothing but to be informed of the commerce between
the sexes, to arrive at full maturity in that kind of knowledge;
however his young tutor in iniquity, was pretty near as ignorant in
that point as he, and could give him but very small intelligence
relating to it: but as I said before, the idea of what he called
Madge, raised formerly an erection, so that brought back the pleasant
reflection of the crisis of the new sport he had learned, and
consequently he had a stronger cause than before to indulge his
thoughts upon that subject, and to be eager in gratifying his desire
of seeing and feeling it: but it was yet almost a year before he
arrived at the height of his wishes.



Chapter II.

About this time, a sister of his mother's of the half-blood, died, and
left an only daughter about, twelve years of age to the care of
Camillo's father: the young lady was brought home to the house, and
educated with the rest of the children of the family: she was very
genteel in her person, had a blooming complexion, and showed all the
prognostics of a great beauty; her temper was extremely agreeable, her
disposition frolicsome, and much inclinable to the romp. She had not
been bred up with all the strictness imaginable, was much less
reserved than Camillo's sister, and on that account she was better
pleased with his conversation than with that of the young ladies, and
of course he became more engaged to her company, shared in all her
diversions, and did her all the little obliging offices in his power,
so that in a short time, such a tender friendship grew up betwixt
them, that Camillo was always uneasy when he was not with her, and
Miss Maria was never better pleased than when in company with him: for
a month or two they had no opportunity of being alone together, though
both wished it, they knew not why. At last fortune was favourable to
our young lovers. It was in the season of hay-making, and all the
children in the family were diverting themselves in the fields, and
romping among the haycocks. There was a little coppice-wood hard by,
and here they all retired to shade themselves from the heat of the
sun. His sisters had not been long there, when they took it into their
heads to go home upon a cart of hay then carrying out of the field;
Camillo and Maria, who, on other occasions, would have been the first
in a frolic of that kind, chose for the present to stay behind, being
both determined by the same motives, viz. the desire of conversing
alone with each other. When the rest were gone, Camillo drew near
Maria, and grasping her about the middle, cries out, "Now my dear
cousin, you and I are together alone, which I have longed wished forI
shall be revenged of you, so I will, for all the tricks you have
played me, since you came to our house; I will tumble and kiss you out
of breath, that I will." She naturally, and with the most artless
innocence permitted him to take as much of this sort of revenge as he
pleased; he kissed her a thousand times, she returning his caresses
with all possible ardour. Warmed with this amorous toying, Camillo's
curiosity put him in mind of what he had of late been so desirous to
see, but never had a glimpse of since the affair of the cherry-tree;
full of this thought, be began to be very familiar with Maria's
petticoats, at which she seemed at first offended; but as her
inclinations were individually the same with Camillo's, after a little
struggle the permitted him, to purvey the secret throne of mighty love
in all its budding bloom: it formed a tempting protuberance, divided
in the middle like the downy peach; its edges tinged with a deep
vermilion, which gave lustre to the radiant whiteness of the
neighbouring mount: no shaggy shrubs had yet disfigured the sacred
vale, but all was smooth as polished ivory: Camillo silently gazed for
same time with wonder and amazement, and then in a transport, pressed
the mysterious spot with his wanton hands, and allowed his little
fingers to search its inmost recesses.

As Miss had been bred at a boarding school, she had there learned
vicious tricks; young, very young as she was, which occasioned her
being the more sensibly moved with the wanton touches of the ravished
Camillo. She lay panting as for breath, and grasped the simple youth
to her glowing bosom with eager transports, as much as to say, "There
is ecstasy yet to come, though you and I are ignorant of the means."
The unconscious boy, though his blood was by this time in a blaze, and
all his spirits on the wing, yet spent the moments in this childish
dalliance, till the nymph, who had exhausted her amorous fire, and
recovered in some measure from the delicious trance, had sense to see
that their companions were returning, and that it was time to resume a
more decent posture.

Camillo had found too much pleasure from the warm emotion of his blood
in this adventure, not to wish for such another; but he had no full
opportunity for two or three months after, only now and then he could
steal a touch while they were romping together in company with his
sisters, who seldom left him and his charming Maria alone, though both
were equally desirous of that satisfaction. And now their affection
for each other increased daily, and was visible to the whole family;
however nobody made any serious reflections upon it, but laughed to
see the effects of their very early flame, which each discovered
without any dissimulation. It even contributed to the advancement of
their education; for when either of them did anything amiss, they were
told such behaviour would render them unworthy of each other, and the
only way Camillo could take to merit his cousin Maria for a wife, was
to mind his exercises; and that she must acquire all the
accomplishments befitting her sex, before she could aspire to be the
wife of Camillo: this obliged both of them to pursue with eagerness,
and take pleasure in learning, everything that could render them fit
for each other. Thus they went on, encouraging a mutual flame, which,
if it had not received a check in the bud, might, as they managed it,
have proved the ruin of their future peace. For they had both
dissimulation enough to conceal the vicious emotions of their
passions, and the loose freedoms they indulged themselves in, as often
as they had any opportunity: not from any conception they had of the
nature or crime of these dalliances, but because the one had been
checked by his tutor and parents for attempting to treat his sisters
and the maids with these kind of freedoms, and the other had learned
to dissemble all her sentiments, that being the grand principle on
which the young ladies depend in the present generation; but they
courted all occasions of indulging in private, and making amends for
the restraint they put upon themselves in public.

About three or four months after the first rencounter, when Camillo
might be about thirteen years of age, his eldest sister, who was
bedfellow to Maria, was taken ill of the measles, and on that account
Maria was removed to a little room next that where Camillo lay: and it
happened at the same time, that Philotis his tutor was obliged to go
up to London, on some affairs relating to the family, and Camillo lay
by himself. This was an opportunity for the young lovers to be alone,
which they had wit enough not to neglect. So the very first night, as
soon as the family were gone to rest, Camillo, according to previous
agreement, left his own chamber, and went into that of Maria's, the
door of which was left open for his reception.

The thoughtless Maria permitted him without resistance to come into
her bed, where he wantonly toyed with her, and pressed her with manly
eagerness to his glowing bosom. She returned his most tender caresses
with equal ardour, posted him on the Mount of Venus, encircling him
with her ivory limbs, and twining round him as the ivy does the oak.
Every warming idea occurred to his imagination, and put all his blood
and spirits in combustion; he pressed, he hugged and squeezed the
wishing fair; but alas, he was totally ignorant how to allay the fire
which he found ready to consume him, and had no thoughts of entering
the sacred circle, but contented himself with beating the bush.

However as the blood and spirits flow mechanically, and as nature
finds ways to disburden herself when loaded by repletion, a humid
moisture darted from the wanton swain, and bedewed the almost dying
nymph, whose imagination, though wide of the point of real bliss, had
reduced her to the same situation, and thus fainting they fell from
each other's arms.

Maria on recovering from this trance, finding something slippery about
her, asked the surprised Camillo, what was the meaning of it? But he
poor youth, was as much at a loss as she to solve the great
phenomenon. On this, a conversation ensued on the means of getting of
children, which they supposed they were to have when they were
married, for they concluded as they knew not yet how children were
got, that it was the business of the parson to teach them, or help
them in the affair, which last is perhaps very often the case. But in
about half an hour, their spirits being a little recruited, they began
to renew their former dalliance; but as Miss had heretofore received
satisfaction from the finger; it now struck into her head, that
something else about Camillo, might perhaps be more naturally adapted
to the purpose. In short, she first put it into his head to try the
experiment. The thought was natural, an attempt was made instantly,
being guided in the operation by, it would seem, the more knowing
Maria; but as he was a novice in the art of working the Maidenhead
Mines, he scarce broke ground for this whole night, though he made
several essays: for both found so much satisfaction in the bare
attempt, that they were not discouraged at the little success they met
with, and day beginning to appear, they agreed to part, for fear of a
discovery, till next night at the same hour.

The next night and two more passed in the same fruitless endeavours to
untie the virgin zone, and penetrate the mysterious passage, which so
fatigued the young lovers, that they looked all day like two ghosts;
their complexions grew pale, their eyes bloodshot, and their
countenance haggard: this was observed by Camillo's mother, who was
fearful of the approach of some distemper, but little guessed the real
cause of the sudden and strange alteration in both their looks. The
fourth night they again tried the amorous sport, and Camillo was more
penetrating now than he had been formerly; and pushing boldly to
pierce the obstructing hymen<10> broke the bridle of his fiery
courser, and was obliged by the extreme anguish to retreat from the
field of battle, most lamentably stained with his own blood, and that
at a time, when the ravished nymph most wanted him to maintain with
vigour that post she found he had just arrived at, and every inch of
which he had gained with infinite, toil and labour to them both; but
in the last onset he had spent his fire, and the pain he felt was so
poignant, that he could neither maintain his ground, nor renew the
charge.

As she felt no such anguish on that occasion, she asked him why he
retired from her arms: he innocently told her he was hurt, at which
the was much concerned, but endeavoured to cure the wound by stroking
gently with her hand the afflicted part, but finding no likelihood of
his recovering it, the lovers parted sooner than ordinary; however,
poor Camillo could not rest that night, the hurt he had got tormented
him so much, and towards morning he was in a small fever, and unable
to get out of bed.

All the family were alarmed at his illness, and a physician was sent
for immediately, who finding his pulse quick, and all the indications
of a fever, ordered him to be let blood. However that did not assuage
the pain be felt in a part which he concealed from all the world; he
seemed rather to grow worse. His tutor came home that evening, so that
the young lovers had no time to talk to one another this night, and
the next day the whole scene was laid open in spite of their
endeavours to conceal it. For the house-keeper coming to shift
Camillo, with the rest of the children, to her great surprise found
his linen all bloody. In the height of her amazement, she showed the
unseemly tokens to her mistress, who immediately guessed that her
hopeful son had been dabbling with the forbidden fruit, and, from some
other symptoms she spied, or fancied she spied, that he had been worse
treated in the field of Venus than he really was, judging no less than
that he was infected with a disease, which often springs from those
unwholesome vapours too common in the damp mines of that region. The
thought of so young a sinner, and the eminent danger to which she
thought both soul and body was exposed, bereaved the fond mother of
her senses for some moments. She sighed, cried, wrung her hands, and
lamented her son's fate in the most doleful terms. In the interim, the
father came into the room, and found his lady in this piteous
condition; he asked the cause with some emotion, but the, scarce able
to answer, pointed to the purple testimony of young Camillo's manhood,
then lying upon the table before her. "There," says she, in a broken
voice, "see the fruits of all our tender care and pains; see what
devilish tricks your young dog of a son has been at. The villain has
certainly got the ugly distempersurely the wickedness of this age is 
enough to bring a judgement upon the land." Then raising her voice in
a more passionate key, "but if I live," says she, "I will find out the
base wretch that has debauched my son, and have her burnt alive: she
must be a brute that would suffer a child to touch her in that
condition.Oh what shall I do to be revenged on the author of this
wicked transaction." All this while, the husband, who had loved the
crack of the whip in his younger days as much as any man in England,
stood in amaze, not knowing whether to laugh or be angry at what he
heard. At last, when her silence permitted him to speak, he desired
his wife to moderate her grief and passion, and to let him know how
she came to the knowledge of this affair, if she had spoke to her son,
or had any other proofs of this transgression than that now lying on
the table. She told him, she had not yet spoke to Camillo, but judged
of the whole matter from what was now before him, which was sufficient
to convince any man in his senses, that all was not right with the
young devil, "But I will go this minute, and give him such a
wherreting, that he shall not think of a woman this twenty years."
"Hold, my dear," replied the husband calmly, "let us proceed
cautiously in a business of this importance; let us contrive to pick
it out of him by stratagem, and without noise, that we may have an
opportunity to find out his associate; for if your conjecture be
right, there must be a woman in the case, and I believe she must be
more to blame than the boy. We must consult Philotis on this occasion,
whose wisdom must help us to unriddle this mysterious affair." The
wife could easily perceive the husband was little less than bantering
her; however, she complied with his overture, and Philotis was sent
for, and with the father, mother, and the house-keeper, who had been
an old servant in the family, sat in solemn council how to come at the
bottom of this wondrous event.

The good Philotis was ashamed to see such flagrant proofs adduced
against his pupil, imagining such a failure would be ascribed to his
remissness in forming his morals, and watching his conduct the father,
seeing his uneasiness, assured him, that he was fully sensible, he had
not been wanting in his duty, and that he could not blame him for a
slip of that kind, which was but the overflowings of nature, and might
be remedied. This gave the tutor fresh spirits, and enabled him to
assist in council with the greater composure. The result of their
consultation was, that the whole affair should be kept a profound
secret from all the family, and that Philotis should take such prudent
measures as should occur to him, to bring his pupil to make a full and
candid confession; which, in fact, was no difficult matter to do, as
Camillo had been accustomed to the most sacred regard to truth, and
taught to think, that nothing was so mean or unbecoming a gentleman (a
character he was very fond of) as telling a lie; besides, he had a
sincere affection for his tutor, a perfect confidence in him, free
from any dread but that of offending against him as a friend.

Philotis began his examination by asking him, if he had any pain in
any part of his body, besides his head, which he incessantly
complained of. The boy remained silent, and confused for some minutes,
casting about in his mind for some evasion that would save a lie,
which he abhorred, and yet answer his tutor's question; but Philotis
repeating the demand a second time, with all the tokens of tenderness
and affection, both in his gestures and tone of voice, before he had
fixed upon any equivocal answer, he replied in the affirmative, that
he had a pain somewhere else, which was worse than that in his head,
but was ashamed to tell him where. Philotis pressed him not to make
anything a secret to one who had so great a value for him; and forcing
a smile, added, "I suppose my dear Camillo you have been making a
present of your maidenhead to some pretty girl, and have met with a
disaster, which you would conceal from your friends; come, you are now
almost a man, and must not act so childishly; let me know how and
where you are affected." Camillo, encouraged by this manner of
speaking, confessed that his tutor had found out the secret, but he
believed his cousin Maria had told him; "What then," replied Philotis,
quite confounded at the mention of that name, "is Maria the person you
have been so free with?" "Why, who else," returned Camillo, "could you
imagine I would concern myself with, than she I design for my wife;
but I will chide her, so I will, if I can, for telling you anything of
the matter." "No, you need not," said Philotis almost overwhelmed
with grief, which he endeavoured to conceal, "she never told me a
syllable; but I have reason to chide you for not letting me into the
secret sooner, I might have prevented your being so ill; but I will
forgive you, if you give me now a faithful account of all that passed
between you and your cousin." In short, without much further entreaty,
Camillo gave him a full narrative of the intrigue, from the beginning
in the coppice-wood to its conclusion the night before last, without
concealing the smallest circumstance.

When Philotis had made himself matter of all he wanted to know, and
examined the state of the part affected, he resumed a graver look, and
told Camillo, that he had been guilty of the most heinous crime, both
in the sight of god and man, and in regard to himself and his cousin; 
that he had been guilty of a breach of one of the commandments, and
allowed himself to be carried away by the instigation of a wicked lust
to defile himself, and ruin his dear Maria for ever; that now he had
made a whore of her, she could neither be his wife, nor fit for any
other gentleman; that his mother and father were inconsolable, and
would never forgive him so great a crime, which affected their peace
and reputation in the tenderest point.

Camillo was thunder-struck at this representation of the case, and
trembled for fear of his tutor's resentment, but more for that of his
parents. He flung himself out of the bed, and embraced the knees of
Philotis, begging him in the most suppliant manner to forgive him, and
to conceal it from his pappa and mamma, and that he never would be
guilty of the like for the future; "Indeed," says he, "I did not think
it was so great a crime to go to bed to my cousin, whom you all know I
loved. Sure, sir, mamma and pappa go every night to bed, and Jacob the
coachman lies every night with the cookmaid, and yet no harm follows,
why should it then be a crime for my cousin and I to do the same, for
I am certain we love one another as well as any two can." "No, you are
wrong Camillo, these you speak of are married, and may, and ought to
go to bed together, but you two are but children, and are not married,
and therefore it's a sin in you, though it is none in them." "You
said," replied Camillo but just now, that I was almost a man, and
Maria I am sure is as big as Mrs. Wn, who was married but t'other
day, and she says, she is as much a woman as ever she can be, and why
may not we be married, and then it will be no sin." "No, you are both
too young, and not fit for it, you see you have hurt yourself, if you
had been a man you would not have done so:" "Well then," said Camillo,
"I wish I were a man, for I long to be married, that I may not be hurt
when I go to bed to my cousin, for indeed she must be my wife; though,
since I am not a man yet, and you say it is a fault, I shall never
again do what I have done, till you give me leave, if you but make my
peace with my mamma and dadda."

Philotis found it dangerous to pretend to convince him of his error by
dint of argument, lest the boy, for want of judgement, should
misapprehend him; but chose rather to rely simply upon the force of
precept; and after having lectured first for some time, and given him
a pretty distinct notion of his folly, he promised to intercede with
his parents for forgiveness, on condition he would renounce all
private correspondence with Maria, and cease to love her. The first
part of the condition he easily agreed to; his present anguish made
him abhor the thoughts of a fresh rencounter, but he could by no means
be induced to promise not to love her: nor durst the tutor urge it
very home, because he thought in his conscience it was a very bad
principle into his pupil, to desire him to abandon a virgin he had
debauched, if what had passed between them could deserve that name,
but left him, assuring him, once more, he would use his interest with
his parents to restore him to favour.

Philotis returned to make his report to his pupil's parents, who
impatiently waited for the result of his enquiries: but they were
confounded, especially the mother, when she heard that Maria was the
partner of this intrigue; yet it was some comfort that she now had
reason to hope that her son's health was not in the danger she had
feared, that the amour had not been of long-continuance, and was
rather the result of natural ignorance and simplicity than any rooted
habit. However the case of the young lady was more to be pitied than
her son's, since the least breath of such an affair taking air, would
ruin her reputation for ever: and Mrs. Camillo thought herself in the
most unhappy situation, since it was in her family, and with a son of
hers such an affair happened. In short she was inconsolable, on the
score of her kinswoman, whom she tenderly loved as one of her
children; and in the first transports of her rage was for taking her
revenge on poor Camillo, who had now sufferings both of body and mind
to struggle with; but everybody else opposed her measures; the tutor,
in particular, told her, that he had engaged his word that she should
express no violent resentment, that the candour and simplicity of his
pupil's confession claimed forgiveness, and that friendly
remonstrances, joined to a strict watch upon his actions, would have a
better and more rational effect than any harsh proceedings. The
father, who did not look upon Camillo's crime as one of the most
heinous, seconded Philotis; but it's the nature of all women,
especially those of a passionate disposition, to profit very little by
advice; on the contrary, they are more inflamed by the smallest
opposition to the reigning dictates of their passion. This was this
lady's case; she was enraged to see her husband and the tutor bear
this dreadful calamity with so philosophical a temper. She wanted them
to be transported as she was, and to wreak their vengeance on the
suffering Camillo. But they judged better, than to allow her by her
violence to give vent to a secret, which it was the interest of every
individual to conceal, and therefore took care to keep the criminals
out of her sight for some time. But the caution had availed nothing,
if a gentleman in the neighbourhood, who was kinsman to the father,
and godfather to young Camillo, had not come in at the very juncture
they were in this dispute. This gentleman was dotingly fond of the
boy, and as he had no children of his own, resolved to make him his
heir, and had come on purpose to enquire concerning his health,
hearing he was ill. He saw confusion in the looks of all the family;
and asked, with kindly emotion, how it fared with his godson. "Ah 
the young viper," replied the mother, "it's no matter how he is, I
wish he had never been born; you have a hopeful godson of him." At
this, her husband gave her a look, which made her stop the career of
her tongue, but she had said too little to satisfy Amandus, for that
was the gentleman's name, and too much to retreat. The husband in his
heart blamed her imprudence, but seeing she had gone so far, thought
it best to relate the whole matter as briefly as he could. "And is
this all you are in a pucker about," replied Amandus, with a malicious
grin, "I thought my boy had been dead, or next door to it, when I saw
such solemn gravity in all your faces. But why do you make such a rout
about taking a bite of a green apple; plague on it, I am more
concerned my godson's hurt, than if he had got all the maidenheads in
the parish. I am afraid he will never be staunch-mouthed since he has
been so damnably mauled and beat about the head at the first getting
blood; we shall not be able of a long time to get him to look a 
girl in the face again . What a noise you make about the young
hussy, who I find, is good blood, too, and for that it I love her with
all my heart. If she has cracked her pitcher a little too soon, it
will soon mend again; and if you can prevail on yourselves, which
seriously is your interest to do, to keep the whole affair hush and
silent, she may bring her goods to market a year or two hence, if she
stays so long, as sound as a roach, and her husband be never the wiser
for it; but this comes of boarding-school education; where they either
learn too much or too little; if Miss had either been taught the real
value and nature of chastity, in such terms as the might have
understood that her commerce with Camillo was a breach of it, or if
she had been kept ignorant of those plaguy tricks which raise the
appetite before reason is ripe to govern it, she had not complied with
the young rogue's wanton dalliance, and so had saved us all this
trouble. But there is no other care taken in the education of young
girls, but to learn them to dissemble their real sentiments of
everything, by which means it's impossible to come at the knowledge of
their passions, till they have fixed some vicious habit in the mind,
which is out of the power of art to eradicate; and no care is taken to
remove the vicious affections they may have imbibed, or store their
minds with virtuous principles: they are only taught to conceal them
in public, by which means they all of them wear the outside of angels,
but within, and in private, are slaves to the basest passions, and the
most libidinous desires."

The first, but especially the last part of Amandus's speech, instead
of allaying the fury of Madam Camillo, who could not bear to hear her
sex treated so injuriously, set her all in a blaze, and forced her to
treat the author with somewhat an undecent reply: but he was very well
pleased to see her wrath turned against him, hoping by that means to
divert her resentment against his godson. He let her run her length,
till her spirits were exhausted; her passion then began by degrees to
subside, and her reason to reassume its place. They now entered into a
second consultation, what was proper to be done with the young
delinquents. It was agreed on all hands to treat them with lenity, and
only to express their resentment by sorrow for their folly, rather
than impertinent railings, which, as they were both generously
disposed, was thought would operate more forcibly than harsh usage.
But as it would be dangerous to keep them together in the same house
Amandus proposed that Camillo and his tutor should remove to his house
for some months, till this infant passion was forgot, on both sides.

The motion was approved on all hands, and to keep up the severity of a
parent, the father desired that his son might be removed as it were
without his knowledge, and for fear of the effects of his resentment,
in order to give Camillo a stronger sense of the fault he had
committed. This was easily executed, and in an hour or two's time,
young Camillo and his tutor, who pretended likewise to be under
disgrace on his account, set out with Amandus for his seat, which was
but about seven miles off, and left Mrs. Camillo to manage Maria as
she pleased, which was the only concern the young lover was under, for
fear his mamma should treat the charmer of his heart with too much
severity; which indeed he had some reason to be afraid of, knowing the
violence of his mother's temper; for they were no sooner gone, than
pretty Miss was closeted, and taxed with the intrigue, which she
flatly denied. This behaviour enraged her aunt, and purchased her a
very severe course of discipline, which highly affronted Miss Maria,
who thought herself too much a woman for that kind of correction, to
which she had never been much used. This made her more obstinate in
her denial of the whole fact, and they could get nothing out of her
all that night, though they had told her Camillo had confessed all:
she looked upon that as only a forgery, and could not harbour a
thought so dishonourable of her dear Camillo, who had sworn inviolable
secrecy. She carried it so far as to desire to be confronted with him,
and stood it out so resolutely, that the aunt began to think Camillo
had abused her, by the instruction of some of the maids, who had
prompted him to that tale to conceal themselves, and this obliged her
to cease her enquiries that night, till she had recourse to another
council to solve the difficulty, for none was admitted to this
examination but herself. She was full of this notion, when she entered
into discourse with her husband after supper, who could scarcely
persuade her, that it was impossible to forge a story with so many
circumstances, and that it must be true, and her niece obstinate in a
lie. It was too late to renew the attack, so they went to bed, giving
charge that the housekeeper should lie with Miss that night, and try
to pick a confession out of her. But Miss was too much upon her guard
to be caught by the arguments of so weak a politician, and was casting
about in her mind, how she should inform her lover of what was
passing, and know from himself how to behave; she knew he was gone to
Amandus's, but did not then know the cause of it. She was several
times in the mind to try to get out of the house, and go to him; but
so many difficulties occurred, that she laid that project aside, and
seeing pen and ink in the room, for she was then fast locked in the
housekeeper's apartment, who was gone down to give directions about
the affairs of the family before shutting the gates, she immediately
thought of writing, though without being certain how she should convey
it to him, so great was her ignorance in love-affairs; however, she
was willing to learn, and that goes a great length towards making an
apt scholar, which the reader in the sequel will find she certainly
proved. To work she went, and wrote the following epistle.

My dear Camillo,
	How could you serve me so? My aunt tells me you told her
all that passed between you and I in the green room, which you
know you swore to me you would not; if you have done so, you are
a very naughty boy, to kiss and tell, and I will never suffer
you to come near me more. But I believe it's all a story of your
mamma's, for I am sure my dear Camillo would not discover our
secrets, when he had as much pleasure as I had in our meetings.
I am sure if you was hurt, it was not my fault; I did all I
could to prevent it, and did not know it would happen so: but if
you love me, and that accident has not made you hate me, come
home, and let us join both together in a denial, and then we may
meet together again, and love as we were used to do, which I
always shall do if you have not betrayed yourself and me by your
simplicity; make haste, for I have been already beat, and my
aunt threatens to burn me alive if I do not confess by morning,
which I shall never do unless you have done it before me.
I am yours till death,
MARIA.

She had just folded up this epistle, when the housekeeper came hastily
into the room, snatched it from her; and read the contents. Here now
was an ample confession of what she had hitherto so strenuously
denied. She was nettled to see so flagrant a proof in the hands of her
enemy, and tried all in her power by tears and entreaties to recover
the letter; but the housekeeper was too old a bird to be caught with
such chaff; to make her easy, however, for that night, she said, she
did not know but she might be prevailed upon to keep it from her aunt.
They both went to bed; but next morning the housekeeper was no sooner
up, then she laid the letter before her mistress. The poor criminal
was called up, and a fresh examination begun; she at first persisted
in her former denial, till her own letter was showed her; then she had
nothing to say for herself, but remained in a sullen silence. Her aunt
would have chastised her obstinacy, and brought her to a sense of her
duty, by arguments drawn from a horse-whip; but the husband was more
compassionate, and chose rather to work upon her by the force of
reason. He explained to her the value of chastity, the esteem it was
in among men, and the reproach and scandal attending the violation of
it; displayed the impiety as well as meanness of yielding to so base
an appetite as that of lust, and how repugnant to the laws of God and
the policy of human society: and then related to her many instances of
the miseries, shame, and ruin, attending those who have yielded
themselves a prey to wanton desires, and the pleasure and happiness
which has resulted to others who have withstood the greatest
temptations, and undergone the severest trials for the preservation of
that inestimable jewel. By this means he gave her a rational idea of
the virtue of which the was before entirely ignorant, and by
representing it in an amiable light, and as a thing productive of the
highest and purest felicity, she soon conceived an affection for it on
its own account, and of course a disapprobation of its opposite vice,
in which her pride assisted her more than anything; for now she knew
what lewdness was, and under-stood the meaning of the gross epithets
given to those who are so: her pride was shocked to think she deserved
them, and obliged her to put on a resolution never to demerit them for
the future. She even began to hate Camillo, who had been the cause of
her disgrace, and more, that she found he had made the discovery. This
she could scarce ever forgive him; for as she was a great mistress of
dissimulation herself, and by the tenor of her education, had not so
delicate a regard for truth as he had, she thought he was guilty of an
unpardonable crime in revealing their mutual secrets. Her kinsman and
guardian would willingly have given her a more just notion of things,
and showed her how much it was her duty to approve of young Camillo's
conduct in that respect; but he was pleased to find cause of dislike
grow up betwixt them, lest their affection, if continued, might become
too strong for their reason, and they still be tempted to pursue a
commerce which might be of such bad consequence. In a day or two more,
he reconciled her with her aunt, whom he persuaded to treat Maria with
her former tenderness, as the best method of cherishing those generous
principles he had taken pains to give her a relish of: and thus the
family resumed its former tranquillity.

As for young Camillo, he was under great concern to be in disgrace
with his parents, whom he dearly loved, without any mixture of slavish
dread or fear; and Amandus, when he got him to his own house, took
pains, with the assistance of Philotis, to give him a notion of the
error he had been guilty of. For though Amandus loved a girl as well
as any man in England, and had a very amorous disposition, yet he was
not of a temper to indulge himself in the excess of that appetite, nor
in any measure to permit it to infringe upon his moral character; much
less was he inclinable to give youth any encouragement to indulge
either, to early, or too violently the emotions of that wanton
passion. It was a principle of his, in the education of youth, to keep
them as long as possible ignorant of the difference of sexes, at least
till they arrived at an age capable of putting it under the government
of reason. For he was absolutely of opinion, that that appetite would
never rise to any troublesome height without the helps of
conversation, and that nature of itself would never find out the way,
without the help of reason. And if we remained ignorant till reason
made the discovery, the same reason would then be strong enough to
subject the appetite to its dictates: but he observed, that by the
common method of training up children in much company, they acquired
the appetite long before their understanding could be of any use to
them, and by that means grew up to a fixed habit, too powerful for any
future reflection to conquer.

As to Camillo, Amandus observed his constitution was amorous, and that
for near two years he had in private indulged himself so much, that he
was afraid it was already grown up to a habit; but as the boy had a
quick apprehension, and a judgement solid enough for his years, he
hoped to get the better of the effects of it, and began by showing him
the scandal of yielding to so mean and brutal a satisfaction; how much
injury it would do his health, and that the curbing of it was the only
method he could take to be soon a man. The pain he was in at the time,
and the concern he was under to be out of favour with his father,
induced him to give the more attention to what was offered, and which
therefore made the greater impression on his mind: but still the
thoughts of Maria clung to his young heart; the idea of her had so
often occurred with the idea of pleasure, that it was impossible for
him suddenly to withdraw his affection from her: especially as he
considered her as a sufferer on his account, and was taught by Amandus
and his tutor, that the blackest aggravation of his fault was the
injury he did his lovely cousin, whom, at the same time, they advised
him not to love. But he could not bring himself to take this part of
their advice, though he promised he would do all he could to forget
her, and for that purpose applied closer than ever to his studies, in
which he daily made great advances: but a melancholy seemed to settle
upon his spirits, which gave his tutor and godfather a great deal of
uneasiness, and they did all they could to dissipate it; and thinking,
perhaps, the notion of his father's displeasure, might be the cause of
it, Amandus pretended to have made up the breach, and in about a month
after resolved to carry him with him to dine at his father's. Camillo,
when he heard he was to go, was overjoyed, and the more so, as he
flattered himself he should see Maria, whose idea was still uppermost
in his mind. On his arrival, he was received with great tenderness by
all the family, and according to previous agreement, not a word was
said of former transactions. He had not been in the house above half
an hour, when his sisters and Miss Maria came into the parlour, where
he was with his father. He saluted his sisters very tenderly, but at
the sight of his young mistress, a sudden trembling seized him; he
approached to salute her with a different air, but she received him
with the utmost coldness, scarce common civility. This shocked him so
much, that he was hardly able to return to his chair. The company
observed his uneasiness, but attributed his confusion to a different
cause. They apprehended it was rather shame than anything else; but
his emotions were owing to a more tender source. He had, in ruminating
upon their meeting, flattered his imagination with the utmost pleasure
in seeing her, and being received by her with the same freedom and
marks of affection, which he had always experienced; but her air and
look bespoke nothing but contempt and disdain, which were things he
was not prepared for, and touched him to the quick; she saw his
concern, and began to relent; the latent fire which she had smothered
for some weeks, began afresh to sparkle; and she found in herself an
inclination to run and embrace him; but shame came to her aid, and
officiously suggested to her memory that he had childishly betrayed
her; to banish these reflections, the appetite took the alarm, and
pleaded powerfully for the almost fainting Camillo; the idea of those
pleasing moments she had passed in his company, recurred with all
their charms to soften her resentment. in short, a hurry of different
passions, reasons, and desires crowded upon both their minds so
quickly, that almost in the same instant, they both fainted away,
which alarmed all the family. They were carried to separate
apartments, and for the future were not permitted to see each other.
Camillo soonest recovered spirits, and Philotis being then by him,
asked, what was the matter with him? Was it the sight of his cousin
that put him out of order? Yes, it was, says he; I have done all I can
to endeavour to think of her as one of my sisters only, but I cannot
bear that she should hate me, as she does by the look she gave me, and
the manner she received me at her first coming into the room. Philotis
told him he should be glad of that change in her, both as it was the
effect of a virtuous command over an unlawful passion, and as it gave
him an opportunity to disengage his affection without the imputation
of the want of generosity on his part; and that he should think it
beneath him to indulge a passion for a fickle girl, who betrayed a
disposition so changeable, that he ought to look upon that fondness he
had for her, as a childish weakness, and indulge it no more than he
would the desire of a rattle, or a hobby-horse. That when he came to
be a man, he would be ashamed of such a flame, and would find a
thousand reasons to convince him that it is the bane of his peace and
reputation; that if he conquered it, it would show he had the use of
reason, and be a manifest indication of his manhood. Thus by playing
his pride against it, he brought Camillo to a more composed way of
thinking, and returned to his father, fully resolved if he saw her, to
assume as haughty airs as she had done, for he had not perceived the
alteration in the last part of her behaviour. However the old people
did not think proper to bring them again into each other's company,
and Camillo returned that night with Amandus to pass a week or two
there, till Miss was gone for York, where she was to be placed with an
ancient relation of hers, to be out of the way of temptation, at least
from Camillo, whose parents could no longer bear to have him out of
their sight. He returned, and by degrees forgot his young mistress
till a new opportunity, in a more advanced age, renewed their
intrigue, when they were both more capable of managing it; though it's
probable the satisfactions they received in the infant state of their
passion, were greater than those they afterwards tasted.



Chapter III.

Camillo continued for four years longer at his father's house, under
the direction of Philotis, who kept so strict an eye over him, and
took so many ways to engage him in a close pursuit of his studies,
that his amorous passion seemed for that time to lie dormant, and was
never suffered to break out into any indecencies. It is true, he had
some small rencounters with the maid-servants, where he came off in
better condition than he did in the green room with Maria, but these
were so seldom, and conducted with such secrecy, that they neither
interrupted his studies, nor came to be public. At last, he had the
misfortune, when he was about seventeen years of age, to lose
Philotis, and to that may be ascribed all the errors of his after-
conduct; for it is more than probable, if that good man had lived, he
had conducted him to manhood, without permitting his predominant
passion to boil over, and so fixed him in such principles of virtue,
as would have enabled him to keep them in continual subjection. But on
the death of this gentleman, his father thinking he had kept him long
enough in the country, resolved to send him up to London, to fit him
for the tour of Europe, which he intended he should enter upon in
about a year's time. For that purpose, he cast about for a person
proper to entrust with the direction of his conduct, both during his
stay at London and upon his travels. The person he pitched upon, was
one who had been abroad with some young nobility, first in the quality
of valet de chambre; and being often employed in that capacity, had
twice made the tour with others in the station of a governor. This
person was well recommended by those he had been abroad with; but that
was perhaps a very good reason why he should not have been entrusted
with the charge of Camillo, or any other youth the parents designed
should profit by that expensive part of education: for this fellow had
raised himself to the esteem and confidence of those who had been his
pupils, by a servile compliance with their dispositions, and
participating with them in all the wantonness of unrestrained youth,
being naturally of an amorous and rakish disposition, which he
concealed while in England, and in presence of his patron, under the
most sanctified reserve, and gave the greatest loose to when abroad.
Our old gentleman was deceived by his outside, as well as the rest,
and put young Camillo under his direction.

They remained for two or three months in the country, which time
Vilario, for that was the name of the new tutor, employed in gaining
upon the confidence of the father, and prying into the disposition of
the son. He easily succeeded in the first, by his grave countenance,
reserved carriage, and constant exclamations against the libertinism
of the present age. He even carried his grimace to a kind of monkish
austerity, and above all affected to be mighty pious and a constant
attendant on the church, which rivetted him in the esteem of the
father, and procured him the entire confidence of Mrs. Camillo, who
thought him an angel, under whose conduct her son would no doubt
become a saint, and a patron of piety. But as to the second point, his
design of prying into his pupil's disposition, he was not so
successful; for the desire of obtaining the confidence of the father,
had obliged him to assume an austerity in his manners quite different
from the carriage of Philotis, who, if may be allowed the expression,
carried his heart in his hand, was facetious in conversation, and
obliging in his behaviour, which had engaged him the whole confidence
and affection of his pupil: whereas this severe outside of Vilario,
awed his behaviour, and obliged him to put on a reserve in his
presence, which was both irksome to himself, and hindered the other
from making any advances in the knowledge of his natural temper; which
he was solicitous to come at, not to improve, or correct it, but to
have an opportunity of ingratiating himself with him, when they should
be from under the observation of his father and friends.

At last they set out for London, at which, till they arrived, Camillo
thought every hour a day, so much was he prepossessed in favour of the
place, from what he had heard of the pleasures abounding there: for
Vilario in his discourses with his father against the wickedness of
the town, had been very implicit in relating the manner of life which
most young gentlemen lead there, when left to themselves; these
discourses were related to the father, to have an opportunity of
expressing his dislike of them, and in the hearing of the son, to try
if he had any relish for debauch and gallantry, the disposition of
mind he wished most to find in him, as most consonant to his own
inclinations; but though Camillo concealed his sentiments, yet the
knowledge that there were such pleasures to be purchased at London,
fired him with a desire to be there; where he flattered himself, he
might enjoy some of them, in spite of the vigilance of his seemingly
sanctified tutor<11>.

At length they made the wished-for port, and Camillo spent the first
two or three days in his chamber, under the direction of tailors,
milliners and wigmakers, with the rest of that tribe, who have the art
of new moulding a country booby into the air and figure of a town
beau. A week or two more were taken up in visiting his relations, in
company with his grave tutor; and in viewing the common curiosities of
art and nature, that usually engross the attention of strangers:
during which time, the sight of so many new faces, and the variety of
the avocations in which he was engaged, hindered Camillo from thinking
on the secret scheme of pleasure he had promised himself; but the
hurry being, pretty much over, he found he had a call for female
relief, and was at a loss how to be supplied: not but he thought there
were plenty in London, but he knew not how to come at them, and had
nobody to consult upon this important affair; for had left his footman
behind in the country, who used to be his purveyor there, and carry on
his affairs with the country wenches, and had none about him, but the
creatures of the rigid Vilario, who seemed to Camillo another St.
Ignatius, fit only to wed a wife of snow. However he was not in quite
so desperate a condition as he imagined himself: for Vilario, though
he was not over much stocked with knowledge of men, yet guessed the
wants of Camillo by his own, and was casting about in his mind for a
fit opportunity to try how his pulse beat towards a wench; and was
resolved to throw a bait in his way, without being seen in it, as
knowing that if he once found that his foible, or could make it so,
and procure his confidence, he could manage him as he pleased, and
lead him by that magnet into what measures were most conducive to his
views and interest.

To this end, he carried him to visit a widow gentlewoman of his
acquaintance, who lived very genteelly, with two pretty girls her
nieces in a retired corner of the town; and was seen but by some few
select friends of the better sort of gentry. Camillo was charmed with
the beauty and innocence of the youngest of these fair ladies at first
sight, and met with so friendly and polite a reception, that he was
highly delighted with the first interview. By permission of Vilario,
he visited there frequently by himself, and was every day so well
entertained, that he grew perfectly enamoured with this new company,
he had frequent opportunities of being alone with the youngest, for
though he concealed pretty artfully the share the had gained in his
esteem: yet it was impossible for him not to show her, so much
distinction by some small tokens of officious complaisance, as was
sufficient to let the widow and her other daughter know, that it was
Charlotta had the best chance of engaging his services. However, such
was his timidity, that though he thought her the handsomest and most
charming woman he had ever seen, and would have given the world, to
have been as familiar with her, as he had been with his young cousin
Maria, yet he had not the courage to tell her so, nor give her the
most distant hint of the state of his mind. He was awed by the inward
emotions of his own heart, which perfectly doted on this new idol, and
represented her as the purest of virgins, and as virtuous as a
seraphim. But he was in dread lest his tutor should discover his
sentiments; therefore he kept the strictest watch over his behaviour,
and allowed the amorous fire to consume him inwardly. He had now no
roving desires after other women. This new passion engrossed his whole
soul, and he was never easy but when at the widow's, and in company
with the charming Charlotta. However, notwithstanding all his
endeavours to hide it, his passion was discovered by the old lady, who
was no novice in the affairs of men, and easily saw by the very means
Camillo took to hide it, that Charlotta had made a conquest; but she
pretended not to see it, and gave her daughter all the necessary
instructions how to improve it, and help to deliver the labouring
Camillo of the mighty secret; but all their art could not give him
sufficient assurance to declare himself; so that the good lady was on
the point of confessing, she had been deceived in her conjectures once
in her lifetime, which would have been matter of great mortification
to one of her temper, who piqued herself upon that kind of dexterity.
The tutor began to fancy his pupil was no votary to Venus, which he
feared would very much disconcert several projects he had formed upon
that supposition.

About this time there was a masquerade advertised, which most of the
nobility in town were supposed to intend to favour with their
presence. The preparations for it were in everybody's mouth, and the
subject of all conversation; and Camillo expressed a desire of seeing
that kind of diversion. The pious Vilario, rather than baulk him,
condescended to lay aside his false habit of gravity, and equip
himself in that of a harlequin, to accompany him. They proposed to the
widow and her two daughters to have been of the party; who, for some
particular reasons, denied themselves that pleasure, but took care to
be informed of the dress of our young gentleman and his tutor.

Camillo was charmed with the mumming humour of the place, and thought
that kind of diversion infinitely preferable to fox-hunting and bear-
baiting in the country. He was gaping about at all the odd dresses he
saw, and the whimsical behaviour of the masqueraders, when a young
lady, dressed like a huntress, pulled him by the sleeve, desiring him
to read her fortune, for he was dressed in the habit of a conjurer.
Camillo was thunder-struck at the question, for he was not prepared to
as the character of which he had assumed the dress. Indeed this is no
part of the humour of a masquerade, though it's natural to be expected
from it, for you may hear a parson swear like a trooper, a Diana talk
smut, and outscold an oyster-wench, while a merry-andrew reads you a
lecture of divinity, and a fox-hunter converses like a statesman:
generally speaking, their dress and conversation are a perfect
contradiction; and a rational mind finds no other humour in that
expensive diversion, than what is owing to the tailor and habit-maker:
whereas, if the masqueraders were really capable of acting the
character they assume, the whole would appear an extempore comedy, and
the odd medley of so many characters might afford some real
entertainment to the most morose disposition, and render the amusement
truly rational. However, perhaps, that was neither the design or
talent of our young huntress, for it's plain she had no more of Diana
about her, whose follower she would intimate herself to be, than
Camillo had of the conjurer, who after a little pause answered, that
the affairs of the ladies were governed by such whimsical stars, that
no man could read their destiny at first sight; but if her curiosity
was strong enough to retire out of the crowd, he would erect a scheme,
by which she might be able to guess at some part of her future fate.
"What, Mr. Conjurer!" replied the nymph, "would you raise the Devil in
a dark corner? No, if you have that old gentleman at command, I should
be glad to see him in open daylight, and in good company, that I might
at least have a fool to throw at him, as I see here one ready for the
occasion," pointing to Vilario in his parti-coloured habit, who
immediately joined them, and would have diverted the discourse,
fearing Camillo's wit would not bear him out in this rencounter; but
the pert baggage of a huntress would not drop the subject: her larum
was set a-going, and she must ring out her peal before she had done.
She continued still addressing herself to Camillo, who began to be in
dread of her raillery, which he thought was an interruption to the
entertainment, "But wise Mr. Conjuror," said she, "as whimsical as you
imagine the planets that govern the affairs of us women are, I will
lay my life I am better acquainted, without erecting a scheme, with
the stars which now predominate over your destiny, than you are with
mine, with all your knowledge of the Cabala. Come, let me see your
hand," at the same snatching hold of it, and pretending to examine the
lines. "See, sir," to Vilario, "cannot your fool's head see that the
line of this gentleman's life is crossed in several parts; that most
of these lines flow from the Mount of Venus, which betokens some small
crosses in love. He is of an amorous disposition, the Cyprian goddess
was predominant at his conception, and all the nymphs of Delos
assisted at his birth. He is now over head and ears in love; but like
a country simpleton, has not the courage to tell his mistress that he
is so;" then dropping his hand, which she all this while was poring
upon, adds, "Have not I hit your case, Mr. Magician? Go home and put
on your conjuring cap, and the next time you see your mistress, let
her know you are a man, and that there is some difference between you
and a snivelling boy." With this she flew away, and mixed with the
crowd, leaving Camillo in a deep reverie with amazement; for he really
believed she dealt with the Devil, as she had hit his case so patly.
He could take very little notice of the remaining part of the
entertainment, for reflecting on the lecture which had been read him
by the young huntress; whose advice he was resolved to follow with the
utmost exactness, and for that reason had a great inclination to have
further chat with her: though her raillery at first piqued his pride,
and he was a little disconcerted to be called to his face, in a
manner, a snivelling boy; yet what she said, was delivered with such
an air of pleasantry and good humour, that he would have been willing
to have stood such another brunt, for the pleasure of her
acquaintance, which, he apprehended, from her manner of address, she
would not be averse to, and indeed seemed to want, though he had
missed of that opportunity by the timidity of his temper, and the
small experience he had in rencounters of that kind. He asked Vilario,
if he could guess who she was, but he could give him no other
information, than that he believed she must be somebody who had met
them at the widow's, and observed something in him particular with
regard to Charlotta, or her sister, and so took the liberty of the
place to rally him upon the bad use he made of the opportunities he
had with these ladies; "But," added Vilario, "let us try to find her
out among the crowd; it is ten to one but she accosts us a second
time, when we may be able to make a judgement of what she is, and her
intentions; for I have a strong suspicion she has some design of
gallantry upon you, either for herself, or somebody else." They had
not looked long before they saw their huntress in a tête-a-tête
conference with an elderly woman in the habit of an abbess: hereupon
Camillo and his tutor took two or three turns about the spot where
they were, to observe if she took any notice of them, and to try if
they could guess who she was by surveying her person. In a little
time, she and the Lady Abbess spying them, came immediately up, and
the huntress briskly asked Camillo, if he had conned over the lesson
she had given him, or if he had a mind to have his memory somewhat
better refreshed, that he might be able to act his part, the next time
he had the favour of his mistress's company, without a prompter. "If
my mistress," replied Camillo, "has as much wit as you have, I am sure
I must be superlatively dull, if I fail in expressing the sentiments
which that must inspire." "How, now," returned the huntress, "would
you slyly insinuate by a compliment to me, that your bashfulness in
your mistress's presence, is owing to her want of wit: I dare swear
you do not think on these occasions, that there is any deficiency on
her side, and must be fully convinced that the defect lies on yours,
if your sincerity was great enough to own it. Do not you imagine every
time you see her, that she is possessed of all the youth, beauty, and
wit in the universe, and are you afraid to open your mouth in her
presence, especially on the subject of love, for fear she should laugh
at you? Is it her wit, or want of wit that inspires you with this
timid behaviour, or is it a natural failing in your temper, a
constitutional defect of your intellects, or a consciousness of
another natural insufficiency? Tell me your case frankly, and I
promise to administer to you in such manner, as shall remove all
obstacles to your desires." "Hold, madam," says Camillo, interrupting
her, "you seem already to be so full of my case, that I have no
occasion to explain it to you, but if you give me leave I shall
convince you that I have no natural defects, and that I have already
so much improved under your tuition, that unseasonable bashfulness
shall rob me of no pleasure which opportunity offers, or love prompts.
Therefore, as we have seen as much of the farce of this place as we
can, let us retire somewhere else, where if you please I shall
rehearse the part you have made out for me." "You see, madam," said
Vilario, "the gentleman has given you a fair challenge, and methinks,
considering the pains you have taken with him, you cannot well refuse
to hear him rehearse that lesson you was pleased just now to ask him
if he had conned over, and know how much he has profited by your
charitable instruction." "Good, Mr. Goosecap," returned she, "my
instructions were designed for the use of his mistress only, who would
be but little benefited if he was to begin practising anywhere else;
that would be teaching him inconstancy, a vice which is but too
natural to all your sex, and may be acquired without a tutor: but,
however, rather than discourage the first dawnings of a virtuous
disposition, I am willing to trifle away an hour or two with the young
conjuror, providing you and he subscribe to certain conditions I shall
mention." "Name your terms," replied Camillo, transported that she
would at any rate consent to a parley out of that place, "it is
impossible but they must be agreeable." "Let," replied the huntress,
"this religious lady be of the party, that her piety may be some check
upon the wickedness of your disposition; and we must be permitted the
free use of our masks, without any molestation on your part: these are
the preliminaries you are to subscribe to, without which we proceed no
further in the treaty." The gentlemen agreed to the conditions, and
named a tavern for the place of congress. Thither they all adjourned
in a short time after, except Vilario, who told the ladies, he must
leave them to the care of the astrologer for some moments, till he
dispatched his servant on an errand he just then recollected, and
would immediately follow them; and accordingly, he joined them before
they had drank the first glass.

At the tavern, the huntress still attempted to rally Camillo upon the
score of his bashfulness to his mistress, which he endeavoured to
acquit himself of, by such behaviour to herself, as must needs
convince her, that he had on all occasions the free use, not only of
his tongue, but every other member. However, he still observed the
strictest decorum, both in speech and address, believing her a lady of
fashion and virtue, and that the disguise they were both in, was no
sanction to ribaldry or ill manners. The lady observed, that he was
still under some restraint, and gave him all opportunities to be more
warm, and particular in his applications; but in short, hints, double
entendres, &c. had no effect upon Camillo, who was full of the notion,
that offering at anything beyond repartee would be an unpardonable
affront to a lady of her appearance; but she had quite other notions,
and was resolved to warm him to something more substantial; and to
engage him to treat her person and virtue with less punctilio; to that
end, she became less reserved in her expressions, and by that means
put Camillo in mind, that when a lady consents to an assignation in a
tavern, with a gentleman who is entirely a stranger to her, it is more
than probable she has a mind to make use of the disguise of the
masquerade, to indulge herself in some frolic, which she would blush
at in her proper person; and that if the fair huntress had such a
design, it would be an unpardonable error to miss the favourable
opportunity which now offered. This thought fired his imagination, and
he was ashamed he had been so slow in comprehending her meaning. But
still a diffidence hung about him, how to begin the attack, to remove
which, he had recourse to another glass or two of Burgundy, and became
in a few minutes as bold as a lion, and resolved to charge her home
the first open she gave him. Vilario, understanding by their
discourse, that matters were ripe for the last scene, which would not
admit of witnesses, was willing to give them an opportunity, and for
that reason, though he had no great inclination at that time for a
frolic on his own account, pretended to make strong love to the
abbess, judging notwithstanding her sanctified dress, that she had as
little snow in her constitution as her companion, and would be as
willing to comply with the dictates of nature: but to his great
surprise, he found her shy, pretending that it was against her
inclination, and only in compliance with the humour of her friend,
that she consented to be of the party. This highly shagreened him, for
he thought this an excellent occasion to initiate his pupil, and give
him a relish for that course of life which of all others he wished
that Camillo should be fond of. But he could make nothing of his
devotee; she answered all his arguments for making use of the present
moment, with a kind of pious raillery; which made him fancy, that they
both had only an intention to play the fool with him and his pupil,
and no design of carrying matters further.

Camillo was now wound up to the highest pitch, and seeing there was no
likelihood of the other couple quitting the room, proposed bluntly to
his lady, but in a low whisper, that they should retire to another
apartment. She whispered him softly, that though she had reason to be
angry at the boldness of his proposal, yet she would not express her
resentment, but only assure him, that it was not convenient before
that company to proceed any further, but that she should be glad to
see him at her own house, where she would convince him what effect his
conversation had upon her; she gave him a direction where to call, but
cautioned him not to mention a word of it to his friend; Camillo
promised to see her the next day, at five o'clock in the afternoon;
then they joined conversation with the company, and in a little time
these ladies proposed to go home, but refused upon any account to
permit the gentlemen to wait on them, and further extorted a promise,
that they should take no measures to dog them. Camillo was easy under
that restraint, as he had all the knowledge he wanted already, and
flattered himself the next day to be made amends for the
disappointment of that evening: but Vilario was not so easy, for he
was piqued to have trifled away so much of his time with a couple of
coquettes, which he fancied these ladies to be, and was vexed to have
been their pastime for so long; besides, he thought there was
something so singular and whimsical in the whole of their manners and
conversation, that he was prodigiously desirous to find out who they
were, and for that reason would have had them dogged, but Camillo, who
feared his knowledge of them might disappoint his promised
assignation, diverted him from his design, and they both went
immediately home, it being now about four or five o'clock in the
morning.

Camillo was so full of his new mistress, and the pleasures he
flattered himself he should enjoy in her company, that though he went
to bed, yet he could sleep but little, and was up and dressed by
twelve; when Vilario fancying that last night's conversation might
have some effect upon his carriage towards Charlotta, proposed to pass
the hours till dinner at the widow's. Camillo was not so much
enamoured with his masquerade mistress, as to find in himself the
least inclination to neglect his charming Charlotta, and therefore
very willingly agreed to the proposal.

They went and found the widow and her two daughters in high spirits;
Camillo thought he never saw Charlotta look so charming as she did
that day; and he said so many polite things on that occasion, that 
they could not help observing, that the masquerade had given his
person and conversation an air of gallantry, to which he was formerly
a stranger; and Charlotta said he appeared to be so gay and sprightly,
that he must certainly have picked up a mistress at last night's
entertainment, the bare reflection on which put him in so good a
humour. Camillo replied, that he was glad if his humour was improved
to any advantage; owned that the mirth and freedom of the masquerade,
might contribute its share to that change, but if a mistress had any
hand in it, it must be attributed to nothing absent, but to the object
present, which certainly had power to work greater miracles, than any
alteration she was pleased to observe in his conversation. Charlotta
blushed at his compliment, and all the company were pleased to hear
him so particular, since he had come closer to the point in these few
words, than ever he had done before; but Charlotta would not let him
pass so. She told him, she believed no object there present could
raise his spirits to that height, since they had frequently seen him
without any of those effects; so they had no right to claim the merit
of the miracle, which some absent She had wrought: that he should
beware of what he said, since the compliment he had passed upon this
company, was a kind of treason against his masquerade mistress, which
if she knew, she would certainly punish with the utmost rigour. "You
had better," added she, smiling, "make us your confidantes, unbosom
yourself to us, we shall have patience to hear you describe her
person, with all the emphasis of love and passion, paint her fine
shape, and delicate neck and arm, dwell upon the gracefulness of her
mien and air, and above all, be lavish in commendation of her wit and
humour, and if she has been so complaisant as to show you her face,
exhaust all your rhetoric in describing its inimitable charms; do,
sir, it's only real friends that can have patience to bear with the
amorous descriptions of a new-made lover, and you may depend upon it,
that we shall participate your pleasure without the least allay of
envy, which you know is promising a great deal for a woman." Camillo
was a little embarrassed by this unexpected raillery; but here the
widow seasonably stood his friend, by giving the conversation another
turn: and soon after the gentlemen took their leave, promising to
return in the evening, and went to dine in the city. Vilario not
knowing of Camillo's engagement, proposed passing the afternoon at a
friend's house where they dined; and it was with some difficulty,
Camillo got himself disengaged at the hour appointed to wait on his
masquerade mistress. He left Vilario there, and taking a chair was
carried to the place of rendezvous. He was showed into a room very
elegantly furnished, which, together with the appearance of the house
and servants, made him believe his mistress of some quality. He had
not waited long before the young lady appeared, but still with a
masque upon her face. She received him very politely, and Camillo had
the courage to tell her, that now the masquerade and the laws of it
were over, he hoped she would dispense with that part of the dress
which she still retained. The lady answered, that as he was only
acquainted with the vizor, he had no reason to complain, and she had
grounds to observe that caution, lest the sight of any more of her
person might oblige him to repent the trouble he had given himself in
making that visit. Camillo replied, that such a shape and so much wit,
could have nothing belonging to them, that could lessen his esteem for
her, and that it was not to increase his respect he desired so
earnestly her veil might be removed, for if her face was capable of
that, he had sufficient reason to wish that it might be always
covered; but that he might have some particular mark to know the
person by, who had robbed him of so much of his rest. "Mighty well!"
returned the lady, "You would make me believe, that I have been
accessory to the disturbance of your repose, when I am persuaded, your
bare-faced mistress employs all your thoughts? I could lay an equal
wager, you have seen her since you saw me, and no doubt have been
practising part of that lesson I was so industrious last night in
learning you, and have only made me this visit out of pure
complaisance, or at best out of cold latitude for helping to inspire
you with the courage of telling your mistress to her face, how much
you adored her: to be plain with you" (continued she) "I know your
attachment to a certain lady, and if you are not explicit in the
questions I shall put to you relating to her, I am determined to keep
my face as much a secret as ever, and you will find any other
knowledge you have of me of little service to you." This speech quite
disconcerted our young lover, who expected more solid entertainment
from that assignation, than he now saw any prospect of. He attempted
to turn the discourse into raillery, and told her, he had allowed her
to run on with the supposition of a mistress at the masquerade, as it
seemed to afford a subject for conversation, and a handle for the
display of that wit which had captivated all his faculties, but that
now the scene was changed; love, warm love called for something more
solid than mere words; that time was precious, and opportunity beat
the alarm to all his senses, which were already wound up to their
highest pitch with the bare idea of that bliss he promised himself in
her company. This said, he grasped her with eager transport to his
bosom, and would have pulled of the mask, but she started from him in
a kind of rage, regarding him at the same time with such an air, as
quite abashed our lover. "What!" cried she; "Sir, do you use me with
so little ceremony, do you think I am to be treated like a common
woman? I thought you more of a gentleman, and that you would not
interpret the freedom I have permitted you, so much to my
disadvantage, as to imagine I consented to this visit with any design
to gratify your unreasonable desires. No, sir, I can, under this
disguise, own to you without blushing, that I have seen you
frequently; that I took a more than ordinary liking to your person, 
and threw myself in your way last night, believing you free from the
vicious courses of the youth of this city; and that your behaviour at
this interview would have been such as would have justified the
affection I found growing in your favour: but since I find you like
the rest of your deluding sex, interpreting every freedom women take
beyond the common rules of life, as proceeding from wanton and base
inclinations, I can banish you from that place in my esteem, which
your innocent appearance and deportment tempted me uncautiously to
grant it, and am glad you know no more of me, that you might not have
the pleasure of proclaiming my weakness among your debauched
companions."

Camillo was thunder-struck with this grave lecture, and was in no
measure prepared to give her an answer. She saw his confusion, and was
willing to help him out. "I see, sir," said she, "you are embarrassed
to find an excuse for your behaviour; but to show you my good-nature,
I promise to forget what is past, provided you observe a stricter
decorum for the future, and that you ingenuously tell me, if, or not,
you saw Miss Charlotta, the Widow 's daughter since I saw you, and
if you can find in your heart to bestow on me that affection, which I
know you have for her. You see I am no stranger to your affair,
therefore it's to no purpose to dissemble, and it's your interest, if
you think my esteem worth the maintaining, to be very sincere. Camillo
was now more puzzled than before; for he had what he thought a real
tenderness for that lady, which a modest and engaging deportment every
time he saw her daily confirmed: as for the disguised fair one, he had
only a strong inclination to enjoy her, which her carriage at the
masquerade had given him room to hope would be the end of that
intrigue. He saw she knew his mistress Charlotta, and that to
dissemble a neglect of that lady to purchase his ends here, might
shipwreck his interest there: and besides, he was too little
acquainted with the world, to be easily reconciled to the dishonesty
of deceiving either one or other of them with expectations of what he
was not sure he could perform. Therefore he endeavoured to waive the
question. "Madam," said he, "you take all advantages, and seem
inclinable to make an unreasonable use of your power: you know, (as it
seems, by same kind of magic, in which you certainly deal) that I am
acquainted with that lady, and would suppose her my mistress; now you
are not contented with having seduced me so far from her allegiance,
as to oblige me to offer sacrifice here, but you would make me an
incorrigible rebel, and ruin me past redemption by abjuring her, when
at the same time, you deny me even a full view of the object for whose
sake I am to become such an heretic. Can no service content you, but
what is owing to implicit faith, and must I swear to forsake that
which I have already seen, for the sake of that which I am not allowed
a glimpse of? For my part, madam, my love, like my faith; is rational;
and I must have the evidence of all my senses to justify the one, as
well as to give my assent to the other." "What then", returned she,
quickly, "my humour and person which you have seen, are not sufficient
to raise your amorous faith in my face; I thought just now you said a
sight of that was not necessary to increase the esteem you had for
me." "No more it was then, Madam," said Camillo, "but I thought at
that time, we should ere now have had no room for faith, but that all
had been swallowed up in fruition. That had been such a convincing
proof of your power, that I could not have been infidel enough to have
denied your divinity, after the testimony of the most intelligent of
all my senses, and must have sworn to whatever love-creed you had
pleased to dictate to me: but after all, I must insist on your
withdrawing the veil, that I may at least know the deity I worship,
before I agree to any of your institutions." "When I have done so,"
returned the lady, "what security will you gave me for performance of
covenant?" Why," replied Camillo, "all that a man can give; I will
deliver my person into your hands, you shall have livery, seisin, and
actual possession, the instrument is ready drawn, and the deeds wait
only to be signed and sealed. Let us retire, my angel, and there seal,
sign, and mutually interchange, and if any doubts, or qualms should
afterwards remain, I shall be the veriest recreant that ever lived."
At these words, he pressed her to his bosom, and was hurrying her, she
making but a faint resistance, into the drawing-room which stood open,
where he saw a couch fit for the purpose; but before he had got half
way to where it stood, they heard somebody coming to the door, which 
made him desist. It proved to be the footman, to tell her that a lady
of her acquaintance was coming upstairs. They had just time to
recollect themselves, when the footman came in, and she stepped out,
leaving Camillo in the drawing-room, and pulling the door after her,
that she might receive her friend without a mask. She returned in a
few minutes again, and begged that Camillo would excuse her for that
time, as a friend had called on her, with whose visit she was not at
liberty to dispense; but that she would be glad to see him next day at
the same hour, and hoped that till then he would forbear visiting his
mistress Charlotta: he promised all she would have him, and took his
leave.

He ordered his chair to carry him home, and there began to reflect
upon his late interview with his masque, and the more he ruminated,
the less he was capable of fathoming that lady's designs, he cursed
her visitant, that had interrupted him in the very moment he thought
he was almost in port. He had been condemned to a longer abstinence
since he left his father's house, than he could well dispense with,
and had been in his own imagination so near the point with his fair
unknown, that his desires were wound up to their highest pitch, and he 
found himself prodigiously at a loss how to lay the Devil which that
disguised wanton had raised. His mistress Charlotta, and the
appointment he had made with her, recurred to his memory; but that
thought brought him little comfort, as he believed her to be strictly
virtuous, and that he run the risk of being burnt to tinder before he
could have access to her quarters, which he was sure would not be
surrendered without a regular siege, which the necessity of his
affairs would not admit of for the present. He then reflected on the
promise he had made to his incognita not to visit her, which at first
determined him not to think of that visit: and yet in the event
prevailed on him to pass his time there rather than in any other
place. He could not imagine how that lady came to be so well
acquainted with the state of his mind in regard to Charlotta, since he
had declared it to nobody, and he found in himself a strong
inclination to go merely because he was prohibited<12>, fancied her
conversation would chase from his mind the chagrin of his late
disappointment; and that he should be able to conceal it from his
masquerade acquaintance. Accordingly he set out, and found his
mistress Charlotta at home by herself in an agreeable undress, the
widow and her sister having gone, as he was told, to pay a visit in
the neighbourhood; she appeared in that dishabille much more charming
than before; and he saw a certain bewitching languor in her eyes, and
the whole frame of her countenance, which set every warm desire
afloat, and for that time banished every thought of his disguised
enchantress. A modest blush overspread her face when he approached
her, and a confusion which she endeavoured to conceal, let him
understand that something interesting engaged her thoughts at that
juncture; and he flattered himself for a moment, that, perhaps, some
kind wishes for him might be the cause of that disorder he saw her in.
This thought gave him new spirits, and tempted him to make use of this
as the critical minute, to declare himself with greater freedom than
he had hitherto done. With this intent he placed himself close by her,
and began to think of expressions fit to deliver the mighty secret:
but the more he endeavoured to be eloquent, the more he was at a loss
for terms that pleased him, and sat for some moments silent, only
expressing himself with his eyes, which was a kind of language more
significant than anything he could utter with his tongue. The nymph
saw his perplexity, and could have wished he had been less nice in his
choice of words for making a declaration she was willing to hear in
any language, and in order to help him out, asked him, where he had
left all the spirits he was possessed of before dinner; "Have you
been," says she, "with your masquerade mistress, and exhausted all
your stock of good-humour on her, that you have left none for the
entertainment of your friends? Has she been cruel, and taken more
notice of the tricks of her monkey, than all the pretty things you
said to her? Come, unburden yourself, perhaps, I can give you advice;
we women know one another better than you do, and ten to one but I
furnish you with a remedy that makes her less coy; provided you have
not been too bashful, that you have had the courage to make use of
your time, and lose no favourable opportunity; for these are things
few women ever forgive." "I believe so," replied Camillo interrupting
her, "and therefore I shall not lose this opportunity of declaring to
you my charming Charlotta, how much I adore you. I own I have been
timorous in making this declaration, but it was for fear you might be
disobliged; but it is better to die by a frown, than to live in
perpetual silence and unavailing doubt: tell me, my fairest, have I
offended by my boldness, or can you vouchsafe to make me hope that one
day my affection may be rewarded with the inestimable blessing of your
heart." "Bless me!" returned Charlotta, "Have I drawn a circle and 
conjured up a Devil for myself, when I thought I was repeating the
charm for another! Sure, Camillo, you are not in earnest; no, that I
can never believe; you only wait to rehearse here, and practise what
you are to say to your mistress the next time you see her: if that is
the case, I must tell you wherein you are faulty, either in your
manner or expression. In my opinion, since I must give it sincerely,
it is too much upon the whine, for which a coquette, if such be the
character of your mistress, would laugh in your face and despise you;
if she is not of that class, it is putting yourself too much in the
lady's power for the first time, who unless she has a large share of
good sense, and very little vanity, may be apt to use you ill for a
long time, merely to show her power. Your look should be more assured,
and your expressions flow easier without any hesitation, and your
declaration ought to be in such terms as you might interpret into
raillery, if you found the nymph inclinable to get into her attitudes,
or which you might turn into serious matter, if you found her in the
humour to lend a favourable ear to what you had to offer: for there
are times, sir, and seasons, when we women are inclinable to turn a
deaf ear, to what, perhaps, at other times we like best on earth; and,
sometimes our fluctuating humour inclines us to give a favourable
reception to the merest trifle, and the most indifferent things in
nature: now in observing these changes, and catching the critical
minute (for we all of us have our critical minutes) lies the whole
secret of the art of making love." "I find then, Madam," replied
Camillo, "I am but a novice in the art; that this is not your critical
minute, and that you are pleased to be in one of these humours at
present, which inclines you to treat with ridicule things of the most
serious concern; but I wish you had given me some light how to
discover those unaccountable changes in the fairest part of the
creation, without which they would be absolutely perfect." "I assure
you," replied she, "I am in no humour to treat with ridicule anything
that can be matter of serious concern to you; but I could not imagine
that what you said could be seriously meant to me, when to my certain
knowledge, it is not above an hour since you parted with a lady, to
whom you have in some measure made a tender of your heart, and one
whom I am assured is of a temper not to admit of rivals, and can
punish disloyalty in her subjects with great severity." Camillo now
fancied that both his mistresses dealt with the Devil, or at least
with one another, and knew not what answer to make to the charge,
which was every word literally true: it was delivered with such an
assured air, that he could not believe it only conjecture, and
therefore thought it would but entangle him the more, if he attempted
to conceal the matter. In short, as he had at the present juncture
more love for Charlotta, than for his incognita, he was determined to 
sacrifice the latter, and make a sincere confession. But he desired
Charlotta to inform him, how she came to imagine he had made any
tender of his heart to any other. She told him, she had the strongest
reason in the world, since she was informed of it by the lady herself,
who told her every circumstance of their meeting at the masquerade,
her going with him to a tavern, her appointing him next day, her
receiving him in a mask, his promise to see her to-morrow, and in the
interim not to see her rival.

After this declaration, Camillo thought himself under no obligation to
conceal any part of that affair, but told Charlotta that her
information was very true: that he had indeed a design of gallantry
upon that lady, to which she had, on her part, given abundance of
encouragement, and that he believed, if an impertinent visitant had
not interrupted them, that they had finished matters to their mutual
satisfaction; but that if the lady had done him justice, she must have
informed her, that he had not, though urged to it, said anything that
might argue infidelity to her, but had declined promising to banish
her from his thoughts, and that she could not think much of his
promising not to see her on so critical a conjuncture, especially
since he did not keep that promise, which might convince her how much
more she was in his esteem than that lady. "I was," returned
Charlotta, "the impertinent visitant who spoiled your sport, which I
am not sorry for. I believe if she had given you that testimony of her
affection, you was then about to seize, you would not have been at the
trouble of making me the declaration I have now heard, which I cannot
help owning to you, would be highly agreeable, if I thought you could
be sincere: but there is no believing men. We women no sooner trust
you with our foolish hearts, than you use them as children do a
rattle, toy with it for a little time, then throw it away for some new
trifle that next takes your fancy." "That may be the case, my charming
Charlotta," said he, "with some men, but it can never be mine; as my
affection is founded rationally, it must be as lasting as it is
sincere; but my charmer, as you own you have spoiled my game in one
place, it is but reasonable that you should make up the loss:" then
clasping her in his arms, he stifled her with kisses, and took
liberties which served to inflame both their desires; and the nymph,
who was taken unguarded, as not expecting from Camillo's former
bashful carriage such a forward attack, had near yielded the fort: but
a noise in the next room, which proved, as she said, her mother's
return, recalled her sinking virtue, and once more disappointed
Camillo of his promised happiness. They had hardly time to adjust
themselves, ere the old lady entered the chamber, when by a look she
gave Charlotta, she made her to understand that she was playing too
open a game; Camillo guessed that the chagrin he saw in the widow's
countenance, proceeded from some observation she had made on their
being alone, and the confusion that was but too visible in them both
on her entrance, and was for taking his leave, but the old gentlewoman
cleared her brow, and entreated him to stay to supper; he was easily
prevailed upon, and Charlotta took occasion to whisper him to keep his
appointment with his masked mistress, and to drive that point as far
as he could without any regard to her, for which she would give him
reasons the next opportunity they had alone.

He went home that night, and was a little more easy in his mind, since
his affair with his two mistresses seemed to be less embarrassed, and
he had now two promising strings to his bow. He slept pretty sound
that night, dreamed alternately of each of them, and was as familiar
with them in his sleep, as he could have desired to be in the day,
which eased him of the burden of his superfluous cash, and enabled him
to wait with greater patience the more regular drafts that might be
made upon him; and it had this further effect, that he could now
calmly reflect upon the consequences of what he was going about, which
the hurry of his passions, over-charged with those redundant humours
his imagination helped to throw off in the night, hindered him from
considering<13>. He saw plainly they had both a design upon him, and
that, for aught he knew, might be a matrimonial plot, a thing he had a
mortal aversion to: for he knew if ever he pretended to conjure
himself into that dreadful circle without the consent of his
relations, that he should find the bitters of that state to exceed by
many degrees all the sweets he could promise himself. He suspected
Charlotta of this matrimonial design, more than he did his masquerade
mistress. Not but he believed, he could persuade the girl to take his
word without the help of a priest; but he judged her maidenhead was
under the guardianship of her mother, who might insinuate obstinate
notions of honour, virtue, and reputation into her head, and make her
insist upon that impertinent ceremony before yielding, and therefore
he determined to be more upon his guard, and somewhat reserved of his
promises, lest he should be unawares entangled beyond the power of a
retreat; and resolved to take Charlotta's kind advice to push his
fortune with his incognita.



Chapter IV.

At the hour appointed he waited on that lady, and was received as
before in a mask. After the first compliments, he asked her, if he was
never to have the happiness of seeing her face, and if his love was to
live by faith alone? she told him, she believed he had very little
faith, since that had not been able to prevail on him to refrain from
seeing Charlotta: but for a few hours, according to his most solemn
promise when he last parted with her. "What can you say" (added she)
"in justification of this manifest piece of infidelity? It is to no
purpose to deny the fact, for you had not left me an hour when you
went to the widow's house, where I know you found her alone, and no
doubt took that opportunity to persuade her to listen to your false
vows and insinuations, and you have now the assurance to come to offer
me the dregs of a satiated passion, or to make reprisals on the
easiness of my temper, for the cold reception you may have met with
from her: but I assure you, Camillo, whatever weakness I may have
confessed for you, yet I would have you know, I have so much
resolution, as to stifle every tender sentiment in my breast, rather
than be made a fool of in that gross manner." "I believe," replied
Camillo, "there must be some secret intelligence between you and that
lady; you seem to be the counterparts, or tallies to each other; for
she entertains me with all I say to you, and you with what I say to
her; and all the while I cannot for my soul know how each of you come
by your intelligence: it must be some new device of the blind boy, who
resolves to lead me a fairy dance between you, and Tantalus-like,
oblige me to starve with meat at my lips, which I am doomed never to
touch. But to do all I can to clear up all doubts, and prevent all
misunderstanding for the future, I shall make you an ingenuous
confession, and be you yourself judge how far I am criminal. You may
remember then," continued he, "in what situation affairs were in
between, you and me when we last parted. I think we were on the point
of entering into certain articles which were to be signed, sealed, and
executed on that couch, when a most impertinent visitant, (who by the
by I understood was no other than Charlotta herself) spoiled all our
measures, and nipped my warm hopes in the very bud; I was forced to
leave the field, when victory was in full view, and my charming enemy
ready to surrender at discretion. I went away as full of your dear
idea as I possibly could be, and the bare reflection of the happiness
I missed consumed me. I did all I could to compose myself, but in
vain; your charming image was still present to my view, and my
imagination painted it in the most enchanting attitude. I fancied you
already on the couch, myself encircled within your snowy arms,
breathing out my soul in the most murmuring accents of ecstatic love,
while my hands wantoned over your panting bosom, and visited the
sacred centre of your warmest wishes. I thought your sighs breathed
short and quick, your pulse beat high, your heart leaped to mine, and
gave the alarm to all the joys of love. I seized the happy minute, and
was ravished with the imaginary ecstasy; but chancing to look up, I
saw myself alone, the vision vanished, and Ixion-like<32>, I embraced
only a cloud of my own, not Juno's creation. I discovered the cheat,
but still the sting remained behind, nothing could extinguish the fire
which I felt preying upon my vitals. I thought a thousand times of
returning to your apartment, and waiting the departure of your
visitant, whom I cursed with bell, book and candle; but I feared to
displease my adorable, and therefore I must own to you frankly, I
thought of seeking relief from the raging torture, from some less
reluctant fair; Charlotta first occurred, I went to visit her, made
love to her, but it was only as your proxy, and was so far happy as to
hear her talk of little else but you; now can you blame me for
endeavouring to quench that flame which you yourself raised, which by
the by I was not successful in, or would you have me allow myself to
burn to ashes, and bring you nothing to day but the dry embers of what
was yesterday? But come, madam, let us trifle no longer; by my
frankness you may guess how much I love, and now we have opportunity,
let us use it before some other impertinent female comes to disturb
us."

"Hold, sir," replied the mask, "your imagination is so strong, there
is no occasion for the reality; you acted your part so well yesterday
when embracing your cloud, it is to no purpose you should ask me to
bear a part, and it is ten to one, but all the warmth you express for
me, may be offered me as proxy to Charlotta, since it is as reasonable
I should be hers as she mine. Therefore you must inform me how I can
be sure that you make love to my proper person." "It is impossible, my
invisible divinity," returned Camillo, "that my devotion can be meant
to anything but you, and you shall be judge of its sincerity by its
ardour. I shall express it in such feeling terms, that an infidel must
be convinced" "Renounce all commerce," said she, "with Charlotta, and
then""and then my angel we shall be happy," returned he; "why stop
the charming accents?echo the yielding sound to my ravished ear, and
I will renounce everything, renounce Charlotta, myself, and all your
sex besides, and adhere to this dear bosom for ever; but why this
covering to your face, unveil thy charms, and strike me senseless with
admiration of that beauty, which my imagination has painted fairer
than the graces, and more radiant than the blooming morn". All this
while he held her fast to his bosom, and hastily, without her
perceiving it, snatched the mask off her face. But how great his
surprise, when instead of that beauty which was but the minute before
to have struck him senseless with admiration, he saw the well-known
face of his mistress Charlotta. "My Charlotta!" said he, "sure my eyes
deceive me: how is this change wrought? Is the age of metamorphosis
returned? Am I in one of the enchanted palaces of the ancient poets?
How is it possible that I should be so long deceived as not to know
the voice, the air, and shape of my adorable Charlotta! Speak, my
charmer, and unriddle this mystery, which makes me doubly happy, in
finding the perfections of both my mistresses united in one."
Charlotta was some moments before she could recover the confusion
which this unexpected discovery threw her into; but at last she put on
a cheerful countenance, and began to play off her raillery upon him.
"How now," said she, "Camillo! how can you look me in the face, when
in the height of your raptures, which I had raised, without any design
to allow you to complete them, you said you would renounce Charlotta,
yourself, and all the sex, but the fancied one you then took me for;
are not you ashamed of the indignity you offered me when you owned the
visit you paid me last night was only to allay the loose desires you
supposed raised by another? I have had my end in thus disguising
myself from you; by it I find the generous motive of your addresses to
me, and now I can assure you I am armed against you, and shall take
care to banish you that place in my affection, which your first modest
deportment made me grant you."

On saying this, she endeavoured to disengage herself from his arms,
and to rise from the couch, whereon they were both seated during the
whole of this scene; but Camillo would not permit her: he redoubled
his caresses, and told her all he had said that day, was done by her
own permission, who had desired him expressly to push matters as far
with his masquerade acquaintance as he could, without regard to her:
that he had said nothing but what he intended to have told her the
next time he saw her, and said nothing but what his heart gave the lie
to, however warm his expressions might seem in so critical a moment.
"And now," added he, "my charmer, I must take your own advice, and
push matters as far as I can with my fair one. The minutes fly swiftly
on: time is precious; every moment solicits to be employed in the
important business of love: all our faculties are full of the promised
bliss, nature calls, love prompts, opportunity offers; let no childish
coyness chill the warm desires that now mutually fires our breasts.
Those languid eyes, that heaving panting bosom, that glowing blush,
all proclaim the god of love triumphant: yield my dearest to his
dictates, and make me happy." This said, he pushed boldly forward,
laid her gently back on the couch, removed the outworks, and sword in
hand charged the breach. The engagement was warm on both sides for
same moments, each strove for victory with equal vigour, till their
ammunition on both sides being spent, the swain first made a decent
retreat, and left the field to recruit his forces, in order to renew
the charge.

How often the amorous combat was renewed is not very material, but it
is to be presumed, Camillo who had kept Lent so long, made a full meal
before he parted, and promised when he took his leave, to visit her
the next day at her mother's, she having cautioned him to take no
notice there of his discovering her plot.

He kept his promise, and was received by Charlotta alone, but she
desired him to observe a distant respects in his carriage, for that
they were under observation. This was a little uneasy to him, for he
had full expectation of finding her alone; but he was obliged to
submit to the rules prescribed by his mistress, and please himself for
the present with an assignation she made him, to meet at the former
place.

He made his visit very short, and was impatient for the hour of
rendezvous, both to satisfy his appetite, and curiosity, for he was
much at a loss to find out the reason of the doubles of his mistress,
which he had no opportunity to do at the last meeting, or that wherein
he had been so successful, for then he was too much employed in
gratifying a warmer appetite than curiosity, to think much of it: and
besides, at the close of the scene, they were forced to part abruptly,
some company coming in, before whom they were obliged to observe some
decorum. At last, the wished-for hour came, and Camillo flew to his
charmer on the wings of love. After the first dalliance was over,
which he was admitted to without much preamble, he had leisure to ask
the design of her putting that trick upon him, and disguising and
concealing herself so long, merely, for aught he could apprehend, to
give them both unnecessary pain. She was at a loss to find out a
reasonable excuse for this proceeding, and at last told him, that 
Vilario had made her some offers, which her mother obliged her to
receive with more seeming complaisance, than she was willing to show
of herself that she had taken an affection to his (Camillo's) person,
from the first time she saw him; and observed with pleasure that she
was not indifferent to him; but durst not, for fear of her mother, own
the one, or encourage the other; and therefore laid the project of
attacking him at the masquerade, which she did in the presence of her
mother, who thought the whole was a frolic, and connived at it as far
as that night, but that she had given him the meeting ever since
without her knowledge, and kept on the mark only to make herself
acquainted with the nature and degree of the regard he had for her,
that she might take her measures accordingly, by discovering herself
if she found them serious and honourable, and breaking off without
scandal, if she found them otherwise. "If you remember," added she,
"my mother seemed out of temper on Wednesday night, when she came in
and found us alone; it was on your account, because she imagined I had
given you notice of my being without company, and suspected by a
confusion, we both appeared to be in, that I had given you
encouragement, contrary to the esteem she would have me entertain for
Vilario. I guessed her meaning then by her looks, and judged that I
should have no future opportunity of seeing you here, and for that
reason whispered you to push matters with your incognito, but not in 
the naughty meaning which you put upon my expression, but in an
honourable way, for I had some thought of engaging you under that
borrowed shape, since it was equal to me, which of your mistresses you
loved most, provided you loved one of them sincerely; but my foolish
heart, yielded too soon, I yielded without conditions, and have put
myself out of all hopes that you will ever repair the injury you have
done;" with this the began to weep bitterly, and Camillo comforted her
as much as he could, by swearing to love her eternally. She talked of
honour, of reputation lost, of marriage, and all that stale stuff, but
Camillo only answered her with kisses, and shifted the discourse by
some new amorous dalliance as often as she mentioned it, so that after
taking a farewell turn, they parted without his being obliged to
explain himself on that head.

When he got home, he began to reflect on the snare he had escaped, and
rejoiced that he had for that time shunned the rock of matrimony, a 
leap, now that his stomach was stayed, he was under no manner of
danger of taking, at least with Charlotta. But he could not help being
a little chagrined at Vilario, whom he looked upon as his rival, and
concluded, that he observe more than ordinary caution before him, lest
he might discover by the optics of a rival, what might escape him as a
tutor. He was at some loss what to think of his making love, for he
knew his circumstances such as did not suit with the charge of wife
and family, and he had too great an opinion of his austere sanctity,
to believe he could be so profane as to think of a mere mistress. This
puzzled Camillo, and put him upon laying a scheme to come at his
thoughts of Charlotta. That same evening, they fell into conversation
about the widow and her daughter, and Camillo designedly dropt some
slighting expressions of Charlotta, supposing if Vilario had any
esteem for that lady, he would not entertain a conversation to her
disadvantage; but Vilario heard him charge her with levity, &c.
without the least emotion, and only said, he was glad to find he was
so good a judge of women, but that Miss Charlotta was well enough to
pass a vacant hour with, and her company less dangerous than women of
brighter qualifications. "But I thought," added he, "that you had a
very great regard for that lady, and had made use of her natural
disposition to forward your design upon her, for I cannot imagine a
young gentleman of your years can be so often in the company of a
woman, whose person is far from disagreeable, without having some warm
thoughts of her, which I am of opinion Miss Charlotta would not
discourage on her part. Come," continued he, observing Camillo blush,
"there is no great crime for one in your circumstances to be desirous
of knowing what a fine woman is made of, provided things are not
carried to excess, so as to interfere with matters of more serious
concern, and are conducted with decency; and if you have any such
inclination, you cannot deal with more safety than in the widow's
family, nor I believe where you can be more acceptable." Camillo, a
little encouraged with this discourse, but not fully satisfied that it
was not with a design to pump him, kept still upon the reserve; but
said, "I own I have the inclinations that are common to one of my
years: I am no more made of iron or steel than my neighbours, but I
would not choose to hunt in other people's purlieus." "What mean you,"
replied Vilario, "do you suspect any particular person to be at
present intimate with Charlotta? I do not think there is; though, if
there were, I do not see that you need be so scrupulous with a
mistress, whom you can have no design to take into keeping, since our
stay here is to be so short." "As for that matter," replied Camillo,
"I am not so delicate as to fall out with her about the disposition of
her favours, as long as there may be enough left for me after a dozen
have had her; but I would not choose to supplant my friend, who,
perhaps, may have views inconsistent with a free commerce of that
kind." "Sure you do not suspect me," returned Vilario, "to have any
designs upon the girl? If you do, you are utterly in the wrong, and to
disabuse you, I must let you into the character of the ladies, with my
design of introducing you there. I knew, sir, that you must have
desires natural to your years, and that in this city a young gentleman
runs great risks, both of his health and reputation, in a commerce
with the common girls of the town. To prevent then your being tempted
to have recourse to them, I introduced you to the widow's, who, to let
you into the secret, has no other method of living, but by the private
prostitution of her girls to men of fortune and fashion. She manages
her affairs with so much prudence, that none of her neighbours suspect
her occupation, and none but those who are under a necessity of
keeping the secret for their own sakes, are permitted any favours at
her house. I did not think it prudent to represent them to you in this
light, lest I should raise an inclination I had rather you had not,
and might perhaps be dormant of itself, and if it was not, you had
there an opportunity of gratifying without any danger to your person.
The widow and her daughters too knew my design, and they were directed
to behave accordingly; that is, with reserve and decency, if that
proved to be your taste; and with openness and freedom, if they found
you that way disposed. The widow suspects you and Charlotta either are
already, or will be very soon hand and glove together: you know best
how far her suspicions are just, but from this you may see your
jealousy of me is ill founded. I have observed," continued Vilario,
"that ever since I had the honour to be entrusted with the direction
of your studies, that you have carried yourself with great reserve
towards me, and appear to have a kind of damp upon your spirits when
in my company. I should be sorry to give you any cause to look upon me
as a bug-bear; on the contrary, I would have you honour me with your
friendship and confidence; it is by this means, my experience in the
world can be of use to you, which I assure will always make great
allowances for youthful inclinations, which I know from long
observation are not to be tied down to all the rigid rules and
precepts of philosophy. Parents, who perhaps have not seen the world,
and have forgot their juvenile thoughts, want to plant grey-headed
wisdom on green shoulders, and are unwilling to relax the smallest
punctilio of the severest morality. We are obliged sometimes to humour
them in their own way, and conceal the liberty we permit those that
are entrusted to our care. My behaviour has been correspondent to this
while I was in the country, and under the eye of your father, which
may have given you a notion that my business about you, is to be a
rigid and austere censor upon your actions, and that I expect of you
the same sedate deportment as from a man of forty. No, my dear sir, do
not think so; believe me only your friend and intimate, whom superior
years and experience have enabled to advise you in what may be most
conducive to your peace and happiness."

Camillo was surprised and overjoyed, to hear the grave and seemingly
austere Vilario talk in a strain, that bordered a little upon
profaneness, and from that moment swore an inviolable friendship to
him, and that he would make him his confidant in everything: and as a
proof of it, made him acquainted with every step of his amour with
Charlotta, by which Vilario understood that both the widow and her
daughter had a matrimonial plot upon his pupil. He was glad Camillo
had escaped the snare, though he saw it was by mere chance, and the
want of management in the young lady, who had not followed the widow's
advice, of whom he was resolved to be revenged for her treachery. He
went immediately to Charlotta, and by sly insinuations got out of her
all that had passed between her and Camillo; and as she had not
prudence to conceal the article of the masquerade, but told that
affair in all its particulars, she gave Vilario an opportunity of
letting her understand he saw a further plot than a piece of
gallantry; and by threats got at the bottom of their design, which was
this: Charlotta was to behave at home in a demure manner, and to
practise all the airs of strict virtue and honour; if that behaviour
took, then she was not to yield without a priest; if not, the disguise
was contrived to attack him with a less reserved carriage, which they
supposed would most probably have its weight: but in both cases, he
was not to be permitted to take possession of the premises, on any
other than matrimonial terms. However, as it happened, Charlotta had
not cunning enough to manage an affair of that nature, and her
endeavours to conceal the whole from Vilario, proved the ruin of their
whole scheme, and lost the widow his custom; for from the moment he
had made a full discovery of their plot, he never permitted Camillo to
set foot in the house; and gave him such a notion of the danger he had
escaped, that he had no inclination to have any further commerce with
Charlotta of any sort.



Chapter V.

Vilario having found out Camillo's amorous vein, and by his last
conversation removed from his mind the impression of his tutor's
rigidity, soon gained upon his temper, and became his entire
confidant; so that Camillo was under no manner of restraint; but
frankly communicated all his inclinations to Vilario, who took care to
gratify him in every respect, and permitted him to run into all the
extravagance of unbridled youth, observing no other decorum, but what
was necessary to conceal their course of life from such of Camillo's
relations as they were obliged to visit, before whom, both the tutor
and pupil practised all the grimace of virtue and piety, passing upon
them, by the most exquisite dissimulation, for two of the soberest
gentlemen of the age. They even carried their hypocrisy so far, as to
be frequently seen at church, not only on Sundays, but on week-days;
and behaved on these occasions with all the outward marks of the most
sincere devotion, though in their hearts, they perhaps, cursed the
parson, and wished the service at the Devil. They were obliged to this
kind of behaviour, in order to obtain and preserve the esteem of a
rich citizen and near kinsman of Camillo's, who being himself very
devoutly inclined, from a small tincture of fanaticism he had imbibed
in his youth, during the last years of the usurpation<14>, when the
whole kingdom was possessed with a kind of religious madness, was
mightily pleased to find the marks of grace so pregnant in his young
kinsman, and on that account, and to encourage the young saint in his
pious courses, was profuse of his purse, which was a strong temptation
to Camillo to continue his hypocrisy, because his other less religious
exercises demanded more money than the allowance his father made him
would admit of, though that was very liberal. Therefore, whenever his
cash ran low, he went to church in the city, where he was sure to meet
with his old kinsman; there he put on a demure look for half an hour,
and repeated the responses with a zealous and fervent spirit of
devotion; which so charmed the heart of the old miser, that he
constantly invited him home, and recruited those pockets, which had
been emptied the night before, not with acts of charity and religion,
but in company with a knot of such pious youths as himself, who, for
the improvement of their morals by the virtuous conversation of the
girls of the town, used frequently to spend their evenings together.

But Camillo did not grow profligate all at once; his tutor in iniquity
was obliged to initiate him by slow and insensible degrees; for to
speak the truth, except a natural proneness to the fair sex, Camillo
had no constitutional vice to struggle with, and the care and
conversation of his first tutor had instilled into his tender mind the
seeds and first principles of many good qualities, which in time might
have been cherished to great and good purposes, and took Vilario some
pains to eradicate. Camillo had a natural openness of temper, a strong
antipathy to falsehood and prevarication, and an innate veneration for
everything relating to religion. These were virtues that stood in the
way of Vilario's views upon him, yet he durst not attack them openly
in person, but led his pupil into such company as by degrees laughed
him out of everything that might be a check upon the gratification of
any sensual appetite.

After Vilario had discovered Charlotta's plot upon Camillo, as I have
observed, he kept him out of her reach, not out of any personal regard
to the honour or interest of his pupil, but for his own interest and
reputation, which he knew would suffer if he permitted such a step to
be taken while under his direction. And lest be might be drawn into
the same snare by someone who had more skill in laying and conducting
a matrimonial plot, he railed against marriage with all the wit and
malice he was master of, and represented that state to his young
charge in the most hideous colours, till he had wrought him up to the
greatest aversion for it. This point gained, Vilario became less
cautious of carrying his pupil into all sorts of company and
conversation, particularly such as he himself generally kept when he
laid aside his virtuous airs, and appeared in his own natural colours.
These consisted chiefly of young rakes of quality, who had formerly
profited under the tuition of this hopeful travelling governor;
players, poets, musicians, old bawds and young whores. He had
acquaintance of all classes, and set hours for attending their
meetings at different places of the town, which he managed so
artfully, that though he was every night in some scene of debauchery
or other, yet he came so seldom to the same place, that he escaped
being observed to be one of their society.

He at first introduced Camillo to the class of them who observed the
greatest decorum in their debauches; from them to the next degree,
till he had travelled through all the scenes of vice and folly our
metropolis is able to exhibit, and Camillo in a few weeks became so
expert a scholar in this university of vice, that he excelled most of
his fellow-students in iniquity; could walk in that dark path without
leading-strings, and was in a fair way of groping out his way to the
Devil without the help of a guide. We shall only take a short view of
some of his rambles in England, and then proceed to his exploits, in
foreign parts, on which the short stay he made at London, had great
influence.

A night or two after his affair with the widow's daughter was blown
up, Vilario and he walking in the Mall at St. James's, were met by an
acquaintance of the former's, who seemed to be a man of threescore,
but was dressed like a boy of fifteen, and what between the antiquity
of his phiz, and the youthfulness of his dress and conversation, he
made in Camillo's eyes a very ridiculous appearance. However, as
Vilario showed him respect, and there appeared a great intimacy
betwixt them, he refrained treating him with that contempt which his
appearance created in him, and received the compliments the old beau
made him on Vilario's introducing them to each other, with as much
politeness as the small knowledge he had yet of the town would permit
him; Captain Wearwell, for that was the beau's name, grew all of a
sudden mighty fond of Camillo, and by now and then throwing in a small
dash of flattery<15>, against which few young men are very well armed,
got the better of his first prepossession, and in two or three lengths
of the Mall, from the most contemptible ridiculous animal in life, he
became, in our young traveller's eyes, the most accomplished,
obliging, complaisant gentleman alive. He asked Camillo if he had seen
any of the public diversions, or if his tutor had introduced him to
any of the choice spirits of the town. "I have been," replied Camillo,
"at the play, the opera, and masquerade, and was very well entertained
at them," but that he was yet a stranger to such good company as he
had mentioned, amongst whom he supposed such a country rustic would
make but an awkward figure, which he supposed was the reason Vilario
had not yet carried him into assemblies where the conversation might
be too polite for him to share in, which, however, he should be glad
of, in hopes they would have good nature enough to put up with his
ignorance, till, by copying from them, he might so far improve
himself, as at length to become supportable. "Why," returned the old
beau, "Vilario has greatly injured you, and robbed the beau monde of a
great deal of pleasure which they might already have reaped from your
conversation: indeed, sir, you are too severe upon yourself; your
mien, your dress, and everything about you, pardon the liberty I take
of saying this to your face, sir, has quite the genteel and courtly
air of St. James's. I could not think it possible that such
accomplishments can be acquired in the country; but some are born with
happy talents, and besides, you have fallen into good hands; Vilario
has seen so much of the world, that but a week's conversation with
him, polishes more than a twelve-month's travel. Well, Camillo, I
prophesy you will be the darling of the ladies, and make more holes in
their hearts than there are patches on their face: egad!But you shall
go with us to Locket's to-night, where a set of smarts are to meet,
and are afterwards to make the grand tour, which must be high
diversion for one who has not seen the manner in which we men of
pleasure live. You have, hitherto, sir, amused yourself in scouring
after a poor hare or a fox, over hills, dales, and five-bar gates, in
eminent danger of your neck; and then, when come home, been obliged to
pass the evening in the dull repetition of the mighty exploits of
Ringwood and Fowler; and the height of your pleasure was toasting the
squire's cherry-cheeked daughter, in dull October, or sophisticated
Port: but now, my hero, the scene is changed; you pass the whole day
in a round of soft circling delights, where every sense is ravished,
and the soul knows no satiety from the infinite variety of substantial
joy; and then my boy, instead of hares and foxes, we make war upon
more noxious animals, the constables and watch, and instead of coney-
warrens and ferret-holes, we demolish bawdy-houses, unrig the girls,
and play a thousand other pleasant frolics, to which the whole
generation of fox-hunters are utter strangers, and cannot conceive the
most distant idea of the dear pleasure which we enjoy in these
midnight sallies."

This description of a town ramble, had too much of novelty in it not
to take the fancy of our young adventurer: he had conceived a high
notion of the polite accomplishments of Captain Wearwell, and was
eager to merit those applauses he had so liberally bestowed upon him,
and to be initiated into that society, whose pleasures were so much
refined, that they quite surpassed his rustic apprehension of things;
therefore you may suppose the scene changed from the Mall to Locket's,
where an expensive supper, and plenty of generous wine, gave fresh
vigour to the youthful imagination, and stifled all former notions of
temperance and rational pleasures. The company, by a whisper, were
made acquainted with the quality of our young squire, and his address
and air were sufficient to let them into the secret of his being a
novice in the town, and all its ways; they received him with abundance
of complaisance, praised with one side of their faces, while with the
other they laughed at the awkward simplicity of his manners. Some of
than were inclinable to make merry with him, and to play off their wit
at him, as the butt of the company, but Vilario's presence kept them
within bounds, he not caring to allow them to carry matters too far,
for fear of discouraging his pupil, whom he intended to engage into a
liking for all the mad frolics of that thoughtless class of mortals,
as most suitable to his own taste, and the designs he had upon him,
Camillo behaved pretty well, and took some sallies of raillery which
were now and then played off against him, for wit, and arguments of
the regard the company had for him; for he thought they honoured him
by permitting him to be of their society, though the group consisted
of younger brothers who lived by sharping, disbanded captains,
debauched posts, and superannuated players; but such as they were, he
thought them the best company in the world. After some hours spent in
riot, noise and nonsense, they set about their grand tour, and
prepared the mighty enterprise of demolishing lamps, beating the
watch, and scouring the streets. Capt. Wearwell was commander in
chief, and led the van, while Vilario brought up the rear with his
pupil, who wanted experience enough to be trusted in a more advanced
station. The first house they entered was a noted bagnio, where they
met with a covey of town partridges, which Camillo liked better than
all he had ever drawn a net over in the country, and amongst them Miss
M the famous posture girl, whose presence put our company of
ramblers upon the crotchet of showing their new associate a scene, of
which he had never so much as dreamed before.

They were showed a large room, wine was brought in, the drawer
dismissed, and after a bumper the ladies were ordered to prepare. They
immediately stripped stark naked, and mounted themselves on the middle
of the table: Camillo was greatly surprised at this apparatus, and not
less puzzled in guessing for what purpose the girls had posted
themselves on that eminence. They were clean limbed, fresh
complexioned, and had skins as white as the driven snow, which was
heightened by the jet-black colour of their hair. They had very good
faces, and the natural blush<16> which glowed on their cheeks (in
spite of the custom of their trade, on seeing so many men fix their
eyes on that part which all other women choose to hide) rendered them
in Camillo's mind, finished beauties, and fit to rival Venus herself,
who could not appear more lovely, had she thus sat for her picture to
Apelles. From viewing their faces, he bashfully cast his eyes on the
altar of love, which he never had so fair a view of as at this present
time: he had seen, it's true, the secret, though only budding,
beauties of his cousin Maria, and been very familiar with those of the
laundry maid in the country; but the parts of the celebrated posture
girl, had something about them which attracted his attention more than
anything he had either felt or seen. The throne of love was thickly
covered with jet-black hair, at least a quarter of a yard long, which
she artfully spread asunder, to display the entrance into the magic
grotto. The uncommon figure of this bushy spot, afforded a very odd
sort of amusement to Camillo, which was more heightened by the rest of
the ceremony which these wantons went through. They each filled a
glass of wine, and laying themselves in an extended posture placed
their glasses on the mount of Venus, every man in company drinking off
the bumper, as it stood on that tempting protuberance, while the
wenches were not wanting in their lascivious motions, to heighten the
diversion. Then they went through the several postures and tricks made
use of to raise debilitated lust, when cloyed with natural enjoyment,
and afterwards obliged poor Camillo to shoot the bridge, and pass
under the warm cataracts, which discomposed him more than if he had
been overset in a Gravesend wherry. However, though it raised the
laugh of the whole company, he bore their frolic with a good deal of
patience, as he was told it was necessary for all new members to be
thus initiated into the mysteries of their society. Camillo began now
to be disgusted at the prodigious impudence of the women; he found in
himself no more of that uneasy emotion he felt at their first setting
out; and was desirous of the company's dismissing them; but his
companions would not part with them, till they had gone through the
whole of their exercise; the nymphs, who raised a fresh contribution
on every new discovery of their impudent inventions, required no
entreaties to gratify the young rakes, but proceeded, without the
least sense of shame, to show them how far human nature could debase
itself. Having resumed a proper posture, with wanton fingers they
entered the mysterious cave, and heaved; and thrust, and wriggled,
till they opened the teeming springs, which shot their volatile
liquids into a wine-glass, each held in the other hand.but here the
reader will hardly believe me, though I assure him on the credit of my
talisman, that what the glasses received, was mingled with their wine,
and drank off without the least shock to the nature of any one
present, except Camillo, whose surprise was beyond expression.

This last exploit inflamed these sons of debauchery so much, that they
proposed, as conclusion of the scene, that each man should choose his
posture, and go through what they had seen only imitated before. But
this was a step the nymphs would not comply with, it being the maxim
of these damsels, never to admit of the embraces of the men, for fear
of spoiling their trade. This very much surprised Camillo, who from
their former behaviour, persuaded himself there could not be invented
any species of wickedness with which they would not comply, for the
sake of money; and though before this their refusal, their abandoned
obscenity had quite stifled all thoughts of lying with them, yet now
his desires were as strong as if they had been modest virgins, and he
had seen nothing of their wantonness; so that he became as earnest to
oblige them to comply, as any man of the company; but the girls
remained inflexible, dressed themselves in the greatest hurry, and
could be prevailed on by no entreaties to stay longer in the company.
The gentlemen, who believed it all grimace, and that they stood off
only to enhance their price, offered what money they pleased; but that
had no effect; and one of them, who seemed to be a girl of an uncommon
genius, addressed herself to the company in this manner.

"Gentlemen, I cannot blame you for having a very mean opinion of us,
and for believing that after the scenes we have gone through tonight,
we have no remains of virtue or modesty left, but I can assure you I
have as great an aversion to whoring, (and I may venture to say as
much for those that are here with me) as some women who are nicely
scrupulous in every other respect; and, however strange you may think
it, my mind is as little tainted by the life I am obliged to lead, and
have pursued from my infancy, as it was before I was capable of
knowing the distinction of the sexes. Perhaps, gentlemen, if you would
permit me to give you a short sketch of my history, you would be
inclined to think me sincere, and that it is needless for you to
persevere in your present intention."

This preamble raised our gentlemen's curiosity, and with one accord
they agreeing to hear her story, she began as follows.

"I was born, gentlemen, of honest parents, but had the misfortune to
lose them before I could be sensible of my loss. I was but turned of
eight when both father and mother died, in a short space after one
another, and left me to the care of an aunt, without any other
obligation to support me, but what arose from the ties of blood, for
all their effects were scarce sufficient to bury them. But alas! Our
being so nearly related, was not sufficient to induce my aunt to be
long solicitous about my welfare; it is true, she allowed me a bare
subsistence for a year or two, but without troubling her head about
cultivating my mind, or forming my morals, of which she had naturally
herself but very loose notions. I was then remarkably well limbed, had
a good complexion, and tolerable features, with a natural liveliness
in my temper, which engaged me to my aunt more than nearness of blood;
my forward prattle diverted her, and she indulged me in every rompish
trick I could invent, without considering what were their tendencies;
she carried me to see her neighbours, a set of gossips, who had not
all the nicest notions of virtue, and who were pleased with my
forwardness, however indecently expressed. I was taught a number of
licentious songs, of which I did not then understand the meaning,
which used to set the old women, her cronies, in such a titter, that I
was thought the best company in the world, and was loaded with
caresses, toys, and sugar-plums, for what I ought to have been
severely chastised.

"I went on improving in this kind of education, till I was eleven
years of age, when my aunt married her second husband, for she was all
this time a widow. He proved a covetous hunks, who grudged me every
bit of victuals I eat, and wanted my aunt to turn me over to the
parish. She was dotingly fond of him, and though she liked me well
enough, for my forward tricks, yet she would have been glad to have
been rid of me in any shape, except to the parish, which her pride
would not let her think of; therefore she made shift to keep me for
some months, in hopes that some opportunity would offer to shake me
off in a manner more agreeable to her pride.

"At this juncture a famous rope-dancer came to the village where we
lived, and put up at the house of one of my aunt's intimates, where I
had frequently been. All our family went to see the rope-dancing, and
my aunt and P. stayed with the woman of the house after the show was
over, and the dancer was admitted to drink with them after the fatigue
of her exercise. They soon became familiarly merry together, and I was
desired to add to their mirth by a bawdy song, which I humoured so by
my action, as to engage the good-will and attention of the rope-
dancer. She commended my parts, and at last ventured to observe that I
was a well-limbed active girl, and if rightly brought up, might make
my fortune by following her profession; but added she, I am afraid
she's too forward, she would be too soon debauched: that's the only
rub she could meet with. No more passed that night; the gossips
parted, but the next day my aunt sent for the dancer, and, in short, I
was bound apprentice for seven years to learn postures and rope-
dancing.

"If I had any modesty before this period, it easily wore off under the
tuition of my new mistress, who found me an apt scholar in learning
her postures. I soon began to think that there was no more harm in
exposing myself before men, than before women: however, as I grew up,
I was taught that nothing could be a greater misfortune to me in the
way of my profession, than to have any criminal conversation with the
men. This lesson, learned before I well understood the basis it was
founded on, and so I found my self guarded against the evil, when
experience taught me what I was cautioned against: and though when in
that woman's service I exposed myself naked, and in many obscene
postures in some select companies, yet being so much accustomed to
vicious tricks in my infancy, they inspired in me no more loose
thoughts, than if I had been reading a Common-Prayer book; it was
purely mechanical, a scene in which my body was only concerned, but in
no measure influenced my morals. I pleased my mistress, and got her a
great deal of money, for the first four years I was with her, by the
many feats of activity she had learned me; but after that time, my
joints became less pliable, and I found myself unable to go through
the many monkey tricks she put into her bills, to allure the wondering
crowd. She saw I could not help it, and therefore was not angry with
me, though she was concerned to see that she would be forced to hire
one to supply my place in those parts of her show which I could no
longer exhibit: but to make up for the loss she had in that respect,
she resolved to make sale of that commodity, which she had hitherto so
often told me it was my greatest interest to preserve; and fancying
that I would make but small opposition to her will, without consulting
me, she made sale of my virginity to a country Justice in Devonshire.
We were then showing away in a village belonging to that gentleman,
who was an old bachelor; and he, after the bargain was struck, sent
for my mistress and me to his house; which was at one end of the
village. We had no reason to be displeased with the entertainment off
the old justice; for we were treated with all the respect due to
persons of a much higher rank, and I was favoured by the good squire
with particular marks of esteem. After supper I was surprised that we
were conducted into separate apartments, as we used in all places to
be bedfellows; I began to be apprehensive of some danger, and desired
the servant, who lighted me to my chamber, to tell my mistress I
wanted to speak with her before she went to sleep. My mistress came in
a few minutes, and asked me what I wanted with her; I told her, I was
afraid to lie alone in that great old house, which might be haunted
with spirits for aught I knew, and would rather be her bedfellow as
usual, or go to the inn and lie there: 'child,' says she, 'what do you
mean? Who knows but the good justice may have some business with you;
before morning? If he has, it would be ill manners to disappoint him:
in short, I believe he has a month's mind for a maidenhead, and I
fancy may bid pretty high; if he does, you may let the old fellow have
his will; I am sure you will not be the worse for it tomorrow.' I
started at the proposal, as if I had trod upon a serpent, and told
her, after what lessons I had heard her give me on that subject, I was
surprised to hear her talk at such a rate; that for my part, to carry
on her business, I had gone all the lengths she had hitherto desired
me, but was determined to take her own advice, and not go one step
further. 'Hey dey!' replied my mistress, half in a rage, 'What, madam,
do you pretend to give yourself airs of chastity! you, who have
exposed all you have to half the kingdom! Sure you are bewitched! It
is true, I advised you to keep your maidenhead for fear of spoiling
your shape, and rendering you useless in our way; but now you are
grown so already, caution is needless; and as your fruit is now ripe,
you ought, to make the most of it before it grows too mellow; you must
some time or other, bring the toy to market, and I doubt not but Mr.
Justice will give you your full price, and leave you as marketable as
before; Therefore, hussy, cease your blubbering, receive the squire as
you ought, and show no more coyness than is necessary to squeeze his
pockets;' so saying, she whipped out of the room, took the key on the
outside, and locked me in.

"I acknowledge, gentlemen, you have reason to believe I am
entertaining you with a romance; but more so if I should repeat the
agony I felt at this instant. Incredible as it may seem to you,
nothing is however more true than this circumstance: even now, when
better acquainted with the loosest scenes of vice, I shudder at the
thoughts of what I felt. I do not say my sentiments were delicate on
that subject, or that the thoughts of honour, or dread of shame
influenced my mind; I had long accustomed myself to think with
indifference of what other women are most ashamed. I had no character
to lose, I had sense enough to think that bad enough in the eye of the
censorious world, which, ignorant of the heart, judges only by the
shallowest appearances; but I found something within me, which started
at the thoughts of prostitution, and made me dread it worse than
death. I then reflected how often, when I have been fretting myself at
the mean opinion most of my sex had of me, for exposing myself in the
manner I did, and how they looked on me as one abandoned to all sense
of virtue; I then. reflected, I say, how often I had comforted myself
with this thought, that however abandoned I appeared to the world, yet
my mind wad a stranger to many of those vices I knew most of my rigid
censurers were guilty of in private; and that I could boast to myself
I had preserved my real chastity. But now that I was in a fair way of
losing the fruits of all my care to a lascivious old miser, I fancied
to myself; that my chastity was much more valuable to me, and the
preservation of it a much greater virtue, than to other women, brought
up according to all the strict rules of decency and decorum. I had as
much flesh and blood in my constitution as most women: the scenes I
acted, the conversation I heard, the company I kept, were all strong
provocatives, and capable of setting every wanton desire afloat, to
destroy every virtuous resolution; yet I went through the fiery trial,
and preserved not only my person but my mind in a great measure free
from the stains of lawless lust, while those who thought me abandoned,
perhaps owed their chastity to the frigidity of their constitution; or
want of temptation and opportunity: for many yield without half the
repugnance I felt in my own mind, without half the struggles I opposed
to the attempts of the justice. But I had still another motive to
determine me to be true to myself at that time, which though it showed
more of the woman in me, yet it heightened my present distress; and
that was the affection I had contracted for a young man who travelled
in our company; I had plighted my faith to him, that as soon as I was
disposed to alter my condition, or part with my maidenhead, it should
be his upon honest terms; but we both proposed to suspend our design,
till we were in a condition of living above the scandalous occupation
we were now engaged in.

All these thoughts crowded on my mind at once, and sunk into the most
terrible despair; for I concluded my mistress had sold me to the old
lecher. I ran to the door, and tried to unlock it, to see if I could
get out of the house, but that was impossible; however I espied a bolt
on the inside, which I immediately shot, and then barricaded the door 
with all the tables and chairs in the room, resolving, that since I
could not get out, nobody should get in. Being now secure in my own
imagination, and trusting to the strength of the garrison, I undressed
and went to bed, pleased that I had disappointed their wicked
intentions for that night, and trusting that providence would put
something in my head to dissipate my fears against next day. In about
half an hour I was just dropping asleep, when s heard the key turn in
the door, and a foot push against it: but all stood firm, and I was
diverting myself with the thoughts how vexed his worship would be,
that he should be obliged to hug his pillow for that night, after
promising himself the mumbling of a maidenhead of fifteen. After some 
few bounces at the door to no purpose, the noise suddenly ceased, and
I turned myself to rest, when to my inexpressible surprise, I saw the
old gentleman enter in his night-gown and slippers, with a candle in
his hand, through a door which opened at the foot of the bed, and
which I had not before observed. I shrieked out as if I had seen a
ghost, for that indeed was the first notion that struck me; but I was
soon convinced that the apparition was not purely spiritual; for
setting the candle down, he threw off his nightgown, jumped into bed
as nimbly as a boy of eighteen, clasped me fast in his withered arms,
and stifled me with his odious kisses, for the old rogue stunk at that
time, or I fancied he did, like any goat. I endeavoured all I could to
get from him, and made noise enough to have raised the dead; but the
worthy justice did not mind my cries, threats, curses, or entreaties,
he was for going the shortest way to storm the citadel, when he found
coaxing would not do, and I observed by his not being concerned at my
outcries, that I could expect no relief from without; I therefore left
off my squalling, and reserved my strength to oppose the enemy force
to force, who seemed ready to enter the breach. But when I put down my
hand to oppose his entrance, for he had already penetrated the
outworks, I found he had exhausted all his ammunition in the storm,
and had not one grain of powder left to carry on the attack, if I had
left the fort without a guard: what I now laid hold on, gave me the
idea of a snail that had been trod upon, shrinking back into its
shell. I was glad to find my enemy so impotent, for I begun to find my
strength fail with struggling and bawling, and therefore considered
with myself, that it was the thing I was contending for, and not the
name, and since my old hero was in no condition to do me any injury,
it was needless to make opposition, as his inability was guard
sufficient to my virtue. I made my repulses weaker and weaker by
degrees, and at last, as if quite exhausted, left him the open field.
Overjoyed that I had removed all impediments, he made another push,
vigorous enough to have alarmed any poor virgin more experienced than
me, but alas! He was still as far from the point as ever: he bobbed
against the breach, but could not move one inch over the threshold. He
repeated his efforts, but always in vain; his forces were now
weakened, and dispirited beyond all possibility of rallying: quite
confounded that he was so baffled, he started from his post as if he
had been stung by a nettle, bounces out of bed, puts on his night-
gown, and vanished in an instant, without speaking one word.

Pleased with my deliverance from age, impotence, and lechery, I slept
soundly for the rest of the night, and in the morning got up earlier
than ordinary, went to the village, where I met my sweetheart, and
told him every syllable that passed, without concealing the minutest
circumstance. We both joined in cursing the old bawd our mistress, and
laughing at the poor justice. But then we thought it necessary to
consult what was to be done to avoid such accidents for the future,
and we could think of no other expedient to free me from the danger of
being sold to the first that would give money enough for me, but to
leave the service. This thought was no sooner mentioned, than it was
put into execution, for that very day I set out for Gosport, took
shipping there for London, where I arrived without any accident,
accompanied by the young man, who treated me with as much modesty, as
if I had been his sister. We soon got into a company of strollers, who
were exhibiting at Sadler's Wells, where I had not been above a month,
when Mr. the famous painter, sent for me; I wondered what he might
want with me, but was not above answering his message. I went, and he
told me he had a proposal to make to me, which if I accepted, would
turn much to my advantage; if I did not, he hoped I would not take the
offer amiss, since he had no intention to affront but to serve me. I
begged him to name his proposal without any further preamble. In a
word, his design, was to make use of me as a figure in a private
academy of painters, and was directed to me by Sir James Thornhill,
who had the chief management of that affair. I was by no means
startled at the proposal, because while with my mistress, I had
frequently, to humour select companies of young rakes, acted my
postures quite naked; therefore I made little or no hesitation to
engage with the Academy, who allowed me more than I could get by rope-
dancing; and they made it an express condition in their engagement
with me, that was to have no commerce with men: an injunction I
observed sacredly for seven years; for so long I stood as a pattern
for the use of that society. During this time, I lived privately, and
respected by all who knew me; for I had shaken of all acquaintance
with strollers, taken lodgings in a remote corner; and passed for a
young lady from the country. I never went out, but in a chair to the
Academy, which was only three times a week. The rest of my time I
employed in reading, so that my landlady justly looked upon me as a
very sober and virtuous person. But in about seven years the affairs
of that society took a different turn, and I was left to shift for
myself, and had nothing now to depend on but what I had from young
painters, for standing to them at their own houses, which was not
sufficient to maintain me. My acquaintance lay among the painters, and
some of them, who knew my difficulties, in order to help me, have sent
for me to taverns, where I only showed myself naked, without going
through any further obscenities. This happening often, and in
promiscuous company, one told another, and I was sent for continually,
till at length I made myself too common, and, to get bread, was
obliged to fall into all the tricks which you have seen, yet still I
have preserved my chastity, and am resolved to do so till I can be
settled in some better way of life."

The company were mightily pleased with the history the posture-girl
gave of herself. By this time their fire was in some measure abated,
and they did not insist so violently upon their first proposal, but
permitted the ladies to depart, and were contented to send for some
less reserved, and who had not such odd notions of chastity. And now
our revellers proposed to adjourn their ramble for that night, and to
spend the remainder of it by lying in state, that is, each with a
brace of girls. The ladies were sent for, and every gentleman made his
election by balloting, and then retired to their respective apartments
with their Bona Robas<17>.

Camillo liked a girl well enough, but he found no great stomach for
two of them at a time; and had so much country bashfulness left, that
he scarce knew how to behave between them. But these sort of creatures
know how to banish modesty, and everything else that tends to baulk
their view; they placed our young traveller in the middle between
them, and used all the tricks and freedom they could invent to animate
him to action. Camillo had nothing frigid in his constitution, but he
found himself so much embarrassed how to please two at a time, and
shocked with the thoughts of having a witness to an action he had
always observed the greatest privacy in, that he was little better
than the old justice, for the first quarter of an hour he was in bed,
and frequently wished them both at the devil: for to his other
perplexity was added the shame to be thought incapable, a secret he
could not hide from their busy fingers, which were officiously
employed to raise the pendent member; and the more he was vexed, the
less capable he was of helping himself. But at last, the heat of blood
got the better of his embarrassment. Their warm dalliance brought the
spirits to their proper channels, when Camillo had begun to despair of
finding his vigour return. He now resolved not to lose the
opportunity, by deliberating which of the two he should begin with,
but taking the one that lay most convenient, he gave a sufficient
proof of his virility, which some moments before there was some reason
to call in question; and before morning he gave each of them reason
enough to be pleased with his manhood, as they were with his
liberality, before they went away; for he tipped each of them a
yellow-boy<18>, treated them with breakfast, and sent them home in
their chairs. This he did very early, and got borne to his lodgings
without calling for his companions; for he began to be crop-sick<19>,
and was afraid of a fresh debauch if he stayed.

Vilario came home about an hour after, and told Camillo that the
company were charmed with his behaviour and conversation, and had made
him promise, in his name, to meet them at night in the same place; but
Camillo desired to be excused for that night, as he found himself a
little out of order, and durst not venture too much at once on his
constitution, before he had seasoned it by degrees. It was not proper
for the tutor to urge too much against so good an excuse, and
therefore gave him a respite for that night.



Chapter VI.

In a day or two after, Camillo met with the same set, and made the
tour of the bawdy-houses in general, and by that means became
acquainted with the manners and customs of the Hundreds of Drury and
Covent-Garden. They completed their ramble by breaking a sufficient
number of lamps, and the heads of as many watchmen, and were marching
home in triumph, when they encountered, at Temple-Bar, a posse of the
watch carrying off a gentleman, who appeared by his dress to be of
some fashion. Our gallants thought themselves in honour bound to
relieve the distressed, and boldly attacked his guard, who were put
into some disorder at the first onset; but a fresh supply coming from
the neighbouring garrisons, they rallied again, and attacked our
scowerers with great fury. The fight was bloody and obstinate, and
victory deemed doubtful which side to favour but at last she declared
for the magistrate of the night, who disarmed our champions, and
carried every mother's son of them to his watch-house.

It's of no great moment to the reader to describe the bruises, bangs,
and wounds, received by the rest of the warriors: it is enough for us
to tell you, that Camillo and his pious tutor, Vilario, received many
honourable scars in this terrible conflict, so many, that Camillo was
quite out of conceit with this kind of diversion. But when he found
himself kennelled with a pack of greasy looking rascals, in a hole so
full of the stench of gin and tobacco, that it seemed the antechamber
to the infernal regions, he grew quite sick of the frolic, and could
not for his life conceive, what wit there was in bloody noses and
broken pates, which seemed to be the sum total of all the fun they had
met with. By the time the chagrin of their confinement and defeat had
cooled the fumes of the wine, which till now operated strongly on
their brains, they had all matter of serious concern to look after:
for upon enquiry into the quality of the gallant, on whose account
they had engaged in this scrape, they found the gentleman was neither
better nor worse than a thief, who had been caught purloining a silver
tankard from the Gentleman and Porter alehouse. The goods had been
found upon him before he got out of the house, and he was for this
fact, which he could not handsomely deny, marching to the watch-house,
when our gentry took it into their heads to rescue him, which they
effected indeed, for the spark made off when his guards were first put
into disorder; and now our gallants were supposed to be of his party,
and the publican came to see them, swore he would prosecute them all.
It was to no purpose to allege they were gentleman and men of quality.
The citizen did not value their fine appearance; he said, the fellow
who pocketed his tankard, was as well dressed as the best of them, and
for aught he knew, looked just as honest in the face, therefore he
would make bold to wait upon the gentlemen before the Lord Mayor, who
had wonderful talents in physiognomy, and could discover a rogue,
though dressed in velvet, at the very first sight. .

Our group of rakes would have laughed at being carried before a
magistrate for breaking windows, or beating the watch; that was no
uncommon thing with most of them; but to be suspected of being in
league with thieves and pickpockets, was an affair of an another
aspect, especially as the thief was gone, and the circumstances made
so much against them. They were all now in doleful dumps, and cursed
their ramble from the bottom of their hearts; but none of them had so
much cause to be alarmed as Vilario, whose whole stock of reputation
seemed to be laid upon this one cast of the dice; for the very company
he had introduced his pupil to, if known, would ruin him with the
sober part of his relations, and the bringing him into such a scrape,
as to lay him under the suspicion of felony, would ruin him with all
mankind. Had it been a common frolic, money could have prevented its
being made public; but this was a crime which even the Constable would
not commute without the warrant of a magistrate, which was all they
dreaded, especially a city magistrate, who they knew would make
conscience of trouncing a rake, in revenge of the favours that class
of gentry generally bestow on aldermen's wives and daughters. Camillo
was afraid, above all things, that it should come to the ears of his
city relations, who would lose their opinion of his sanctity, after so
manifest a breach of the laws of sobriety. What course to take he was
quite at a loss; for the more earnest they seemed to be for their
liberty, the stronger were the suspicions of their being actually
concerned in the robbery. At last one of the company, who had slept
ever since they were taken into custody, awaked, and being come to his
senses, asked where they were, and what was the matter. Vilario told
him their doleful story, and how much it concerned him to get out of
the scrape without himself or his pupil being known. The gentleman was
brother to a noble peer, who was very well known to most of the
magistrates in and about London on account of his nocturnal frolics.
On a solemn consultation, it was resolved, that he should be sent for
immediately, to help them out of the scrape. A courier was dispatched
to all the bawdy-houses in town, to find the peer, for it was yet too
early to expect him at his own house. He was at last met with, and
came, attended by half a dozen of his brother nobles, to the relief of
our distressed knights. On hearing the state of the case, he pretended
to bully the constable, and threatened to pull his watch-house about
his ears, if he did not immediately release the gentlemen. But the
fellow, by trade a butcher, and naturally surly, bid defiance to the
peer, and told him bluntly, if he pretended to insult him in his
office, he would make bold to secure his Lordship with his companions,
and answer for it to the House of Peers next day. Finding they could
make nothing of the brute, they had recourse to an Alderman of their
acquaintance, whom they knocked up, to procure his warrant for
discharging the prisoners; less than an hour the Alderman, out of
respect to the peer, came in person to deliver his brother. The whole
company was overjoyed on the prospect of being released out of the
clutches of these unmannerly fellows, who had no more respect for
laced clothes and a bag-wig, than for a chimney-sweeper. But how
confounded were Vilario and Camillo, when the city Alderman proved to
be their religious friend, out of whose pocket they had drawn same
hundreds by an outside show of sanctity and devotion, and railing at
such pranks as they were now caught in. They both stood like mutes,
uncapable of motion or utterance, and the pious citizen was amazed as
if he had seen a spirit. How now, kinsman, says he, is this the effect
of your being at prayers but yesterday afternoon; do you serve God in
the morning and the Devil at night? But I see through your hypocrisy,
and shall find a way to punish both you and that varlet who has the
care of you, and whose years and experience ought to have kept you
from such vile courses. I come (turning to the peer) my lord to
release your brother, I shall be as good as my word, but for these two
gentlemen, I will have them exposed in all the streets in the city, to
teach such hypocrites not to make a mock of religion, and use it as a
pimp to their wicked appetites.

The peer was confounded, and vexed to find that by the very means he
intended to serve these gentlemen, he had exposed them to all the bad
consequences they dreaded by a discovery; he endeavoured to pacify the
citizen, and told him, he could not conceive what he took so much
amiss in his kinsman, since he was sure he was in very good company
the night before, and met, with the other gentlemen by mere accident.
Let me tell you, my lord, replied the cit, neither your company, nor
your brother's, are likely to benefit such a one as I took my nephew
to be: but it is not he I so much blame, for he must be ignorant of
the town; it is that wretch Vilario, who has no excuse to plead, and
ought to have prevented this. Vilario had by this time recovered his
surprise, and thought of an excuse.

He interrupted the Alderman, and told him, if he would have patience
to hear him, he would convince him that he had no reason to find fault
with his conduct in this affair, since everything that could be
presumed against him, happened by pure accident. "You know," added he,
"that I travelled with Mr. L youngest son of the Countess of ,
this noble lord's aunt, and am very much indebted to that lady for the
countenance she has always shown me. As soon as I came to town with
Camillo, I introduced him to that family, which I hope was neither a
crime in me, nor a dishonour to him; he has been very well received,
and he and I passed the evening there last night with her second son,
who goes this day for Flanders; there we met with these gentlemen, and
happened to leave the Countess in company. Near Temple Bar we met with
these fellows, (pointing to the watch) who I believed jostled, or
otherwise affronted some of the company, on which a fray ensued; you
would not have had Camillo and I stand still, when we saw gentlemen of
their rank insulted.

Though every word of this was a lie, and the Alderman was strongly
inclined to suspect the truth of it, yet every man of the company
vouched for the veracity of the narration, though some of them had
never heard of the Countess, much less had been in her house that
night. The good-natured citizen was prevailed on to discharge the
prisoners, and invited Camillo next day to dine with him, where he
read him a lecture against bad company, women, wine, and late hours,
to the tune of the hundred and nineteenth psalm, to which Camillo
pretended to give vast attention, though he profited very little by
it. However, by his grimace, he reinstated himself in the Alderman's
favour, and had from him a fresh supply of money, of which he was very
much in want.

But to show that misfortunes never come alone, and that folly is
always productive of mischief of one kind or other; in this visit to
the Alderman, which the ramble produced, Camillo lost his heart to a
young demure Quaker girl, who chanced to dine there. She was in
company with her mother, a very grave devout woman, whom the Alderman
treated with great respect.

Camillo had never seen any of that sect before, and the oddness of
their manner, and singularity of dress, engaged his attention all the
time of dinner. The daughter was about sixteen, tall, finely limbed
and as finely shaped, her complexion fair, and her features exactly
regular, with two large blue eyes, which spoke the warmth of her
heart, in spite of the cold demure look she affected to wear. Her
conversation was lively for one of her profession, and her air every
way attracting, though she seemed to do everything with the greatest
indifference, and with that chastity and simplicity of manners
peculiar to that sect in whose principles she had been educated.

The old gentlewoman her mother, appeared the remains of a fine woman;
her humour, though under the restraint of an outside formality, was
polite and facetious. She seemed perfectly well acquainted with the
world, and had really as little stiffness or moroseness in her temper,
as those who pretend to a less rigid behaviour, and excepting a few
starched phrases peculiar to the people she had been most conversant
with, she had nothing in her conversation, but what we might suppose
to have met with in that of the English matrons in the days of Queen
Elizabeth, when virtue and modesty were the distinguishing marks of a
well-bred woman, before a forward masculine carriage, and petulant,
pert, affected conversation, were mistaken for good breeding.

The beauty of Saphira's person, and the plainness of her dress and
manners, first engaged Camillo's attention. He was surprised to see so
much beauty as the daughter possessed, the progeny of such an
antiquated piece of furniture as he conceived the mother to be: for at
first he looked upon that lady as sister to some of the old pictures
in his father's gallery. But when he heard them speak, and was a
little habituated to the peculiarity of their style, he conceived a
veneration for the one, and felt something about his heart for the
other, which wanted a warmer epithet to explain it, than complaisance
or esteem.

He listened to Saphira with a pleasure, which he had not experienced
in the conversation of other women, and the singularity of her phrase
was now so far from being looked upon as ridiculous, that he thought
all other manner of speech impertinent, and fancied, such must have
been the language of angels, when they came to communicate any
heavenly message to some favourite mortal. Her words were all harmony;
the symphony of the spheres could not be more ravishing to his ear,
than the syllables she uttered. He gazed upon her incessantly, and was
so much taken up with the pleasure of surveying her charms, that he
even infringed the bounds of good manners; was guilty of several
absurdities during the time of dinner, and put the fair Quaker often
to the blush; but it was all unknown to him; for he was so absorbed in
deep contemplation of this new beauty, that he was quite absent from
himself, which was soon taken notice of by the old Alderman, who
played off some of his city raillery on that occasion, and by that
means gave our lover an opportunity to recall his scattered senses, at
least, so much as to enable him to behave with more decorum.

Dinner being ended, and the ladies retired, while the gentlemen
finished the other bottle, the Alderman, his kinsman told Camillo,
that he was glad to see he took notice of the lovely Saphira, for
added he, "It's a sign your mind is not vitiated with the wild notions
of the youth of the present age, who make a jest of everything that
has the least appearance of modesty, virtue and religion. To such,
Camillo," continued he, "my cousin Saphira, charming as she is, would
appear but as a proper subject for their raillery, as she observes a
behaviour different from the loose but modish airs of our court
ladies; I see you are not shocked at the appearance of virtue; nay, I
dare swear, you are more charmed with the modesty of her behaviour and
conversation than with the beauties of her person, though these are
sufficient allurements to any man." "I am," replied Camillo, "charmed
with everything about her, more than I have been with any woman I ever
saw; and as she is your relation, and one you seem to have an esteem
for, I should be glad to cultivate an acquaintance with her, by your
permission, for I am sure I must be profitably amused in such company
as she and her mother seem to be, and hope you will introduce me to
them in a particular manner when they return." "Hold, there, my young
kinsman;" replied the Alderman, "not so fast, sir; I am for no
particular introductions at present; I love my kinswoman Saphira very
well, but not quite well enough to recommend her to you for a wife;
nor is she so indifferent to me, as to suffer me to permit you to gain
any ground on her affections on less honourable terms, if I can help
it: she is beautiful, sensible, virtuous and modest; these are all
fine qualifications in a wife, Camillo, but there is a main article
wanting, without which, all will not do with us old people; that is
money, my boy; she has not above ten thousand pounds to her portion,
and I expect by the time you have seen all the courts in Europe, you
may meet with a girl who has, and will freely part with, four times
that sum, for a husband so accomplished as you ought to be after so
many advantages and improvements of birth, and education, and so
forth. Therefore no more of this little saint; I see she has caught
your fancy, and for that reason I will keep you asunder if I can, for
fear one or both of you would do a foolish thing, for I should be
heartily sorry, if you marry her, on your account, and as heartily
vexed if you debauched her, on her own." "I hope, sir," replied
Camillo, "I may have the pleasure of conversing with a virtuous woman,
and a woman of sense, without having designs of either kind. I know
too little of her and myself, to have the most distant thoughts of
matrimony, and I see too much virtue and modesty in her behaviour, to
form any schemes of another kind; all I proposed, sir, from her
acquaintance, was the pleasure of passing so much of my time in such
rational entertainment, as I am sure her conversation could afford
me." "Yes, rational," returned the Alderman, "and irrational too: she
can afford you any kind of entertainment; but neither you, nor she,
are by any means to be trusted together, for I assure you, that little
Saphira, as much a saint as she looks to be, is made up of errant
flesh and blood, with a long train of passions, and appetites, and
affections, which are every morning in an uproar to be employed on
their proper objects. At present, poor thing, with the help of her
prayers, the force of example, and a virtuous education, and above
all, the want of opportunity and importunity, she is able to keep all
quiet within; but as soon as a young fellow with a proper, handsome
person to introduce him, a sly tongue to plead for him, opportunity on
one hand, and importunity on the other, lists himself on the side of
flesh and blood, I am afraid that devotion might begin to cool, that
virtue would nod, and in the end, the saint perhaps become a mere
sinner. It's true, at present, you have no such notions in your head,
and perhaps, mean only to amuse yourself with my pretty cousin, but
she has temptations about her, you are not proof against; how can you
see that snowy bosom heave and pant, without being moved by it, or
stand the brunt of those piercing eyes of hers? In short, Camillo, I
cannot view the charms of her person myself, old as I am, without
being strongly agitated. How then can you think to withstand the
united perfections of her body and mind, without being affected by
them, either to the ruin of your peace, interest, or reputation? Say,
when an old veteran like me, armed with philosophy, prudence,
impotence, and old age, can scarce stand my ground: therefore, after
this night, my dear Camillo, I expect you to avoid the sight of this
fair basilisk, and if she has raised any unruly emotions in you,
either stifle them with prayers and abstinence, or if that will not
do," (added he ironically) "I fancy you may find a cooler before you
get to your lodgings, who may answer to all intents and purposes, as
well as Saphira, whose company, I assure you, is more dangerous than
that of twenty street-walkers<20>."

Camillo had by this time conceived so high an opinion of the fair
Quaker, that he thought this last assertion of the old gentleman's
bordered upon profanation, for his ideas at present, as he had not
time to examine himself, appeared to be purely seraphic and free from
all earthly mixture, and he was about to make the worthy citizen a
reply suitable to the indignity he thought he offered his mistress, by
comparing her to the most abandoned part of her sex; when Vilario, who
had been all this time silent, and had observed, from the old
gentleman's manner of expression, that he had some selfish motives in
what he said to Camillo, seasonably changed the discourse, lest the
young one's temper, naturally warm, might have prompted him to say
something that might prove disagreeable to the dignity of our city
magistrate, and thereby incur his displeasure, which would have been
very inconvenient, as their affairs then stood.

In a little time after, coffee being called for, the ladies joined
company, and in spite of the grave lecture that had been read to him
on the danger of being too familiar with Saphira's charms, Camillo
gazed upon them incessantly; and drank in greedily full draughts of
the lovesick potion; he was the more eager in his devoirs to her, as
his kinsman had warned him that this was the last time he had any
chance of seeing the lovely charmer. Resolved to make use of the
present moment, with his eyes, and by dumb gestures, he said the 
tenderest things he could think of; but alas, that was the language of
the world, and a manner of speech to which Saphira was as yet utterly
a stranger. She did not understand one word of this courtship. She saw
him ogle, and move his eyes in a thousand different attitudes, but
they all conveyed no other idea to her, than that he stared her out of
countenance, and looked sometimes like one possessed, or out of his
wits.

He would have been more explicit, but the Alderman watched all his
motions, and never permitted him to exchange words with her, or gave
him the opportunity to make her one compliment; for during the whole
of the time that they remained in the house, the citizen kept all the
conversation to himself, which artfully turned upon the danger of
permitting young people of both sexes to be in any measure familiar
with each other, unless, in all respects, they were proper persons to
enter into the holy state of matrimony together. The old lady fell
entirely into the Alderman's sentiments, and approved of the custom in
Spain and Italy, where parents marry their children without the
parties being at all consulted in the matter; this wise precaution of
the parents, she said, prevented passion, folly, or obstinacy from
taking place in the sacred tie, and founded it wholly upon prudence,
and the mutual interest of the parties. This declaration of the mother
of his charmer, was like a thunder-clap to our young lover, who had
already laid a scheme in his own mind of making a push at introducing
himself to their acquaintance, without the assistance of the Alderman,
which this queer notion of the mother's quite knocked in the head, and
showed him, that he had not only the reserved behaviour of the young
one to combat, but the obstinacy and prepossessions of the old one.
However, amidst this dismal prospect there appeared a faint ray of
light, some small shadow of hope; he thought he could read in the eyes
of his Saphira, a silent contempt and disapprobation of the method of
linking two bodies together, whose souls might be as distant from one
another as the poles, from whence he concluded she was no enemy to
love, and had some passions capable of gratification, if they met with
their proper objects; "For," said he to himself, "if she is incapable
of or indifferent to the joys of reciprocal love, this doctrine, which
I see her eyes condemn, though delivered by her mother and cousin, is
matter of no moment to her, and to one of that make would certainly
appear every way rational; but I see my charmer condemns the monstrous
notion, and her free-born soul declares for love and natural liberty.
It is impossible such a form, such a mind, one, who in everything else
thinks so rationally, can utterly deviate from reason and nature, in
the most important concern in life. She is capable of love, her soul
has in it, doubtless, a spark of the social fire that was originally
breathed into every creature.

He pleased himself with this reflection, till the ladies took their
leave of the Alderman, when he had the pleasure of handing Saphira to
her coach. If he was enamoured by her presence and conversation, he
was quite in raptures when he touched her fair hand, though shrouded
in a glove. He cursed the envious covering, and wished the first
inventor of it at the Devil. However, he squeezed her fingers gently,
and by that action let Saphira know more of his mind, than he had done
by all the amorous glances he had shot at her for the whole afternoon,
for he observed a crimson blush to overspread her lovely countenance,
and sudden tremor seize her whole frame; she seemed scarce able to
support herself in going into the chariot, and to prevent falling,
grasped his hand with some eagerness, which sent such a thrilling
pleasure to the heart of the enamoured youth, that it required all his
philosophy to hinder him from expressing his raptures by some word or
action unsuitable to that juncture. She made him a bow at parting,
with such a bewitching languor in her eyes, and pronounced her
farewell with such a faltering tone of voice, that Camillo entertained
no doubt but he had made some impression on her, which in time might
be propitious to the new passion he found himself in so lively a
manner animated with.

This thought enabled him to bear the pangs of parting with greater
temper than he imagined he could have done, and diffused through his
whole behaviour an air of gaiety, which was visible to the Alderman,
and the rest of the company, though they could not guess at the cause
of so sudden a change. He endeavoured to turn all the discourse on
Saphira, that he might learn something more of her circumstances and
family, in order to assist him in his future attacks; but the old
citizen grew testy on his mentioning her so much, and they were
obliged to quit him without any further intimation, than that she was
of a good family in Gloucestershire, and her father's only daughter,
who left her and her fortune to the disposal of her mother, who since
his death had turned Quaker; that she had brought up her daughter in
the same principles, and designed to dispose of her to a relation of
the famous William Penn.

When Camillo was returned to his lodgings, he begged Vilario's advice
how to compass an intimacy with the fair Quaker. Vilario told him, he
needed not ask him his reasons for being urgent for an acquaintance
with that young lady, for that he could see, by his late behaviour,
that he was smitten with her. "I cannot blame you," added he, "she has
youth and beauty sufficient to charm an anchorite; but it is not these
alone that are captivating; were she like one of this world, she would
pass in a crowd unobserved, but it is that air of simplicity in her
looks, that show of sanctity and piety, a thing so uncommon in one of
her years, that engages your fancy; though I believe you would be ill-
pleased to find her altogether so much a saint as she appears to be;
no, we like the Devil when he appears in the shape of an angel; and
however much we may like the sinner, yet we do not care that vice
should appear in all her natural deformity. There is certainly
something beyond the mere pleasure of enjoyment, in an intrigue with
one of these devotees; it is the novelty of the thing that creates
most of the delight, and I doubt not Camillo, but you will have enough
of it with the fair Saphira. At present I cannot perceive how I can be
assistant to you in your design, but I shall soon find means to bring
you acquainted, though I foresee a great deal of difficulty in the
affair, from more quarters than one; for I am strongly mistaken if the
Alderman himself has not some design to be nibbling at this luscious
morsel, either out of love or avarice, or perhaps a mixture of both;
however, it is odds but we prove too many for the citizen in the end."

Camillo went not to bed that night to sleep, for the thoughts of his
Saphira dwelt so strong upon his imagination, that he could not rest
one moment, and was up almost as soon as day, to put Vilario in mind
of his promise of finding out some method to get once more into her
company. But that day proved not propitious to the impatience of a
lover, and produced no plot that had the smallest appearance of
favouring his enterprise.

To divert him, towards evening, Vilario would have had him up to the
club of smarts, with whose company he seemed for some time past much
diverted, but their mirth appeared now to his imagination all noise
and impertinence, since he could not expect amongst them any news of
his Saphira, he forced himself to hear two acts of the play, but found
fault with everything he saw or heard: the players were out in their
parts; the music was all discord, and the ladies were no better than
so many gorgons; nothing was agreeable there, since the fair Quaker
did not grace the assembly: he left the house in a pet, and retired to
his lodging to indulge his spleen, and curse his stars, that he could
invent no scheme for a second interview.

Towards eleven or twelve Vilario came home, and told him, he had as
yet hit upon no project that pleased him, but that to keep his spirits
from sinking under the calamity of so long a suspense, he might go the
next day, being Sunday, to their meeting in Grace-Church Street, where
it was more than probable he might feast his eyes with the sight of
her.

Though this gave him but a poor prospect of furthering his amour, yet
the thought of seeing her once more revived his hopes, and he
flattered himself he should be able to hold such a conference with her
eyes, as should leave her no room to doubt of the situation of his
heart. He went to bed more composed, and had the pleasure in a dream
of being more familiar with his fair saint, than he could expect to be
in reality after a siege of some months. He was up betimes next
morning, and was more patient for the hour of public worship, than a
young girl is to try on a new mantua: the long wished for hour came at
last, and he and his governor Vilario, went to the meeting, and seated
themselves near that quarter where it was most likely to have a view
of the object of their devotion. They were there almost as soon as the
doors were open, and Camillo kept his eyes fixed towards them,
expecting every moment when the charmer of his soul would enter: but
as misfortunes and disappointments fill up the circle of human life,
it happened neither Saphira nor her mother appeared all the forenoon.
This was a dreadful mortification to our inamorato, especially as he
was condemned to hear the drawling discourses of two old women, who
were moved with the spirit to utter their incoherent reveries for
gospel revelation. At other times he might have found himself highly
diverted with their devout gesticulations, their sanctified ogling,
and the various forms into which they distorted their withered chops
to squeeze out their enthusiastic oracles; but at present they served
only to raise his spleen, and aggravate the vexation of his
disappointment; but he was obliged to sit out the ordinary time of
their meeting, and went home cursing the old women, and his stars,
that had been so little propitious to his love. He returned again in
the afternoon, and was more happy, for he saw Saphira enter without
her mother, and, as if fortune intended to make amends for his
forenoon's chagrin, the charming Saphira placed herself on the seat
next to him, and after she had seated herself, returned the bow he
made her with a most obliging complaisance, told him, in a whisper,
that she was glad he was so religiously disposed, and hoped he might
be induced to prefer their manner before the pomp of ceremony to which
he was accustomed. To this, he briskly replied, that her presence and
example were capable of impressing any notions upon a heart like his,
which was full of no other idea than what related to herself. She
blushed at the compliment, and turned away her head with an air of
disapprobation, which damped the courage of our lover, who feared he
had said too much, though infinitely short of what his fond heart
would have uttered had he been at liberty. Before he recovered quite
from the confusion occasioned by this modest reproof, her mother
entered, and took her place between him and his charmer. He returned
the bow he made her, on her passing him, with such a stern forbidding
countenance, that he concluded his presence was by no means agreeable
to the old lady, whom he believed to have penetration enough to
understand, that religion was not the real motive of his appearing in
that devout assembly. He had, it's true, the satisfaction of now and
then casting an eye at his charmer, but he was obliged to observe so
much circumspection for fear of her mother, and saw the young lady
herself in so much uneasiness whenever she caught him gazing at her,
that he passed his time rather worse than in the forenoon. When the
assembly was over, he had the mortification to see them pass by him
without taking the least notice of him, and join company with an
awkward, greasy, formal fellow, who held them in chat till they got
into their coach.

He and his governor were posting out of the sanctified crowd, when one
of them, an old acquaintance of Vilario, plucked him by the sleeve,
with "How dost th' do friend? I am glad to find thee here.I hope
thou art going to bring this young man," (looking at Camillo) "early
acquainted with us. I observed you both listen very attentively to
Friend Comber. How dost thou like him? I hope th'art the better for
his doctrine." Camillo eyed the fellow from head to foot with an eye
of the utmost contempt, and was just going to make some ill-humoured
reply to him, which Vilario prevented, and, knowing the Quaker to be a
good soul at the bottom, he told him, that he was the only man he
wished to see, and if he could recommend them to a glass of good port,
such as the Friends solace themselves with, he would be content to
pass an hour or two more in the company of the faithful before he
returned to the sons of sin and wickedness. Obadiah Tipple took
Vilario at his word, and conducted them to a house, not far from the
place they had met at, occupied by one of the Yea-and-Nay tribe. As
they were going thither, Vilario whispered Camillo to put on a civil,
easy carriage to this person, who was a man of substance, and had a
great deal of sagacity, but no more of the Quaker in him than the
outside, which he always put off when in company with men of sense who
were not of the profession, and that he might probably be of use to
them in their designs upon Saphira; the hopes of that would have made
Camillo hug him in his bosom if he had been a chimney-sweeper, and
reconciled him to the manners of the man, had they been ever so
fantastical or impertinent.

They had not been ten minutes in Obadiah's company before he
considerably dropped the Quaker's phrase, talked intelligibly in the
style of the profane, and discovered that good wine, used moderately,
and a pretty girl, enjoyed privately, were no deadly sins, according
to his notions of morality. As Camillo could not forbear discovering
his surprise at the metamorphosis, Obadiah told him he was but a young
man, unacquainted with the world, otherwise nothing like this would
seem strange; "For what is," says he, "all the commerce among mankind
but one continued masquerade, a mere stage-play, where everyone
endeavours to conceal his natural face under some borrowed vizor, the
most likely to promote his views in life. The wickedest would be
thought honest in some degree, and others would appear more wicked
than they really are, but none of us just what we are; yet we think
ourselves not a jot the less virtuous for appearing in disguise. All
our aims are like those of persons at masquerade, though we cannot
deny we are changed from our real appearance, yet we endeavour to
conceal our natural selves till we get home amongst our friends and
intimates, where we unmask with freedom, and laugh at those on whom we
have imposed with our borrowed dress. This is just my case in the
great masquerade of life: my habit is that of the people called
Quakers, which serves to promote the main concern of life, getting
money. I wear the outside all day, and perhaps practise as much of the
real virtues of which the plainness and simplicity of our dress and
style, are designed as a type; but when I meet with a man like
Vilario, who can make allowances for human frailties, and understands
so much of the world, that rigid virtue is not to be expected from
mortal flesh and blood, I lay aside the disguise as useless, and
appear in my natural shape, which I hope is no more deformed than that
of other men, and take it up again when I go abroad among the vulgar;
who always judge by appearances, however absurd they may be."

Camillo would have excused Mr. Tipple this long lecture in praise of
hypocrisy, since he thought every word lost, and every minute an age,
which was not employed in the mighty affair of love. Vilario saw his
impatience, and candidly opened the state of the case to Obadiah, who
observed by the by, that all men, if they had opportunity, would be
hypocrites, and that every man is so with regard to religion, some
time or other, when it makes for the gratification of the governing
passion. "I doubt not," added he, "but Camillo, for the sake of his
new mistress, would, if left to himself, turn Quaker, Mahometan, or
anything to enjoy her; but I believe I can help him to an opportunity
of addressing the young lady, without running any risks; for I am in
some measure related to her mother, and much in her esteem and
confidence. I will invite her and her daughter to dine with me some
day this week, and shall give you notice of it, that you may be there
as by accident. This overture gave Camillo new life, and he was urgent
that the day should be fixed; but Obadiah, who knew he was steered by
a female compass, whose motions are always uncertain, told him that
could not be done; however, that it should be as speedily as possible.

This important point settled, they drank a cheerful glass without
excess; and parted mutually pleased with one another; for besides the
obligation Obadiah was about to lay upon Camillo, he found him when
divested of the stiffness of his religious dress, very facetious
company, and the more so that every word he uttered the least
bordering upon wit, appeared more entertaining, as it was so much in
contrast to his Quaker character, on which his whole behaviour seemed
a continued satire.



Chapter VII.

Two or three days passed away without any news from Obadiah, which
seemed so many centuries to our impatient lover; at last he received a
note from the faithful Mr. Tipple, desiring Vilario, with his friend
Camilo, to pass by his house on the morrow, precisely at three
o'clock, when he would be at the window, and call them up, as by
accident. The needle could not be more true to the pole, than Camillo
was to the appointed time, and Obadiah saw them from his window, and
sent down a servant to acquaint Vilario he wanted to speak with him.
They obeyed the summons, and were conducted upstairs into a spacious
dining-room, where Obadiah and his guests the fair Saphira and her
mother, were ready to sit down to dinner: the hypocritical Quaker made
no bones of telling a lie to serve his friend, and told Vilario he had
some business to impart to him, which obliged him to take the liberty
of calling him up, but hoped he might have the pleasure of his company
at dinner, after which he would let him know the affair that had
induced him to make so free with him. Vilario and Camillo made some
pretended excuses of being otherwise engaged, but allowed Obadiah's
entreaties to prevail on them to stay. He told his friend Sarah,
Saphira's mother, that these were two honest gentlemen for whom he had
a particular esteem, and she would find their conversation not
disagreeable; friend Sarah told Obadiah she had seen his friends
before at the Alderman's, and found they were very civil persons,
though, added she, for my child's sake, whose young mind might be
tainted with be vanities of the world, I could wish she should be as
little in company as possible with any but Friends. Dinner was
immediately served up, and the good-natured Obadiah purposely turned
the discourse in spite of the old lady, to such subjects, as gave the
young people an opportunity of bearing a share in the conversation, by
which means Camillo's esteem for his mistress increased, and now and
then he took occasion to express himself in such terms as might
confirm the idea the young lady must before have conceived of his
having really contracted a passion for her. At last they talked of
flowers, and Obadiah took an opportunity to mention a small collection
he had in a garden near Islington, and to put Sarah and her fair
daughter in mind that they had often expressed a desire to see them:
that now the weather was tempting, and he would, if they pleased, go
with them that evening. Sarah, who began to be uneasy in the company
of sinners, made some demur at going, but Saphira modestly expressing
a desire to see the flowers, of which she was very fond, the whole
company became so importunate, that her mother, without downright
rudeness, could not avoid complying. They soon arrived at the little
pleasure garden, which was laid out with a great deal of neatness and
art, and stored with some very curious flowers and shrubs, both
domestic and exotic. Obadiah carried them round it at their first
entrance, to give them a general view, and after a collation of tea
and sweetmeats, which he had ordered to be prepared in the summer
house, they went to take a more particular view of the garden; he
himself kept Sister Sarah in chat, while Camillo handed Saphira to the
several plots, Vilario keeping at a small distance, to give him an 
opportunity of declaring himself. Camillo commended the nicety of Mr.
Tipple's taste, and broke out into this exclamation, "How charmingly
fragrant is the smell of these flowers! How does the infinite variety
of their shades and blooming colours delight the eye, and fill the
heart with joy, and adoration of that infinite cause, who commands the
seasons, and gives being to so many agreeable objects, to make this
earthly pilgrimage less irksome to us mortals! What pity is it,
Saphira, that this blooming rose, and that gay tulip should fade so
soon! Today they flourish and scent the air with their aromatic
odours, but to-morrow they wither and dwindle into dust, and are no
more." "That, friend," replied Saphira, "is the most useful effect of
this beautiful part of the creation; this reads us a lesson of
morality, and continually hints to us the nature of our own existence
here; a subject we are very unwilling to enter upon, however conducive
to our happiness both here and hereafter." "Right, my fair moralist,"
returned Camillo, "all nature is but one continued memento mori, and
from every plant and inanimate thing, we may learn to employ our time,
and not lose the few precious moments with which we are blessed. As
these flowers, my Saphira, put us in mind that we are to die, so they
teach us how to live; they improve all their time to the proper
purposes, and waste none of it in vain formalities. See the blushing
rose, it wraps its tender bloom in downy folds, till it is visited by
the vernal sun; then it expands its self with open arms, and yields
without coy resistance to the warm embrace of its genial beams. The
sunflower, instead of running from the arms of its enamoured lover,
meets him half way, and courts the enlivening gleam. They seem
conscious that their moments are few, and therefore fill up their
scanty span with a full draught of what their nature is adapted to.
But we, poor deluded mortals, like forward children, shun that which
most we want, till time has chilled our vital heat, and soured our
remaining cup with bitterness and disappointment. Woman, the most
beautiful of nature's flowers, is the most recreant to her laws, and
starves with cold and unnecessary forms, that divine flame her
beauteous system was designed to kindle. You have, Saphira, thrown off
all the other follies of your sex, throw off, my angel, this also, and
permit me, without being offended, to make you the proffer of a heart
charmed with your unfading beauties, a slave to your virtue, a willing
victim to the excellence of your mind: speak, my fair one, and speak
me into life or death, for on your sentence my destiny depends." "God
forbid," replied the blushing maid," that either death or life should
depend upon my words; no, these you owe to a higher power, whose
majesty you profane by attributing such power to his creatures. But he
will forgive you, as they are only words expressed by habit and
custom, without any idea suitable to their natural import. I am
unacquainted, friend Camillo, with the modes of love practised by
other women, but be assured, that my lips shall always on that, and
every other subject, correspond with my heart, and when my duty and
inclination prompts me to love, I shall never be ashamed to own it;
and to show thee that I deal sincerely with thee, I own I find no
antipathy to thy person, on the contrary, a hearty desire to wish thee
well: further place than that thou, nor no man else shall ever get in
my affections, without the approbation of my mother, who I know would
not favour any address from one whose manner of education has been so
different to that the has brought me up in."By this time this same
mother, in spite of all that friend Obadiah could do, joined her
daughter, whom she would not part with for the rest of the evening.

From a mistress of a common character, such a favourable reception
might have been explained almost into an entire conquest, but the
temper and sedate manner with which she delivered his sentence, filled
Camillo with a thousand inquietudes, and almost threw him into
despair, till Vilario, who had heard all that passed, and judged all
women to be no better than hypocrites, gave him some courage, by
explaining her words according to his general prepossessions against
the whole sex. They left the garden in a short time, and the gentlemen
saw the ladies home, but were not invited in: however, friend Sarah
told Obadiah at parting, that she hoped he would, dine with her on
Monday next; he accepted the invitation, and without hesitation said
he would take the liberty to bring his two friends with him. At this
she hid her vexation as well as she could, but it was visible that
overture was by no means agreeable to her, though she could not help
saying, that he, and any friends he brought with him, should be
welcome.

They adjourned from thence to the tavern, where they held a council
upon the affair of Camillo's love, and concluded, that no female
fortress was impregnable, if attacked with skill, and vigour; but they
could not come to a resolution whether they should proceed by way of
siege, blockade, sap, or storm, till they had another parley with the
governess.

On Monday morning they met at the good-natured Obadiah's, and laid a
plan for another excursion, that Camillo might have the better
opportunity of entertaining his mistress out of the hearing of that
watchful dragon the mother. But when they came to Sarah's house, they
found all their schemes abortive; for Saphira, on being taxed by her
mother on the subject of her conversation in the garden with Camillo,
had confessed the whole truth, which convinced the old Argus, that
Obadiah's invitation was a design to favour that gentleman's
pretensions, which she, with all the obstinacy of sixty-five, was
determined to oppose. To this purpose, though she had provided a very
elegant entertainment for Obadiah and his friends, yet she kept out of
sight the best part of it; for she ordered Saphira keep her chamber on
pretence of a slight indisposition. This was an unspeakable baulk to
Camillo and his companions, who hearing that she was not to favour
them with her company, looked so confounded at the unexpected blow,
that it more confirmed the old woman in her suspicion of their design.
She entertained them with abundance of formal good manners, but every
one wished the dinner over, that they might have the liberty to vent
their resentment against old Sarah.

After dinner they adjourned to a neighbouring tavern; but had only
just turned the corner of the street, when a girl, dressed after the
Quaker's fashion, stopped Camillo, slipped a letter into his hand, and
vanished like lightning, without waiting for an answer. He no sooner
touched the paper, but a sudden transport seized his heart, he was
ready to run mad with joy, for his mind presaged from the looks of the
Mercury, that this epistle could come front nobody else but his
beloved Saphira. He showed the sacred scroll to his companions; and if
he had not been in the street, would have devoured it with kisses. As
he had fallen behind when the girl delivered it, they were ignorant of
the means how he came by it, and lugged him into the tavern before
they could get him out of his rapturous ecstasy. They immediately
called for a private room, where he had time and opportunity to unseal
the mysterious oracle. He frequently attempted to break it open, but
forbore it lest the contents should awaken him from his fool's
paradise; nay, he would rather suppose the contents of it to be all
love and ecstasy, than suffer himself to be disappointed by the
reality. At last curiosity, and their teasing, prevailed on him to
open it: he first read it to himself, and smothered the much loved
subscription with a thousand kisses, for it was really from Saphira,
and ran thus:
"Friend Camillo,
I am so much a stranger to the way of the world, that I know not
how far I am answerable for writing to thee; but however I may
transgress the bounds of settled modes and fashionable forms, I
know I act consistent with truth, when I assure thee that I
unwillingly complied with my mother's commands in refraining to
bear you company at dinner. I acquainted her with the
declaration thou madest me in the garden: she chid me for the
answer I made thee, and charged me to give thee no manner of
encouragement, but to look upon thee as one laying a snare for
my innocence. The first part of her injunctions, I can and will
comply with, but I cannot be so uncharitable as to fall in with
her opinion in the latter, and as a testimony of my sincerity in
both, I take this means to acquaint thee, that thy suit to me is
in vain, since I am already as good as disposed of to thy
kinsman the Alderman, a match my mother told me she had
concluded for me, as most suitable to my interest, and with
which my duty obliges me to comply, without consulting my own
inclinations, which, as far as I can hitherto judge, are still
indifferent, in that respect, to all mankind. My opinion of thy
sincerity, and regard to justice prompts me to give thee this
information, that thou mayest in time banish a fruitless
passion, that if continued, may involve thee in some
misunderstanding with thy kinsman, and perhaps, disturb the
peace of thy friend
SAPHIRA."

The contents of this letter, at the same time that it cast a damp on
the excessive raptures into which the receipt of it had raised
Camillo, gave him fresh cause to admire the virtue and prudence of the
charming Saphira. Yet while it gave him great reason to despair of
succeeding in his designs upon that lady, the ingenuity and good-
nature which discovered itself in that letter, made him regret most
sensibly the loss of one so capable of giving him the highest
satisfaction. If he was before all ecstasy, he now sunk into the other
extreme, and bewailed by turns his bad fortune in the most pathetic
manner, and cursed friend Sarah, the cause of his disappointment, with
the bitterest execrations. His friends endeavoured to pacify him, but
in vain, they were obliged to allow his passion to vent itself for
some time, till a sullen calm ensued; then Obadiah read him a lecture
on patience, and assured him he had no cause to be so mightily in the
dumps, from the contents of that letter; for that, according to his
notion of the sex, there was nothing in it but what ought to encourage
his hopes. Then he begun to comment upon the billet, and made it
appear as plain as a pike-staff, that Saphira loved him, though she
hardly knew it herself, and he was so dull of apprehension not to
perceive the apparent symptoms. "Does not she," says he, "tell thee,
that it was unwillingly she complied with her mother's commands in not
bearing us company at dinner? Does not she confess she has a good.
opinion of thy sincerity; and that has no inclination for the old
Alderman? She tells thee all this under a pretence of great charity,
and with a prodigious air of sincerity; but I tell thee it's all
grimace: she loves, but does not own it, even to herself; she leaves
thee to explain the oracle, and this letter, at which thou art so much
frighted, is only to incite thee to relieve her from the embraces of
thy rival, whom it is impossible she should love or submit to but with
reluctance. Can a maid of seventeen with a handsome person, and no
despicable fortune, be fond of sixty-eight? No; I tell thee it is a
mere contradiction; pursue her, and make her acquainted with her own
sentiments, and of the difference between a vigorous young fellow, and
old age, impotence, and avarice. We must find out this she-mercury,
and a thousand to one, but she clears up all doubts, and restores thee
to thy senses."

They all agreed, that there were some grounds for Obadiah's
conjecture, and that if the maid who delivered the letter could be
come at, half the difficulty would be over. Camillo had but a confused
idea of the girl, she parted with him so quickly: all he could
remember, was, that she had on a Quaker coloured stuff, or camlet
gown, which it is possible might be the dress of all the maid-servants
in the family. However, with this small light, Obadiah promised to
find her out; he went immediately back to the house, under pretence of
having left a pair of gloves behind him, which he sought for in the
apartments they had been in, but to no purpose, and a girl he
suspected to be the party he wanted, opening the door for him at
coming out, he whispered her to follow him to the tavern, where she
came almost as soon as he. It happened to be the same girl, who told
them, what a deal of mischief their conversation in the garden had
made; that the old gentlewoman had lectured her daughter most terribly
about it, and prohibited her ever seeing or holding the least
correspondence with Camillo, which she said Saphira took much to
heart; for ever since that night, she had done nothing but talk of
him, both sleeping and waking; "yea truly I believe," Says she,
addressing herself to Camillo, "thou hast bewitched my young mistress,
for I never have seen such an alteration in my life; she talks so
strangely, since she has become acquainted with thee, that she is
verily become another creature, and, thinks the old Alderman she is
going to be married to, whom she formerly liked passing well, such a
hideous ugly old fellow, that sure it would pity my heart to see them
wedded together; but our mistress is obstinate, and must have her
will, unless thou hast the ingenuity to find out some way to get into
her good graces, and supplant the Alderman, as they call him; but I
must run home again, for if my mistress should know that I saw thee,
and spoke with thee, she would make the house too hot for us all.
However, I will tell Saphira, and we shall have a long preaching about
thee before we go to bed." She was going on in this chat, when Obadiah
interrupting her, said to her, "Look thee, thou wouldst do an act of
great charity, if thou wouldst become an advocate for this young man
to thy mistress Saphira. It is not meet that one so young as she
should marry an old man; a young one is much fitter for her purpose,
for verily nothing comes of these ill-matched marriages, but strife,
contempt, and a continual warfare between the flesh and the spirit;
the flesh must be gratified, and by it the sprit profiteth, and there
is hopes of fructifying when youth is joined to youth. Therefore it is
our duty to prevent Saphira from falling into the snare which our
friend Sarah is so weak to lay for her; do thou then help this pious
young man to the speech of Saphira, he will reward thee here, and thou
wilt be rewarded hereafter for promoting the interest of the Saints by
multiplying the number." "Truly, replied she, "thou speakest what is
right and just, for I feel in myself an inward loathing of these
marriages between youth and old age; and the young man has the marks
of grace in his countenance; verily I shall serve him all I can, and
the Lord will sanctify my endeavours with success."

Camillo tipped her a couple of pieces, and begged of her to tarry till
he wrote a line or two in answer to that one delivered. This he
finished immediately, the contents being as follows;
"My adorable Saphira,
What language can I find to express the situation of my heart?
At one time I am filled with the warmest sentiments of gratitude
for your favouring me with a line from your dear hand; and, at
other times, I could wish you had not been so cruelly kind,
since it served only to increase my distress, and lead me to the
utmost limit of despair, when you pronounce the fatal sentence,
that as your mamma has concluded a match for you, you are
resolved, without paying any deference to your own inclinations,
to sacrifice your person to your duty. Cruel Saphira! Could you
have any notion of my sincerity, and not reflect that such a
declaration was sufficient to stop the springs of life, and
overwhelm me with the most agonizing pain. You desire me to put
a stop to a fruitless passion; but why, my fair one is it
fruitless? You owned, your charming lips uttered the dear kind
expression, that you had no prejudice to my person, that you had
no prepossession in favour of any other. Why then cease my
endeavours to warm you into love, and tune your tender soul into
union with mine? Can duty persuade you to wed with old age, or
espouse the man, who, if not odious, is at least indifferent to
you? No; duty requires no such sacrifice; and nature, and
justice forbid the unhallowed rites! Such a union is prohibited
in heaven, and abhorred on earth. Think, my Saphira, before it
is too late, how miserable you make yourself by such a forced
compliance; it is that must disturb your future peace, rob you
of all joy here, and interrupt the paths of bliss. Permit me, my
angel, to love you, to endeavour to kindle in your soul the
glorious spark that holds all nature together, without which
this universe would fall into a heap of jarring atoms; let me
but have an opportunity to see you before you tie the fatal
knot, if not for my peace, at least for your own; but be
assured, whatever may be your resolution, mine is fixed to love
you while I have life, which must have a very short period, if
anyone can call you his, but
Your affectionate lover,
And most devoted humble servant,
CAMILLO."

This letter, approved of by his two counsellors, Camillo delivered to
the maid: but before she departed, they concerted measures for their
future correspondence, and as his lodgings were at too great a
distance for the maid to come to so often as in might be necessary,
Camillo took others at a house she directed him to, the back part of
which joined to Sarah's, though it entered another street.

That very night Camillo moved his camp, and took up his head-quarters
at his new lodgings. Towards the evening of the next day, which
appeared to the impatient lover twice as long as the famous day of
Joshua<21>; Rebecca, for that was the name of this pious emissary,
appeared, to give new life to his drooping spirits.

She said to him, "Verily, friend Camillo, I have laboured much, and
been sore afflicted in spirit on thy account: but as I am moved with
an inward regard for thy welfare, I thought nothing too much for thee,
as I expect thou wilt soon leave thy vanity, and become as one of us,
truly thy letter has moved thy friend Saphira exceedingly, and I
firmly believe she would willingly become the wife of thy bosom, but
that the fear of her mother is before her eyes, and that she trembleth
in spirit when she thinks of disobeying her commands. However, I have
set before her the goodly appearance of thy person, and the vigour of
thy youth, which when she compareth with the age and many infirmities
of thy kinsman, it disturbeth her mind, and staggereth the resolutions
of her duty; but verily I had forgot that she has wrote thee her mind
in this paper, to which thou may'st return an answer to-morrow
morning, which I will call for when my mistress is gone to the
meeting, to which I shall persuade Saphira not to accompany her." The
impatient Camillo, unable to bear any longer with her tedious
narrative, snatched the letter out of her hand, paid the portage
generously, and was glad she went away with little ceremony, that he
might peruse his epistle; which ran thus,
"Friend Camillo,
Why should thou disturb the peace of an innocent person, and
endeavour to pervert my steps from the paths of my duty. Before
I saw thee, I was undisturbed in mind, and indifferent as to my
lot in this life; but thou hast changed the whole system of my
thoughts, and produced a dreadful war in my mind, between new-
born inclinations, unknown infant desires, and the obedience I
owe to a parent; till now, my own cares, which were few, were
all that employed my meditations, but thou hast cunningly warped
thy interest with my peace, in spite of my resolutions, and the
remonstrances of my mother. But what availeth this confession,
if thou canst take pleasure in making thy friend partner in thy
uneasiness, without hopes of relief? For though my inclinations
were never so strong, yet through grace I will sacrifice them to
my duty, and suffer everything rather than disobey her. Desist
therefore, friend, to ensnare my affections, since without the
consent of my mother, I can never be thine:
I am thy friend,
SAPHIRA."

Camillo, on reading this letter, cried out in raptures, "She loves!
She confesses it, the dear lovely angel acknowledges the power of
mighty love! I have got the better of her professed indifference: the
next step must be to conquer her foolish resolutions, which can be but 
weakly supported, when they combat a woman's warm inclination. She is
mine, Vilario, and we shall laugh at that curmudgeon the Alderman.
What a ridiculous figure will he make, when he is baulked of his
designs upon this young creature. But what shall I do to get to speak
to her? If cold unanimated writing could banish her indifference, sure
the eloquence of words, lip, eyes, prayers, vows, warm embraces, and
short breathed sighs, must melt her into compliance. Oh the nameless
transporting ecstasy; thus to fold her to my warm bosom, to see her
panting, blushing, sighing, dying! The very thought transports me
beyond mortal imagination." "Yes," replied Vilario, "and beyond mortal
apprehension too: sure like St. Paul you are got up to the third
heaven, and must have a prick in the flesh, and a messenger of Satan
sent to buffet and bring you to your senses again. Do you consider
that you are going to pull an old house on your head? If you proceed,
you make the Alderman your mortal enemy, and then farewell your hopes
of his money: besides, he writes to your father, who right or wrong
subscribes to his opinion, sends you packing to France, discards me
for being privy to your designs, and saddles you with some sour ill-
natured pedagogue, who because he is not fit for this world himself,
believes you capable of turning Stoic, and living up to the musty
morals of Seneca, without the smallest grain of allowance for youth or
human frailty; all this must happen as sure as you live, if you
pretend to oppose the Alderman's marriage. If you proceed wisely, you
may have your ends of Saphira, which I suppose amount to no more than
a night's lodging or so, and that the old man may spare you without
being the worse for it: but if you pretend to monopolize this bit
entirely to yourself, one word of his blows up your plot in a trice,
and try then if you can think of blushing, panting, dying, sighing,
and so forth. No, my dear, you, must come a peg lower, and do nothing
at present but keep her inclinations awake till the citizen has fairly
wedded her, and then his fumbling raises a Devil, which you must be at
hand to lay. This is your scheme; if you sail beyond this latitude,
you must ride the storm without a pilot, for I will have no hand in
the matter."

If Camillo was before in raptures, he was now as much in the dumps,
and plainly perceived his tutor was in the right; but he could not
with any degree of patience think of the Alderman's wedding her,
though he had no inclination to put on the yoke himself; he proposed a
thousand frivolous objections to what Vilario had advanced, but they
were so weak, they appeared as the result of his passion and
obstinacy, rather than his reason. However, they came to a compromise,
that Camillo was to oppose but faintly her design of accepting of the
citizen, but if he found an opportunity, he was left at liberty to tip
him the favour of cuckoldom before marriage, and save the old man the
labour of getting her maidenhead. And to this effect, he resolved to
try all means to come to an interview, which he hoped to compass by
the means of his faithful agent Rebecca, for whose coming he prepared
the following letter to Saphira.
"My Angel,
With what rapturous pleasure did I read the transporting lines,
which confessed I had conquered your indifference, and made a
party in your heart. But, my adorable, the blessing, like all
those we enjoy on earth, came seasoned with bitterness and
anguish. How can I bear to think, that you, who have confessed I
have an interest in your affection, should become the property
of another, and that those dear charms, which are only mine,
should be rifled by one who knows not their infinite value, who
is incapable of tasting those unspeakable transports my fair can
communicate to another. But if you are resolved to make that
cruel sacrifice to duty, let me have one opportunity to bid an
eternal adieu to those joys, for whose sake alone I would live.
Sure, niggard duty cannot refuse this poor request, to take my
last farewell, or hear your enchanting lips pronounce the
parting sentence, Farewell, for ever: as that must bring death,
I would choose to receive the blow immediately from you, and not
by second hand. My life, Rebecca will contrive some means for
our meeting, with which I conjure you to comply, as you value
the peace and happiness of
your constant, though
unhappy admirer,
CAMILLO."

Rebecca came, and brought him tidings that the Alderman had been there
the night before, and had met with but a cold reception from Saphira,
who, though she could not absolutely reject his proposal, yet was
obstinate in delaying the nuptials for a few days, which he would have
consummated instantly; and desired, that if he had anything to offer
that could help her out of her anxiety in which she was, that now was
the time. Camillo told her, he had wrote to her to beg a meeting,
which he hoped she would persuade her to yield to and gave her the
letter. Rebecca promised to do her utmost, but came back in the
afternoon, telling him absolutely, that she could not prevail on
Saphira.

They were now at their last shift, as nothing could be done
effectually by the distant method of negotiating. They thought of
several stratagems, but something always appeared impracticable in
them, without the assistance of the lady herself, whose consent they
despaired of obtaining. At last, as female invention is always best,
especially where intrigue is going forward, Rebecca thought of an
expedient, which carried in it the face of probability. As the two
houses joined by the back, they had both formerly been in the
possession of one family; and there still remained a communication
between them, by doors through the dressing-rooms of all the
apartments, which were only nailed up. Rebecca knew this, and that the
door through Saphira's dressing-room, where she lay, was so lightly
made up, that she had frequently pushed it open to converse with the
maid of that family, before Camillo came to lodge there. She
acquainted Camillo with this circumstance, saying, verily friend I
take thee to be a sober person, and that thou art not so wicked as to
think of offering the least indecency or violence to my mistress, but
that thou meanest honestly to take her for the wife of thy bosom
before the congregation. Therefore I will conduct thee through that
door into Saphira's bedchamber, when all the family is at rest, when
thou mayst have an opportunity to push her home, and oblige her to
yield to the inward dictates of her natural spirit, which is
exceedingly desirous of communion with thee. When I have left you
together, I shall return to my own bed, where if aught that is evil
happeneth, the sin be upon thine own head; for verily I mean
righteously. Camillo asked her if she would communicate this project
to Saphira, but she told him it would be better not, lest she should
be obstinate, and not consent to her own good; and that if she should
chide for a little, yet her wrath would be soon over, especially if he
prevailed. Camillo, overjoyed at so near a prospect of happiness,
doubled the ordinary gratuity to the kind messenger, and dismissed her
to be ready at the appointed hour.



Chapter VIII.

He went immediately up to the chamber through which he was to pass,
which was that where his footman lay, and observed that the door into
the next dressing-room was so slightly fastened, that it might indeed
be very easily opened. About twelve at night, when all in both
families were at rest, except the actors in the drama: Camillo
undressed himself, all but his slippers, and his night-gown loosely
wrapped about him, and sat in his servant's room watching the
appointed sign; which was at last given. He opened the doors gently,
and the kind Rebecca, shrouded only with her smock, handed him to the
door of Saphira's bedchamber; and left him to make the attack himself.
The nymph was asleep, with a watch-light burning by her; he stepped
softly till he came to the bed-side; while every limb and joint
trembled with the bare imagination of the approaching scene. But who
can describe the bewitching view that then opened to his enamoured
eyes. Saphira lay with her head carelessly reclining on one arm, her
face covered with a glowing blush and every feature fashioned into an
agreeable smile, which alone was sufficient to animate the most
impotent mortal; but the lower region would have given life to
Prometheus's man of clay, and saved him the trouble of stealing fire
from heaven, for her snowy bosom appeared in full view; the bed-
clothes, as conspiring to bless the happy lover, left the nymph quite
naked, even her shift furled itself up above her middle, and unveiled
the sacred territories of mysterious love. Her ivory limbs lay
negligently extended, as unwilling to bar the gates of bliss; but,
that imagination might have room to play, and the raptured swain
something more to wish for than what he saw, her right hand was just
placed upon the confines of the fount of love, and shrouded that which
is better felt than seen. Camillo stopped and gazed, and wished the
beauteous scene might last for ever. The luscious attitude in which
all these charms were seen, set imagination wild, and sent thrilling
pleasure through every part: but the innocence and awful virtue that
smiled in her countenance, gave a check to the looser appetite; for a
moment calmed the sensual rake, and inspired him with such sentiments
of honour and virtue, that he was almost about to retire, as not
daring to violate her chaste repose, lest her guardian angel should
strike him dead for the horrid sacrilege. But these pious thoughts
were but short lived; they soon vanished, and gave place to the
natural impulse of flesh and blood. But to do him justice, the
temptation was indeed strong; for just when he was in the struggle
between love and restraint, Saphira began to breathe short, and her
limbs to quiver, as if in some agony, which added new beauties to her
former posture; for the removed her hands from their first station,
and seemed to hug something between them with extreme eagerness, and
at last, in a kind of murmuring ecstasy cried out, "My soul, my life,
my Camillo, you ruin me; but you have charmed me to such a height, I
must yield to my undoing, ohCamillo!" and then let fall her arms on
each side. Nor Camillo, nor any flesh or blood could longer stand it.
He leaped into her bosom and grasped her with eager transport, saying,
"I am here my charmer, I am blessed in your arms, happy beyond the
thoughts of mortal man." The first surprise tied up her utterance, and
deprived her of all sense of what he said; but when she could speak,
she shrieked out loud enough to have awakened those in the next house,
and struggled to get from his arms. He tried all in his power to
pacify her, but her cries were so loud, they alarmed the house, and
Rebecca came running in to tell them her mistress was coming up
stairs, and pulled Camillo hastily into another room, and shut the
door upon him; from whence she had but just returned when Sarah came
in to see what was the matter, Rebecca, who had more of her wits about
her than Saphira, though much frighted, answered her mistress before
the other had time to form an excuse; that Saphira had been frighted
in her dream, and had shrieked so, that it waked her, thinking
something strange had been the matter with her. Saphira took the hint,
and told her mother very gravely, that she had dreamed, that an ugly
great bear was tearing her to pieces; that she waked with the torture
she thought he put her to, and the impression was so strong upon her,
that it was some moments after Rebecca came into the room, before she
could be persuaded that it was a dream. "Verily child," says Sarah,
"thou hast eaten too heavy a supper, and the fumes of it oppress thy
spirits; I'll get thee some surfeit-water<22>, and thou wilt be well
again after thou hast slept." She ran down immediately and brought the
cordial, which she really stood in need of; for besides the former
fright she was in, she now recollected how much danger she had exposed
Camillo to by her outcries, the very thoughts of which crowding at
once upon her spirits, rendered her scarce able to speak. However, the
surfeit-water relieved her, and her mother left her to her repose. She
then chid Rebecca severely for her imprudence in letting Camillo in to
her chamber, which the girl excused herself for, by urging, that truly
the young man meant her no harm, but was willing to have an
opportunity to persuade her to listen to her own good. "And now,"
added she, "as thy surprise is over, th'hadst best permit me to call
him in; thou mayst profit by his counsel; verily, if thou hadst eyes
to see how comely he looks, and with what eagerness he would press
thee to his bosom, thou wouldst be angry at thyself for having
frighted him away." "Away, girl," replied Saphira, "thou art naughty
and impure in thy imagination; thou madst me guilty of a sin, in
telling my mother a lie, but if thou any more mentionest his name, or
presume to give him admittance into my apartment, I shall reveal the
whole truth: get thee gone, and let him out by the way he came in. But
hold, what shall I do, he must pass through the chamber, and I cannot
bear to see him; he has discovered my nakedness when asleep.oh! I
shall sink for shame as often as I reflect upon it." "Nay then," said
Rebecca, "if I must not let him out, he must stay in the house till
day-light, and then all the family will see him, and the tongues of
the wicked will be let loose against thy reputation: I would advise
thee to let him pass now, and only bid him farewell before he depart,
never to trouble thee more." Saphira was a long time perplexed what
course to take. But at last she consented that he should pass, though
on condition that he should not approach the bed, the curtains of
which she ordered to be drawn. Rebecca brought him again to the
charge, and retired to her rest as before, leaving upon him the
scandal of breach of capitulation<23>, of which he was not over
scrupulous; for he gently put back the curtain, and bending one knee
to the ground, conjured her to lay aside her fears, as he had no
design upon her virtue; begged of her in the name of love, to permit
him to breathe out his soul at her feet, and convince her with how
pure and ardent a flame he adored her; and so much adored, that he
would use none of those precious moments to promote his own interest
in her breast, but to persuade her, purely for her own sake, not to
throw herself away upon a doting old man; which however, if she
should, and, if his absence would make her happy, he would banish
himself for ever from her presence, though his death would inevitably
follow. This he uttered in so moving a strain, that Saphira could not
see him in that agony of mind, without offering some relief. She
stretched out her hand to point to a chair, that he might sit down,
which he greedily snatched to his lips, and sealed with a thousand
glowing kisses. Then seating himself on the bed-side, and looking
wistfully at her, "Can you, my charming Saphira", said he, "keep me at
such an awful distance, when you see the purity of my sentiments? Can
you imagine that I can think I have the least interest in your heart,
when you so easily sacrifice me to an imaginary duty; and likewise
treat me with so little tenderness, when this may be the last time we
shall ever meet." "Oh Camillo!" replied the nymph, in a tone of
softness, "what wouldst thou have me to do for thee? How do thy words
pierce my heart, and how vain are all the resolutions I had formed
against thee? I should chide thee for this rude intrusion on my
privacy and the little delicacy and regard thou expressedest for my
good report, in practising upon a mercenary wretch, to aid thee in
ruining my fame. But I cannot form my words in anger against thee; I
own the pleasure I take in hearing thee, though at the expense of my
reputation. Cease then to complain; if thou art unhappy, I am more so:
for relentless duty binds me for ever to the man I hate, while my soul
is full of thy image. But thou mayst range in quest of another, and
lose the remembrance of me in the chaste endearment of some more
fortunate maid." "This is impossible, my charming Saphira," replied
he, throwing himself by her and snatching her to his bosom, "all the 
charms of the whole sex united are insufficient to efface thy dear
idea from my remembrance; no, I can taste no happiness without thee,
especially when I reflect, that this delicate person, these fine
limbs, formed for love and tender dalliance, must submit to the
loathed embraces of withered old age, and become the property of a
wretch, whom indeed thou canst not but hate and despise! Heavens! The
very thought distracts me! Must such a dotard rifle all thy lovely
sweets, and hoard up a treasure nature has denied him the ability of
enjoying!" While he spoke, he overwhelmed her with amorous embraces,
and his licentious fingers wandered over all that tempting scene his
eyes had feasted on but some minutes before. The nymph would have chid
him for his boldness, but he stifled her complaints with kisses, and
held her so close that she had no power to hinder him from using his
hands as he pleased. One liberty begat another, till both were in a
blaze, and reason was no longer able to stem the torrent of impetuous
desire. He was even proceeding to the last mysterious ceremony of
love, and ready prepared to launch into the sacred zone, when a sudden
noise in the room alarmed them both, and recalled the yielding maid to
thoughts of honour and virtue. Camillo, who was as much alarmed as
she, started out of bed to examine into the noise he heard, which
proved to be only Rebecca, who, it seems, willing to be acquainted
with what passed between the lovers, had stolen softly into the room
to listen. She stood at the foot of the bed, and heard all the first
part of their conversation pretty distinctly; but when they came to be
more warmly engaged, she heard nothing but short. breathing sighs, and
a rustling and tumbling in the bed; which made her fancy they were
about to begin the old trade of basket-making; and being willing to
see a scene so uncommon, went stealing about to one side of the bed,
where the curtains were not drawn; when stumbling over something that
stood in her way, she fell violently against a table, which she
overturned; the noise of which alarmed the lovers, spoiled their
sport, and once more brought the old woman upstairs. They heard her
rattling up, and Camillo had only time to escape through the dressing-
room before she was at the door. Rebecca laid the blame of this
accident upon the cat; and Saphira was so much in confusion and so
frighted, that she could give no account of the matter; so that the
old woman, fancying some ghost or evil spirit haunted the room, made
Saphira get up, and become her bedfellow for that night. Camillo
waited some time in the dressingroom, till he heard his mistress was
to be removed, and then having no further business there, nor any
inclination to encounter Rebecca, whom he heartily cursed for her
curiosity, that had disappointed him in the critical minute, he
vanished by the way that he came, and went to bed, horridly vexed that
he had been wound up to such a pitch, without any kind She at hand to
allay the fever in his blood.

Next morning he ordered his servant to watch for Rebecca, and bring
her to him as soon as she came abroad. It was near twelve before he
could get sight of her, and then she had only time to tell him, that
he was to be admitted next night to consult with his mistress how to
break off the match with the Alderman, for that she was now bent upon
disobedience. At the hour appointed, Rebecca met him in the dressing
room, and told him that Saphira had altered her mind, and would not
consent to see him; and had obliged her to lie with her that night;
but that she would put out the candle when she was ready to go to bed,
and when he should observe the room dark, he should immediately come
in and take her place. He hugged her for her invention, and almost
forgave her for her last night's disappointment. She parted with him
to put Saphira to bed, and gave him the signal to come in, by putting
out the light. He groped to that side of the bed where Rebecca had
directed him, lay down without any interruption, and by degrees crept
close to the nymph, but was afraid of discovering himself, for fear of
her making a noise. But he had no occasion for that caution, for she
turned to him and by accident threw one of her legs over his. This set
him so much on fire, that he could contain no longer, but grasped her
close in his arms, and without speaking, but in soft murmuring sighs,
used all the freedom could wish, and finding so small resistance in
the prelude, he made a bold push at the fort, which received his fire
without flinching. The first ecstasy over, the reader may believe
there could be no great difficulty in repeating the essay, till they
were both cloyed. Camillo was charmed beyond expression, with the soft
melting tenderness of his mistress; but was surprised that during two
or three rencounters, and their intervals, she never uttered one word,
though there was no more danger of being overheard this night than the
night before. He asked her, why so silent, why did she not bless him
with the sound of her voice. "Has love charmed away the utterance, are
his ecstasies so strong, my fair one, that you cannot find words to
call me yours? Or do you grudge me the pleasure of hearing you confess
that you love, and that you partake of that mighty joy, which absorbs
all my faculties?" "Verily, friend Camillo," replied the nymph, in a
laughing tone, "thou art deceived, for it is not Saphira thou hast
caressed, but thy handmaid Rebecca. I guessed thou wert lewdly given,
and had a design upon the body of my mistress, and therefore put
myself in her place, that I might divert thee from thy purposes; but
truly thy evil spirit hath got the better of mine, and thou hast made 
me even as one of the wicked." Camillo, stung to the quick, that he
had been so lavish of himself on such a creature, whose very idea
chilled his vigour<24> (for she had something very forbidding in her
countenance, and nothing but youth to recommend her) was going to
bounce from the bed, and leave her with a curse; but she caught fast
hold of him, begged him to be patient, and since they had time, and he
could reason calmly, consult about the affairs of Saphira's marriage,
which must be in two days, if not prevented. He, on second thoughts,
judging, it would not now be proper to disoblige her, pretended to be
pacified for the disappointment; but for his blood could not bring
himself to another charge, though not much exhausted; the idea of her
face was so strong in his mind, he could not conquer his aversion so
far as to do her the favour in her own proper person. She told him
Saphira would have kept her appointment, but her Mamma would not part
with her that night, and therefore she had ordered her to tell him,
that she would be advised by him; how to proceed with regard to the
Alderman. Camillo was embarrassed for an answer, since he had resolved
not to oppose the Alderman's marriage, especially at the expense of
taking the conjugal vows himself; but judging that it would be
difficult for the young lady to see him, and that the marriage might
be consummated before a meeting could be effected, he told Rebecca
that it was impossible to consult measures for their mutual interest
without an interview, which he left to her to bring about as soon as
possible. This affair being settled, he forced himself to give her a
warm hug, and retired to his own chamber much chagrined at the trick
that had been put upon him, and the little hopes he saw of enjoying
Saphira, without the previous Bill of Church-Benediction.

Next day Rebecca came to him and acquainted him, that she and Saphira
would come to his chamber through the dressing-room about five o'clock
in the afternoon: but Rebecca begged of him to mention nothing of what
had passed the night before. He promised he would not, and waited
impatiently for the appointed hour. At last they came, and Camillo
desired Rebecca to remain in the dressing-room, to give them
intelligence if any danger was near. Thus he saw himself again alone
with the charming Saphira, whose short breathings; frequent blushings,
and trembling accents, convinced him that the idea of those ravishing
moments they just passed together, was still fresh in her memory. He
sat down by her on a couch in the room, pressed her tenderly to his
bosom, and wiped the pearly drops from her eyes, which unwilling burst
from her, and made her look like the sun in an April morning. He
begged of her to tell him the cause of her present grief, and why she
seemed so much overwhelmed with sorrow; while he encircled her in his
arms, and his soul breathed nothing but love and tenderness. "Ah,
Camillo! cried the lovely girl, what cause have I not for sorrow, when
I have discovered to thee the weakness of my soul, and that I am so
bewitched to that affection with which thou. hast inspired me, that
regardless of my virgin fame, and the repeated warnings of a fond
mother, I have gone great lengths beyond my sex's modesty, and met
thee when alone in thy own apartment, for no other purpose but to have
the pleasure of telling thee how wretched thou hast made me; for, oh
my friend, we must never meet again: to-morrow's dawn puts an
everlasting period to all our fond hopes, and binds me to woe and
misery. I have no longer respite from endless wretchedness than this
night, which will be but too, too soon at an end. Alas! What malicious
star brought me first acquainted with thee? till then my hours ran on
in careless indolence, and my hopes were equal to my circumstances; I
knew no happiness greater than my duty, and I obeyed without
reluctance; but thou hast given me a glimpse of joy, to which my soul
was utterly a stranger, and taught me to regret the loss, when 'tis
out of my power to"Here the emotion she was in stopped her
expression, and Camillo, melted into extreme tenderness at her soft
complainings, compassionately mingled his tears with hers, while he
sipped in the balmy dew as it fell from her charming eyes. She
permitted him to press her panting snowy bosom, and returned his kind
embraces with undissembled warmth, which raised such ecstasy in both,
that they fell over upon the couch, in a posture fit for love's last
sacrifice, without either's knowing what they did. But Camillo soon
perceived the advantage he had over her, and was resolved not to lose
so fair an opportunity of reaping the first fruits of those joys which
were so shortly to become the property of the fumbling, insufficient
old Alderman; and he was once more arrived on the confines of amorous
bliss, when Rebecca came running in out of breath, to tell them that
her mistress had called twice for Saphira, and would certainly come up
if she did not instantly go down. The posture Rebecca found them in,
made them both look exceedingly foolish; however, they were not at
much pains to explain the matter to her, and Saphira left him hastily,
promising that she would endeavour to see him once more, before she
gave her hand to the odious Alderman. Rebecca would not stay behind,
well knowing Camillo owed her no good will for thus traversing his
measures; for in fact, her mistress's calling was only a pretext to
disappoint their happiness: for she had peeped through a crevice all
the while, seen all that passed, and rushed in with that pretence,
when she saw matters coming to a conclusion, as she could not bear to
see all that happiness communicated to another, which she had
experienced herself the night before, when she personated Saphira. In
about an hour after, she returned with an account that Saphira would
come to the same chamber, when all the family was at rest, and desired
him to be there to receive her, but without light. Camillo dissembled
his chagrin, and paid her handsomely for her intelligence; but when
she was gone, began coolly to consider her message, especially the
circumstance of being without light. He recollected the trick, that
had been put upon him before in the dark, and was resolved not to
spend his ammunition to so little purpose a second time.

He went to bed in that chamber about the time appointed, and put out
the light, depending on his feeling for discovering the cheat, if any
was intended. He had not been in bed many minutes, when the pass-door
opened, and Rebecca, for it was no other than she, came to the bed-
side; he put out his arms to receive her, and found a person in her
shift, which convinced him it was not Saphira; for he concluded, from
the whole tenor of that lady's deportment, that she had not yet got so
far the better of her modesty, as to come to him in that dishabille;
however, he permitted her to come to bed, and felt her hand, (to
assure him in his conjecture before he uttered a word) which finding a
little too robust and hard for a woman of Saphira's delicacy, without
any seeming emotion says, "Rebecca, what message has the charming
Saphira sent me? Am I to be admitted to her, or has she changed her
mind?" "Why," replied Rebecca, "what hast thou to do, friend; with
Saphira? She is the betrothed wife of thy kinsman; verily, it is a sin
for thee to tempt her weakness, and I am now come to offer thee advice
to let her alone. Truly thou must conquer the flesh, and let it not
get the better of thy reason." Camillo knew she had an approved recipe
for the conquest of the flesh; but not being disposed to follow her
prescription, he was so enraged to be thus trifled with, when his
desires were wound up to their highest pitch, by his expectation of
Saphira, that he could not even dissemble complaisance, but, in a
passion, desired her to let him immediately know what message she
brought from her mistress, or he would call up his footman, and order
him to duck her in the neighbouring horse-pond. Frightened with the
violent tone in which he expressed the menace, she begged him to be
patient, and she would conduct him to Saphira, who lay in her own
chamber expecting him; he made her no reply but bounced out of bed to
follow her, she went in through the pass-door before him pretty
nimbly, and pulled it after her, and was endeavouring to fasten it on
the inside, but he proved too strong for her, burst it open, and
catching fast hold of her, swore bloodily he would strangle her if she
spoke one word. She promised to be calm, and permitted him to pass
through the room, into Saphira's bedchamber, where he found her all in
tears, bemoaning the misfortunes of the ensuing day. The first moments
were spent in silent rapturous embraces, in which they both indulged
themselves without reserve, and which served as a prelude to more
substantial delights; for Camillo was resolved to husband the precious
moments, least some new disappointment should, rob him of his bliss.
He artfully fanned the virgin's flame by warm caresses and wanton
dalliance, without seeming to point at the main object of his wishes;
and when he had raised her to the height of expiring ecstasy, he
nimbly sprung upon the throne of love, and rushed into her virgin
zone, before she could imagine the enemy was so near her quarters.
Then, finding it too late to offer at resistance, she met his amorous
efforts with equal ardour, and suffered herself to dissolve in balmy
bliss.

But, when waking from the delicious trance, she faintly cried out; "Ah
Camillo! thou hast undone me, robbed me of my virgin innocence, and
left me nothing but shame and dishonour, for the vast stock of love my
soul had in store for thee;" then clasping him wildly in her arms,
"restore me," added she, "thou dear ravisher, what thou hast stolen
from me." "Yes," replied the vigorous swain, "I will restore it thee,
my charmer, but it shall be in the same form I received it: we will
repeat our joys so often, that you shall confess you have laid out
your stock of love to great advantage, on one, who has no other aim
but to restore the mighty blessing tenfold. Let us love now, careless
of to-morrow, and prolong the happy night, by filling up every
fleeting minute with some new scene of joy." Saphira, by this time
more knowing, grew less reluctant, and met his second fire with equal
ardour. But the violence of their appetite subsiding, reason began to
flow in apace, and Saphira to think seriously on the false step she
had taken: she burst into a flood of tears, with which she bathed
Camillo's bosom, saying, "Good God! What have I done? my faith is
pledged to one I hate, and my honour is sacrificed to another whom I
love. Shall I bring pollution to the marriage-bed? No! I'll die first,
I'll share my fate with thee Camillo, wander with thee over the wide
world, and seek no happiness but thy love. Wilt thou wed me, and
restore me once more to the paths of virtue, that I may honestly and
avowedly call thee mine: speak, and make me happy! Why now so silent?
When a continuance of our mutual happiness is the theme?" Camillo, who
was not fully prepared for this kind of explanation, was much at a
loss what reply to make; for now that he had reaped the fruit, he
could find little or no difference, in reflecting upon the mere act,
between this he had been in such a mighty bustle about, and the more
accessible Rebecca, whom he could now heartily have forgiven for
another interruption to relieve him out of his present perplexity. He
had such an aversion to matrimony, that the very thoughts of it, at
any time, reduced him to a state of anility<25>. He endeavoured to put
her off with telling her, that the present minutes were not to be
spent in fruitless cares about futurity; their business was love,
which would be propitious to itself, and find out means to continue
their bliss. Then stifling a reply with kisses, he would have put her
past her present thoughts, by a repetition of former joys. But
Saphira, though young and unexperienced in the ways of men, had
penetration enough to see through his evasion, and flung herself from
his arms, saying, "No, Camillo, thou hast awakened my virtue by the
evasive answer thou hast now made me, and shalt not again triumph over
my weakness, till thou hast given me an explicit answer to what I ask;
for though, having been once thine, I scorn to be, nay dare not be
another's, yet, I had rather perish in the most wretched manner, than
continue thy prostitute. I have now discovered the baseness of thy
soul; thou appearedst first to me in an angel's form, thy looks, thy
words, and all thy actions bespoke thee pure as virgin wishes: hence
thou wast enabled to ensnare my unguarded affections, and lull the
guardians of my honour into a fatal security; but thou hast now
unmasked thyself: the fiend, the lustful ravisher appears through the
disguise, and thy soul stands naked before me in its natural baseness
and deformity." Then sinking into a less passionate tone, "Or is it,
thou dear deceiver, to try me, that thou puts on this air of coldness?
Oh, say it is, that I may not burst with grief; put on again the
lovely vizor, and deceive me as thou didst before; blind me with
passion, and shroud me from reflection, lest I go mad with thinking
what a wretch thou hast made me. But what do I say? wretched I cannot
be, if thou lov'st me, and wilt but promise to be mine for ever, by
the sacred ties of marriage?" "I will be thine, my Saphira," replied
Camillo; "I will be thine alone" "But wilt thou confirm it publicly?"
returned the other impatiently"Why so importunate," interrupted he,
"about a trifling ceremony, especially to-night, which may be much
better employed""Away deceiver," returned the unhappy Saphira, "false
dissembling monster! I see thy design, thou hast indeed drawn me into
thy snare, but if there is justice above, my curses shall dash thy
future days with sorrow. Nay, thy own conscience will be thy
tormentor, and I shall be amply revenged by the hourly upbraiding with
which it shall embitter all thy pleasure. But, wretch that I am, what
will become of me? My curses recoil on my own head, and I feel already
those pangs, thy too hardened heart is an utter stranger to. Oh!
Miserable woman, betrayed, lost, abandoned to the scorn of the wise,
the laughter of fools; and without one glimpse of inward peace. Oh
Virtue! How ineffable art thou? But a few minutes ago, I was happy in
thy possession, blessed with innocence and peace; now all pollution,
rage, madness and despair." She spoke the last words with such
violence, and her heart was so full, that her utterance failed her,
and choked with passion, she fixed her eyes on Camillo, mixed with
rage and languor, and sunk into a swoon.

Camillo, alarmed at the condition he saw her, in, chafed her temples
with his hand, and did all in his power to bring her to herself; but
finding it in vain, he jumped out of bed, and called in Rebecca to
assist him. She desired him to retire, that she might call for more
proper help. Though his good nature would have prompted him to stay
and see her recover, yet believing it no mortal fit, he was glad of
that opportunity of getting rid of her clamour, and marched off to
bed.

He was no sooner out of the room, then Rebecca finding Saphira
continued still insensible, formed a resolution the most wicked she
could contrive to be revenged on Camillo for the disappointment he had
given her, and the indignity he had offered to her charms, by obliging
her to quit his bed without performing those rites she expected from
him. She tore off her mistress's cap, and disordered her hair, and in
that condition, opened the bedchamber door, and bawled out murder as
loud as she could. Her clamour raised the whole Family, and brought
them to the chamber. The servants were the first that entered, before
whom she behaved like a creature bereft of her senses, howling,
shrieking, and wringing her hinds, and, as if unable to utter the
cause of her grief, pointed to the bed where Saphira lay, in a
condition apt enough to move pity, without the preparation of the
frantic behaviour of this diabolical woman. At last Sarah came into
the room, frighted out of her wits, and asked the cause of all that
outcry. The wicked Rebecca then found her tongue, but in broken
accents, such as, "Oh we are all undonethe chaste Saphiraisoh she
is ravished by a base villain, there the poor sufferer lies expiring
by his brutal violence. The fond mother ran to her daughter, bathed
her with her tears, and endeavoured to wake her from her trance, by
the most moving exclamations. Cordials were applied, but all in vain,
and the whole family seemed distracted, not knowing how to behave; but
Rebecca uttered her complaints with more vehemence than any; and when
she had exhausted her spirits with her noisy grief, a silent scene of
mournful sorrow succeeded. She took that opportunity to tell them,
that a person from the next house, whom she had seen dine with her
mistress some days ago, had that night forced open the door in the
dressing-room, rushed in upon her when in bed, put a gag in her mouth,
and forced his way into Saphira's bedchamber, where he acted the base
deed. That when he saw her almost expiring, he left the chamber, took
the gag from her mouth as he passed, and vanished, the same way that
he came, into his apartment. While she uttered the last part of this
malicious speech, Saphira recovered her spirits, and heard her; on
which, fixing her lovely eyes in a ghastly manner on Rebecca, she
could only utter with a piteous groan, "Ah wretch! what have I done
that thou shouldst thus"then sunk into her former swoon, which was
soon followed by convulsions. The broken sentence Saphira had uttered,
with the look it was accompanied with to Rebecca, puzzled all present,
and made them believe there was some mystery in the matter, which none
but Saphira could unriddle. The mother, with some impatience, asked
Rebecca if she was sure any violence had been offered her daughter? To
which the crafty wench replied, "I was not present, but could hear
through the wainscot, that something very uncommon was transacting
within; but I believe," added she, "the villain has left his marks
behind him, which may leave you no doubt of the misfortune." The
mother, though overwhelmed with the most poignant grief at the
melancholy situation of her child, was yet willing to satisfy herself
of the depth of her misfortune before she would call in the assistance
of physicians, lest she might imprudently hurt her reputation without
just foundation. She ordered such of the men-servants as were in the
room to retire, and with the women examined the body of the half-dead
Saphira, for such signs and tokens of ravished virginity, as her
experience taught her to expect on such occasions; and to her
unspeakable sorrow found them indeed there. This, joined to the tale
of the maid, put the matter beyond all dispute; and now the old lady
seeing her daughter's reputation lost beyond redemption, and her life
in great danger by the violence of her convulsions, made a truce with
unavailing sorrow, and bravely resolved to use her reason only to
preserve the one, and revenge the other. She, in the first place,
ordered that all her doors should be locked, that none of her servants
might get out to alarm the ravisher, but such whose fidelity she could
trust to. She sent one for the next physician, and another for a
constable, who proved to be a sensible man; to whom she related the
tragical story. This night-magistrate, on being shown the door through
which the ravisher had passed, made no scruple to enter in with a
party of his myrmidons, and seized Camillo in his bed, who had no
apprehension of such an unseasonable disturbance; for the solicitude
which had perplexed him for several days and nights, and kept him from
rest, being now abated, he was in a sound sleep when he was awaked by
the noise the constable and watch made on entering his apartment. He
was exceedingly amazed when he saw such odd company about him, but
thunder-struck when Mr. Constable told him he was his prisoner for a
rape; after a considerable pause, he had scarce the power to ask on
whom, and at whose suit? When he was acquainted that it was on the
score of Saphira, he grew a little more assured, at conscious of his
innocence in that respect, and hastily demanded if that lady had
charged him with so black a crime? No, replied the surly Magistrate,
the condition you left her in, put it out of her power to charge you
with anything, but the fact is alleged by the mother, on the
information of the young lady's maid. Camillo immediately saw through
the malice of this vile woman, and had so much regard for the
reputation of Saphira, that he would not utter one word in his own
justification; but said "Mr. Constable, I cannot blame you for doing
your duty, and I must trust in providence, and my own innocence, to
baffle the wicked attempts of that base strumpet." He then immediately
got up, and dressed himself as quick as possible, with no signs of
guilt or emotion in his countenance or behaviour. In the meantime, his
footman and Vilario entered the chamber, and were amazed to hear the
charge. Vilario did not know but the fact might really be as it was
represented, and was confirmed in that opinion by Camillo's silence,
which he construed into a confession. He had been gone to bed before
Camillo came in, and had not heard anything of what had happened, so
that he was in the utmost perplexity how to behave, partly on
Camillo's account, but more especially on his own; because he knew
that part of the reflection would light on him. At last he slunk out
of the room, with a resolution to go to the Alderman, as if knowing
nothing of the last part of the disaster, and inform him, as far as he
knew, of the affair, that when it became public, he might have it to
say, that he did all in his power to prevent such a misfortune. But
the footman, who loved his master from more generous motives than this
selfish tutor, and besides, by his being up to put his master to bed
when he returned from Saphira's chamber and heard from him the whole
affair, as it really happened, was impatient to relate the fact to the
constable, thinking by that means to release his master: but just as
he was about to speak, Camillo checked him, saying, Frank, I see your
good will, but I charge you not to utter one syllable without my
orders; I have my reasons, and on your obedience depends something
more valuable to me than my life. By this time he was dressed, and a
coach being called, he was carried off. But we must leave him for some
minutes, and return to Saphira.

This unhappy lady continued in a state of insensibility for near
twelve hours, with few intervals; and when she was able to speak, her
senses seemed to be distracted. She raved incessantly, sometimes
calling on Camillo in the most moving, tender and passionate accents;
mentioning him by all the endearing epithets her bewildered fancy
could invent, and talking to him as present; at other times loading
him with the heaviest reproaches, and exclaiming against him as the
violator of her peace and honour. All the powers of medicine were
tried to allay the fever in her blood, and calm the tempest in her
mind; but all in vain. At last, one of the servants came abruptly into
the room, and told Sarah, in her daughter's presence, that she was
required to appear immediately before the magistrate, to prefer her
charge against Camillo. On hearing this, Saphira grew calm, and in one
moment recovered all her faculties. Fetching a deep sigh, she cried,
"Rebecca has undone me, and would also load me with the guilt of
innocent blood;" then desiring all to leave the room, but her mother,
and a near kinswoman of hers, she related every circumstance that had
passed between her and Camillo, and as far as she knew, the part
Rebecca had acted in the affair, without concealing any circumstance
that might tend to clear that gentleman's innocence as to a rape, or
endeavouring to palliate her own weakness; and in the end, she
conjured her Mother, as she valued her eternal peace, to go and
release him, that she might not go down to the grave loaded with his
blood, which she saw, for what reason she could not comprehend,
Rebecca thirsted after. She had no sooner paid this than she fell her
former agonies and ravings, and continued in this melancholy condition
for several hours after.

The mother was by no means softened by her daughter's confession of
the truth; for though she saw that Camillo was more innocent than had
been suggested by Rebecca, yet she was resolved to be revenged on him
at all events whatever, and determined to make use of Rebecca's
evidence against him, and to conceal her daughter's justification of
him, which was known only to herself and her kinswoman: with this
design, but without communicating it; she left her daughter in charge
with her relation, with direction not to mention a word of what had
passed to any of the family, nor give Saphira an opportunity, if she
came to herself, to repeat it, for, says she, though we must acquit
this young rake, yet it is but reasonable to frighten him a little.

She and Rebecca immediately set out, and sent word to the constable to
meet them with his prisoner at Guildhall. When they came before the
sitting Alderman, Rebecca gave in her information very
circumstantially, as to the entrance into the chamber, and what she
pretended to have heard afterwards, and the mother corroborated what
she said, by the circumstances she had discovered on inspection of the
body of the young lady. Camillo made no defence, but appealed to
heaven, that every word Rebecca had said was false in every
circumstance, and observed, that it was now no time to make a defence 
against their express affirmations, which he was informed the law (in
complaisance to the Quakers) would look upon as real affidavits; so
that all he at present desired, was only to know if Saphira was
concerned in the charge? The old lady was puzzled at this question,
and endeavoured to evade answering it, by saying, that Saphira had
been ever since out of her senses, and talked in such manner, as
nobody could make sense of what she said. The Justice would have had
her be more explicit in her answer, but no more could be got from her,
which made every one present, who till now were prepossessed in favour
of the plaintiff, suspect that there must be some mystery in the
affair, which none but the young lady herself could explain, and
determined the Magistrate to act very cautiously in so nice a point,
wherein the life and reputation of a gentleman of distinction were at
stake: for several people of fashion, his relations and acquaintance,
whom his footman had alarmed, came to give him a character, but none
of them were able to say anything that could cast any light on the
present affair with which he was charged. Being asked again and again,
if he had anything to offer in his own behalf, which might prevent his
being committed, or any way invalidate the testimony of his accuser;
he said, that whatever defence he had to make he would reserve to a
more proper occasion; in the meantime, his worship was at liberty to
act from the evidence that lay before him. Hereupon the Justice was
about to commit him to Newgate, when the Constable told him, that he
believed the gentleman's footman, who was in court, could say
something in his master's justification, if he was permitted; for that
he at first offered, in his master's chamber, with much assurance, to
clear up the whole matter, but his master charged him to be silent.
Upon this the footman was called, and asked if he knew anything of the
rape, with which his master was charged? He replied, he knew his
honoured master was innocent, and that bitch Rebecca perjured; but
that he durst not explain particulars without his master's consent,
who had commanded him to the contrary; and that he thought it his duty
to obey, as he was ignorant of the motives which induced him to enjoin
so unaccountable a silence. Every one present was surprized that a
gentleman would permit himself to lie under the imputation of so
atrocious a crime, as a rape upon the person of a young lady of virtue
and some distinction, if he had it in his power to clear himself; but
he declared, that till that lady appeared against him, he was
determined to be silent, and trust the event to providence, contenting
himself at present with the testimony of a conscience clear, at least,
from that horrid fact. As he remained obstinate, all that could be
done, was to commit him to the Compter till further examination,
hoping that the lady might recover, and help to clear their doubts.

Sarah and her maid being returned home, found Saphira much worse than
when they left her, and that the physicians began to despair of her
life. However, when she had pretty well recovered her Senses, her
fever abated, and all the signs of health that could be expected,
after so violent a shock returned: she had found herself in this
condition but a few minutes, when she asked her mother if she had
acquitted Camillo, to which she returned an equivocal answers. But
Saphira told her, that she believed she had but a little time to live,
and therefore would be extremely glad to see him. Her mother fell into
a passion at the proposal, and would by no means consent to it, which
exasperated the other so much, that she told her, she never would
forgive her, if she denied this her last dying request; but the old
woman was invincibly obstinate, and could not be prevailed on, either
by the tears of Saphira, or the joint entreaties of her woman, who
really believed Camillo had been discharged. When Saphira found that
nothing could persuade her mother to comply with her desire of seeing
Camillo, she requested that an attorney might be sent for, that she
might settle her fortune, and then prepare to make her peace with
heaven. The mother, who had no suspicion of what she intended, was not
averse to that measure, and sent for an old limb of the law of her
acquaintance, for whom Saphira had expressed a more than ordinary
esteem. When he came, she desired to be left alone with him, and when
the company was retired, she observed to him that she had not only
sent for him as a lawyer, but as a friend to advise with; "you have,
no doubt," added she, "heard of my misfortune?" He told her he had
indeed heard it, and was sorry that so great a villain could be found
among men, as her ravisher appeared to be. Upon this Saphira took him
up short, and acquainted him with the whole affair, which she put in
the most favourable light for Camillo, of whom she gave a most amiable
character, declaring, at the same time, that she attributed all her
illness to her resenting too quickly his refusal to marry her at the
Quaker's Meeting. "I had no reason," continued she, "to expect that a
man, bred up as he is, would fall in all at once with my manner of
thinking, which was all he refused to gratify me in, for I firmly
believe his original intention was to deal honourably by me, though
upon calm reflection, I could not so severely blame him for
entertaining contrary notions, after the sacrifice I freely made him;
few young men have the generosity to attribute a compliance of that
nature, to excess of affection; they generally ascribe it either to
levity of temper, or the predominance of a gross appetite, and either
of these are strong objections against entering into an alliance for
life with such a woman, as I believe Camillo loved me sincerely, and
would have made me his wife, at least, that he intended as much, till
my own imprudence gave him just cause to reject me; and as I yielded
to his desires, as looking upon him in conscience as my husband, so I
intend to leave him what I must leave to someone, and what, if the
ceremony had passed, he had enjoyed as his legal right."

The attorney was truly an honest man, compassionate in his temper, and
much moved by the unbounded generosity, and noble sentiments of
Saphira. He approved of her design, and drew up the will after the
manner she desired, and with all the speed and secrecy she could wish.
Saphira executed and delivered it into his custody, to keep for
Camillo whom she desired him to find out, and acquit her to him of the
affront that had been put upon him: But charged him not to mention one
word of the will. He left the room, and in going downstairs, was met
by Sarah's kinswoman who told him of the desire Saphira had expressed
to see Camillo, and how her mother opposed it; and hinted as much as
if they did not mean fair things to that gentleman, whom she
understood they still detained in custody, though Saphira had so
fairly acquitted him. The lawyer was surprized at the double dealing
of the mother, and went directly to the Compter, to wait on Camillo.
When he came in to him, and acquainted him that he came from Saphira,
Camillo received him with open arms, and as much joy as if a messenger
had come from heaven. But when Mr. D acquainted him with the many
generous and tender things that lovely maid had said of him, though he
had been the means of robbing her both of life and reputation, his
soul was filled with remorse, and the most lively compunction. A
thousand times he cursed his unruly passion, and the guilty joys,
which had ruined so much innocence; but at last, rousing himself from
his depth of sorrow, added, what is done, cannot be undone; but what
reparation a man of honour can make, I will make her. Get me, sir, but
out of this place, where the malice of her mother, and that execrable
fiend Rebecca keeps me, and lead me to the lovely mourner, and if
possible, I will charm her back again to life and love, and by a
sacred union make her happy yet. The honest attorney applauded his
generous return to virtue, and assured him that he would immediately
take measures for his release. He then returned back to Sarah's house,
and called for Mrs. Arabella, the relation who spoke to him when he
went from thence, and prevailed with her to go with him to the
Alderman who committed Camillo, before whom they deposed the substance
of what Saphira had confessed, and as a further proof, produced her
will; which fully convinced that Magistrate of the malice of Sarah's
proceedings, and immediately gave orders for Camillo's enlargement,
and a warrant for the commitment of Rebecca for wilful perjury. He
would have made free in the same manner with Sarah, but the lawyer
desired to be excused from concerning himself in that matter, because
it would be an odd prelude to the marriage he intended to bring about
between Saphira and Camillo. Mrs. Arabella went home with instructions
to prepare Saphira for a sight of Camillo, without communicating any
part of their transactions to the mother, and the lawyer went to the
Compter to free Camillo, who hardly wished for liberty upon any other
score, but as it enabled him to do justice to that generous maid. He
ran with all the eagerness of unpalled desire, and owned a thousand
times afterwards, that he felt more real pleasure in the bare
reflection that he was about to do a just and virtuous action, than
ever he experienced in the most intoxicating moments of guilty joy.

Mrs. Arabella had acquainted Saphira that he was at liberty, without
the knowledge or consent of her mother, and that he and Mr. D the
lawyer, by whose means he had been set at liberty, would shortly be
with her. On this she felt a new dawn of joy seize her, which proved
almost too strong for her exhausted spirits: she got up, and dressed
herself in a loose dishabille to receive him. Her Mother, on coming
into the room, and finding her up, was overjoyed, but fell into a
violent passion, when her daughter told her, that she was sorry she
had countenanced that perjured wretch Rebecca, in blasting the
character of the innocent Camillo, whom she expected every moment,
notwithstanding the wicked arts of that creature to ruin his and her
reputation. Sarah hereupon loaded them both with the most odious
epithets which, though they shocked the good-natured Saphira, yet had
this happy effect, to enable her to support the excessive joy of
seeing him enter the room, for the compunction she felt for having
given but too just cause for an indulgent and fond parent to be angry
with her, balanced the satisfaction she felt from a lover she once
thought lost to her, and kept her soul in a kind of equilibrio between 
joy and grief, either of which alone, especially the first, would have
been apt to have discomposed her whole frame. Camillo, regardless of
the ravings of the mother, whose passion on seeing him was immoderate,
ran to his charmer, and embraced her with unfeigned ecstasy, uttering
at the same time the most tender, soft and obliging expressions, his
heart over-flowing with all that love and gratitude could dictate.
Saphira returned the fond embrace, and spoke her sentiments in the
moving eloquence of a languishing eye; the emotion of her mind on this
occasion, was too big for utterance; words could not convey any idea
of her transports, and when she was able to speak, it was only in soft
murmurs."Am I again happy before I die," said she, "Has not my folly
cooled thy affection? Ah! Camillo I scarce deserve thy esteem, much
less thy love, since have been so lavish of my all, that I have
nothing left for thee to ask, or myself to grant; but I see thou
pitiest me, and that is all I ought to desire while I live, and that
thou vouchsafe a tear to the memory of one, who died because she loved
thee too much." "Speak not of Death, my charming angel," replied
Camillo, "We have many years of happy love, and joys unmixed with
guilty reflections yet in store. Calm, thou idol of my soul, thy mind
to its wonted tranquillity; think no more of what is past, for every
moment I expect a priest, who can make us one by lawful wedlock, by
which we shall stop the malice of envious tongues, and hoard up a
treasure of endless joys to ourselves; for thou hast yet a paradise of
untasted, unrifled pleasures, to bestow on one whose love is now
refined from the base dross with which it was at first allayed, and
whose soul breathes nothing but that purer flame, which may warm even
the breast of a seraph." He uttered these words with such a lively
emphasis, that Saphira had no room to doubt his sincerity; even the
flinty hearted Sarah was moved with his generous passion, rose from
her seat, and, in her way, bestowed her benediction on the happy pair,
as they sat encircled in each other's arms. But, alas! Saphira's joys
came too quick upon her: the assurance of her lover's fidelity, and
the blessing and forgiveness of an enraged parent, were too much for
her to bear: she sunk, with the excess of joy, her lovely head into
Camillo's bosom, and had only power to say, "I am too happy! Heaven"
and in a few moments expired in his arms.



Chapter IX.

To those who are acquainted with the emotions of the soul, in such
uncommon and interesting emergencies, to describe the grief, the
despair that possessed the wretched Camillo, when he saw the idol of
his eyes breathless before him, is needless: and minds that are not
framed in such a mould, would think it impertinent. Therefore I leave
the first to measure the anguish of every person present, by supposing
himself in similar circumstances, the only method I can convey to him
any idea of that poignant sorrow which overwhelmed them all; and the
last, either to laugh or cry, just as he finds himself in disposition,
from the effect the narrative has had upon him; but though one would
think, that Camillo needed no new motive to augment his grief, yet he
had very near fallen a sacrifice to despair, when Mr. D the
attorney, presented him with the will of the deceased, letting him
know that as she had left him all, it was his business to look after
the funeral. The idea of so much generosity, at a time when he had
given her cause to hate him, by treating her honest proposal of
marriage with such mean evasions, covered him with so much shame, and
remorse, while it heightened the transcendent merit of the undone
Saphira, lost to fame, life, and honour, by his maltreatment of her,
that he ran frantic about the room, threw himself on the dead body,
pressed the yet warm clay to his bosom, spoke to it in raptures, as if
it still had life, and at last, if he had not been held, had certainly
laid violent hands upon himself.

Mr. D had him carried to his lodgings, and took upon himself the
ordering of the funeral, which was performed with as much decency and
privacy as possible in about three days: in which time Camillo's grief
had subsided into a calm settled sorrow, without those violent
agitations which discovered themselves on the first approach of that
passion. In this condition, he was visited, the day after the funeral,
by his father, his relation the Alderman, and Vilario. At sight of the
two first, whom he had so much offended, Camillo was a little choked,
but the kind father soon relieved him from that embarrassment, by
telling him, that he and his kinsman were not come to chide him, but
to condole with him on the loss of Saphira, whose character and
behaviour towards him, he had been made acquainted with, and to advise
him not to allow that unhappy affair to lie to heavy on his spirits,
nor to be too severe upon himself, in reflecting upon any inadvertency
he might have been drawn into by the heat of youthful blood. If, says
he, you make a proper use of the train of accidents to which your
first engagements with that lady has drawn you, you may learn a lesson
of wisdom, which may lead you through the several stages of life with
pleasure, and sweeten the approach of old age; on the contrary, if you
neglect to make the plain and obvious reflections, which result from
the tragical story, every circumstance in it must serve to embitter
all your future enjoyments, and render the thoughts of grey hairs and
death insupportable. This, my son, is the last time that ever I shall
mention the affair to you, unless your future conduct gives me room to
think that you make a bad return to that providence, to which alone
you are indebted for your life and reputation; whatever share my
kinsman has suffered in the fatal catastrophe, I am convinced he feels
more for you, and will contribute all in his power to make you forget
every dark circumstance attending it; and in order that objects may
not keep up an ungrateful remembrance of what is best forgot, I
purpose you shall forthwith set out on your travels with your governor
Vilario, with whose conduct in this affair I am perfectly satisfied,
since he had the wisdom and care to inform my kinsman as soon as he
foresaw any danger from your conduct, and came down post to me, as
soon as you were taken into custody.

Camillo was overjoyed to have so easy a come-off with his father and
the Alderman, as from both of them, especially the latter, he expected
nothing but the keenest resentment. He was well enough pleased to
leave London, but had no mind on to enter his travels; he had rather
an inclination to indulge his melancholy, by returning into the 
country for a few weeks; but his father would not humour him in that
manner; He endeavoured all he could to divert him, and ordered Vilario
to carry him into such company as was by degrees might dissipate the
gloomy melancholy turn he had taken. All his acquaintance exerted
themselves on this occasion, and he was obliged in good manners, to
countenance in some measure their endeavours, and thank them for their
intentions; but inwardly he repined at the force they put upon his
inclinations, fretted at the restraint he was in while in their
company, and was more pleased when he could indulge a tear in private,
or speak his sorrows in heavy sighs and heart-piercing groans, than he
used to be in the enjoyment of the gayest pleasures of the senses<26>.

His friends obliged him to pass a few weeks in this manner, in hopes
that his sorrow would abate, by the company he was continually in, and
the round of diversions in which he was, in spite of himself, engaged;
but his father observing little or no alteration in him from these
means, ordered him to set out on his travels and to take the way of
Holland, where he had some relations settled at Amsterdam, with whom
he was directed to stay for some months, and then to proceed for
France. He was obliged to submit, and went over in a vessel belonging
to the Alderman, and arrived at Amsterdam, in the latter end of March.
He had been there but a few days ere the many new objects he
continually met with, had banished, in a great measure, that
melancholy, which had seized him on the death of Saphira: he now began
to relish company, and such diversions as that city afforded, and
assumed in a little time his former gaiety of disposition. As love was
his predominant passion, that first returned to its wonted empire, and
he no longer repined for breathless beauty, but entertained thoughts
of solacing himself with the warmer charms of some living Fair, and
laid himself out to gratify an appetite, which the long Lent his grief
had obliged him to keep, rendered very importunate.

As he did not understand the language of the country, so he had no
great opportunity of entering into any polite intrigue; and therefore
he laid out for a mere woman, of any rank, to answer his necessities,
resolved to take up with the first he could purchase, for love or
money, as the popular phrase is. As he lodged at the house of one of
his Dutch relations, where he had no opportunity to refresh himself at
home, his inclinations were consequently sent abroad. He had heard of
the music-houses in that city, and felt a curiosity to visit them.
This he proposed to Vilario, who cautioned him against venturing
amongst them, as strangers had frequently been ill used in those
temples of pleasure. This rather increased the curiosity of Camillo
than deterred him, for he was naturally bent upon everything, in which
he was opposed, and he took it in his head, one evening to give
Vilario and his servants the slip, and went by himself to that quarter
of the city where the stews were then tolerated. He had scarce entered
their precincts, when he was hailed by a female from one of these
houses; by her dress and carriage he was in doubt what she was, and of
the nature of the house to which she invited him. However he complied
with her request, and followed her into the house, where he saw a
great number of Dutch women dancing with their gallants, in a large
room pretty well illuminated, to a kind of music which had more of
noise than harmony. However, the company footed away to the notes in
their heads, without much minding the stops in the music. Camillo,
sharp set as a sailor just landed from an East-India voyage, would
have excused himself any prelude to the main affair, and was
immediately for retiring with his frau; but he must first be
introduced to the company, and initiated into their mysteries, by
drinking plentifully of flip<27>, and what other liquor this seraglio
afforded. As he was soon discovered to be a stranger, they determined
to make the most of him and called, at his expense, for what they
pleased, and obliged him to drink so many bumpers, that he almost
forgot the business he came upon, and grew as frolicsome as the best
of them.

The master of the house led him into a more private apartment; and
told him, that if he did not like the frau who brought him in, he
might have his choice of a dozen more, who would present themselves
before him: and without waiting for his answer, called in a great many
of all sizes, dresses and complexions. Camillo could have put up with
any one of them, and would not have been much at a loss in his choice,
but they took it into their heads to differ amongst themselves about
the preference, and almost smothered him with their caresses, and
deafened him with their clamours. At last, one proposed an expedient
which would end all their disputes, viz. That they should all strip
naked, divest themselves of their borrowed ornaments, and allow the
gentleman to determine the prize of beauty, as Paris did among the
contending goddesses. This overture, which had been previously
concerted, was agreed to with this amendment, viz. that Camillo should
likewise undress, to be ready for the rencounter. Accordingly, about a
dozen of them stripped naked as they were born, and Camillo being
likewise disrobed, they gave him an apple in his hand, placed him in
the middle among them, and joining hands, danced in a ring about him,
directing him to give the apple to the happy she whom he most
favoured. Camillo liked the novelty of the frolic, and to prolong it,
was some time as if in doubt where to bestow the prize, and the girls
put themselves into all the antic postures they could, as if to engage
his attention. He was just about to make his election, when the
landlord came running into the room, put out the lights, desiring them
all to shift for themselves, for the magistrates were in the house,
with intent to fend every soul of them to the rasp-house<28>. The
girls on this alarm, which was all pretence, crowded towards a back
door which opened from the apartment they were in, and naked as they
were, hurried Camillo in the midst of them out of it, and so through a
long dark passage with several windings, till they come to a gate
which opened into a bye-lane. This they unbarred, and having pushed
Camillo out, shut it against him, conjuring him, as he valued his own
safety, to shift for himself.

It was now about two o'clock, in a very cold morning, when our
adventurer found himself stark naked, shivering most piteously with
cold, and trembling with fear and shame, in a street he knew nothing
of, nor how to get to his lodgings, the way to which he was utterly
ignorant of. He rambled to the end of the lane, groping his way, for
it was quite dark, and was in continual terror lest he should stumble
into one of the canals, which that city is full of; at last he
discovered a light, and made towards it, in hopes of being put into
his way, or sheltered from the inclemency of the weather. When he came
near the house where he observed the light, he saw the door open, and
a woman standing at it; he immediately, though with reluctance, and a
modest awkwardness, made up to her, covering with his hands what he
least cared to expose, in the best manner he could. As soon as she
spied, him, she screamed out, taking him for a ghost; he stept up to
undeceive her, but she was fallen down in a swoon on the threshold; he
stooped down to help her, crying out, do not be frighted, I am no
apparition.By this time, her shrieks had brought out an old woman in
her shift; who seemed as much frightened as the other, for the stood
trembling and bawling out till all the family was up, and at the door.
Some of them appeared armed with domestic instruments of war; such as
pokers, fire-shovels, &c. On their demanding what was the matter, the
old woman, pointing to Camillo, and the woman on the floor acquainted
them, (as, by her gestures, and what followed, he guessed) that he had
offered some violence to the girl, and must be either a thief or a
madman; her information was followed by some blows with a broomstick,
which a surly fellow bestowed across his back; this odd reception,
together with his being unable to make himself understood, made
Camillo take to his heels, followed by two or three men from the house
in their shirts, bawling after him like a pack of hounds. The noise
alarmed the watch, who joined in the chase, and soon coming up with
their game, brought him flat to the ground with one of their poles.
They then laid fast hold of him, and all in a breath asked him a
thousand questions; but he was so stunned with the blow, that it was
some minutes before he could speak, and even then he could not make
them understand one word he said, though he spoke in English, French
and Latin. Finding they could not prevail on him to give any account
of himself in a language that they understood, they carried him to the
night-magistrate, who crammed him into a stinking dungeon, where he
lay, cold and bruised, on a wad of rotten straw, and where a million
of fleas lived at free quarters on his defenceless body. Here he had
full time to ruminate on his misfortune, and to curse the instigations
of his appetite, which had brought him into so many disasters,
especially this last, which might be attended with very ugly
consequences, the best of which was to be exposed to all the city, in
the odd pickle he was now in. He was many times so exasperated at that
unruly member, whose importunate demands had given rise to such
disgrace and trouble, that if his hands had been loose, he might have
been tempted to do himself a mischief: but these were but short-lived
resolves; his enmity to the staff of life vanished as soon as he found
himself at liberty, which did not happen till towards ten next
morning, when the gaoler brought a pair of sailor's trousers, and an
old coat, at least a thousand strong, to cover his nakedness, and
carried him before a magistrate, in company with half a dozen
pickpockets, who had been taken in their vocation the night before.

When they were all presented in order to their examination, though
Camillo's garb did not challenge much respect, and the fetters he was
bound with did not allow him to move with any tolerable mien, yet
there appeared something in his countenance, which attracted the
attention of the burgomaster towards him more than the rest of his
company. Camillo had a very engaging face, with a great deal of
sweetness mixed with a certain air of majesty, which the despicable
figure he otherwise made could not hide; he had a fine hand, and a
complexion more than ordinary fair for a man. These were symptoms
sufficient to entitle him, at least to the first rank of pickpockets,
and as such the burgomaster spoke to him, and asked with as mild an
aspect as a Dutch magistrate is capable of assuming, what he was
charged with. Poor Camillo replied in English, but the Dutchman no
forstaw ye mynheer; at last he spoke in French, which by accident, not
being a learned but a trading language, the man understood, and heard
his tale with a great deal of patience, but was so cautious as not to
take his word for all he said, but ordered him to send one of his men
to his lodgings, that somebody might concur with him in the account he
gave of himself. The servant had not been long gone, when Vilario, and
Mynheer Van Roster his relation, at whose house they lodged, came, and
satisfied the cautious magistrate in all his scruples, and paid the
fees, the want of which, till they came, was the strongest reason he
had to doubt his innocence; for in that country, there is no crime so
severely punished as want of money: there gold supplies the want of
charity, and a great many troublesome virtues, and truly covers a
multitude of sins, which without this covering would be very visible
to the magistrate, whose business it is to correct them; and as the
possession of it in that country hides the most enormous faults, so
the want of it throws a veil upon the most conspicuous merit, and in
matters of justice, renders the judge like his prototype, absolutely
blind to the most glaring innocence, as was plainly the case of
Camillo and his judge; for those who took him up, when they recovered
from their first fright, had nothing to object to him but his
nakedness; the magistrate might very easily have released him on the
rational account he gave of himself, which if he had, without the
appearance of his friends, he must have gone without his fees, for the
naked man had none to give; but he made twenty guilders by the
treachery of the whores, and so far went snacks with them<29>;
therefore no wonder he connived at such houses, where tricks of that
kind, and much worse, were daily put in practice.

Camillo was so ashamed of the figure he made in this last excursion,
which was pretty public amongst all his acquaintance, that he had not
the courage to appear abroad any more while he stayed at Amsterdam,
and set out soon after for The Hague, where there was a great resort
of foreign ministers, on account of the first partition treaty,<30>
then negotiating by King William. Vilario was pretty well acquainted
with the English minister, and Camillo had recommendatory letters from
his relations at Amsterdam to some of the most considerable members of
the state, which introduced him at once into the best company, and
with his own behaviour, procured him a very polite reception from
persons of the highest rank.

Camillo, for the first month, chiefly kept company with his own
countrymen; but Vilario, who certainly knew as well as any man, what
was most for the advantage of a young traveller, endeavoured to wean
him from their society, and recommended it to him to cultivate rather
the acquaintance of foreigners, that in this republic, where
travellers of all nations are to be met with, he might be able to form
some idea of the manners of those countries through which he was to
travel, and rub off that stiffness of carriage, and sullenness of
disposition, so peculiar to his native country, and that attachment to
its modes and customs, so natural to young persons who have not seen
the world.

Camillo, who had as little of the saturnine disposition as it was
possible for any Englishman, was easily induced to drop the society of
his countrymen, and herded mostly with the French, a people whose
genius suited better with his own, and in particular contracted an
intimacy with the. Marquis De Montandre, a young gentleman of a
considerable family and estate in Normandy. The Marquis was just of
age, had lately entered into possession of his estate, by the death of
his father, who, while alive, had kept him in great subjection, and
from a principle of avarice, had denied him all the enjoyments
suitable to his years and quality, and kept him at his country house,
without any other company than that of his tutor, a surly pedant, and
some rustic neighbours, people of the same stamp and disposition with
the old Marquis himself, and all professed enemies to those pleasures,
which engage the minds of youth. A young gentleman thus buried, and
chained to the caprice of old age and covetousness, could not be over
and above afflicted for the death of his father, which set him free
from such confinement, and gave him possession of a fine estate, and a
large sum of money, over and above what was sufficient to discharge
the portions of two young ladies his sisters, who were left to his
care and management. The young Marquis did not so much as dissemble
sorrow; he scarce waited the funeral rites, which decency and his own
pride obliged him to perform, till he gave a loose to his hitherto
smothered inclinations, and resolved to revel in all those joys he had
so long panted after, which he knew but by report, and which the
avarice of his father had kept him a stranger to.

His first inclination was to see the world, and make himself
acquainted with the manners and customs of other nations: though he
knew little of his own, besides the province he was born in, yet his
impatience to see foreign countries was such, that in about six weeks
after his father's death, he left the management of his estate to his
steward, and set out for The Hague, where a near relation of his, much
in the same circumstances with himself, and an intimate acquaintance,
had gone some months before, in the retinue of the French Ambassador;
and with him he intended to make the tour of Europe. He had not been
at The Hague above two months, ere he became acquainted with Camillo,
between whom there commenced the strictest intimacy, arising from a
sympathy of tempers, especially their governing passions, which in
both happened to be Love. The Marquis' kinsman, Monsieur De Aubevile,
was not so much inclined to the amorous, but out of complaisance to
his relation, he made one of the party, and all of them were in some
measure under the conduct of Vilario, whose temper rendered him
agreeable, and his experience in the great concerns of gallantry
useful. These four generally passed their time together, which they
spent chiefly in pursuit of the ladies, only now and then at play, for
the sake of Aubevile, who had a passion that way, to whom the Marquis
and Camillo were bubbles; they played merely for amusement, without
any regard to money, which neither of them valued at that time, but as
it served to gratify their pleasures, and as yet conceived no
intrinsic worth in the largest sums, but in proportion to the joys,
and the number of kind girls it could purchase. But the other two
valued the shinning metal at a higher rate; and put in practice all
the arts of cunning and chicanery to possess themselves of it. De
Aubevile and Vilario soon determined to take advantage of the frank
open disposition of their bubbles, and entered into a league to divide
their spoil betwixt them. They sometimes lost, to keep up the farce,
and hinder their collusion from being detected, but as Vilario's
losses were supplied out of Camillo's pocket, they soon made up what
they permitted them to win in this manner; and the others were too
generous to grudge them their good fortune, as long as they had enough
left to supply their more important pleasures.

They had hitherto pursued only low gallantry, and contented themselves
with the favours of public courtesans, with which The Hague abounds, a
kind of diversion De Aubevile liked better than more elevated
intrigues; he loved a girl well enough, and could find in his heart to
part with a pistole or two to purchase a new face; but he hated any
trouble or fatigue in the affair; he would not lose an hour of his
rest, nor a party at play for the mere enjoyment of the finest women
in Europe, and would rather put up with the cook-maid or laundress at
home, than be obliged to go a street's length, to enjoy a duchess. In
a word, he had nothing of the politely amorous in his disposition, and
knew no pleasure in woman but the mere act, which he thought not worth
much pains or expense. But the Marquis and Camillo were of a different
disposition; they loved the chase better than the game, and
difficulties whetted their desires. They were now cloyed with
downright wenching, and longed for something that had the air of an
intrigue. They frequented most of the public assemblies, in hopes of
meeting with something to their purpose: they saw numbers with whom
they could have liked a soft engagement, but it was sometime before
they found anything that touched them so effectually, as to put them
on finding means to prosecute their pretensions; but time and industry
generally gets the better of everything, and fortune at last threw
something in their way to exercise their adventurous talents.

About this time the French Ambassador gave a grand entertainment, on
account of the birthday of his master, to which were invited most of
the persons of distinction then at The Hague. The Marquis De
Montandre, Monsieur De Aubevile and Camillo were of the number of the
guests, and treated both by the Ambassador; and the rest of the
company, with great marks of distinction. The assembly was very
brilliant, and the entertainment the most elegant that could be
contrived, and ended with a grand masque. The Marquis and Camillo had
much difficulty to preserve their amorous hearts from the impressions
of love, towards a great number of fine women who graced that
assembly, and to whom, in dancing they had opportunities to have made
many advances, which, no doubt might have been very well received from
two such accomplished cavaliers, and there were some of the ladies,
who could have wished they had been more particular in their
addresses, and were for that time out of conceit with their own
charms, that had not power to excite in either of these gentlemen, any
more than mere complaisance; but it was the multitude of charms that
assaulted them at once, which kept them in suspense, and saved them
from falling a sacrifice to any individual lady. They were sometimes
enamoured to distraction, with the bewitching languor in the charming
eyes of the Countess of M, and ready to make her an offering of
their hearts, when the regiment of little cupids that keep garrison in
the dimple of Mademoiselle De Espinait's chin, arrested their
resolution, and kept them in suspense, till the majestic mien and
commanding air of the young Duchess of Longuevile brought them relief.
Thus wandering from one species of beauty to another, like the ass in
the fable, they were likely to starve before they could fix their
choice; but when the masque began, their wandering eyes were at once
fixed, and all their faculties employed in admiring two ladies who
appeared among the masquers. Their habits were extremely rich, and the
fancy peculiarly genteel, which alone had been sufficient to draw the
eyes and attention of the whole assembly; but when they moved, they
displayed such graces, and danced with such bewitching majesty, that
the men were fired with love and admiration, and the women ready to
burst with envy.

After the first surprise on this appearance was a little abated, and
curiosity began to mix itself with admiration, a whisper ran round the
room to know who they were, but none could give the least
intelligence; even Monsieur the Ambassador was as much at a loss as
any, and equally anxious to be informed who two such extraordinary
persons could be, who had taken up so much of the attention of so
grand an assembly. Their manner, dress, and behaviour, spoke them of
quality sufficient to entitle them to all the respect he could show
them, in which the Ambassador was not wanting. After the masque, he
complimented them in a particular manner, and entered into a
conversation with them, wherein they showed that their wit was in no
measure inferior to their other accomplishments; he modestly hinted
his inclination, that they should unmask, but finding them unwilling,
he desisted, and left them to the company with which they entered. The
Marquis and Camillo now forgot all the beauties, they had been
bewildered with, during the foregoing part of the night, and found
themselves carried on by an unaccountable impulse to adore the
handsome strangers. They kept close by them all the while they stayed
in the assembly, and by every motion, even the most trifling action,
were more and more confirmed that they deserved their adoration more
than all that fair assembly put together.

The moment they left the room, which was some time before the company
broke up, our young gallants could not prevail on themselves to stay a
minute after them; not so much, as to call their companion De
Aubevile, who was at another end of the room, but immediately followed
them in hopes of learning by some means or other, some intelligence
who the fair strangers were, that had thus robbed them of their
affections. They saw them go off with a very splendid equipage,
attended by a number of richly dressed servants, with flambeaux, by
the light of which they pursued them through several streets; but all
on a sudden, they saw the lights put out, lost sight of the coach, and
were obliged, like many other gallants, who had followed them with the
same views, to content themselves with cursing their stars, and the
ill nature of these incognitas, who had led them such a dance, and
left them at last in the dark.

In this disposition they separated, full of love and chagrin, to their
several apartments for that night, appointing to meet early next
morning, to concert measures for accomplishing their so much wished
for discovery. After a night spent in great anxiety and little sleep,
they went next day to pay their compliments to the Ambassador at his
levee, thinking that the most probable place to meet with some
intelligence concerning the enchanting strangers. When they came, they
found the levee crowded with a number of young beaus of quality,
deeply smitten with the same disease. The discourse turned chiefly
upon the unknown ladies, some praising one grace, some another, and
all in the utmost perplexity to know who they were.

The Ambassador rallied the young sparks upon their solicitude about a
brace of females, who perhaps were ashamed to show their faces, which
might prove antidotes to that passion their persons and behaviour
created. "It's impossible," added he, "that they can have faces
suitable to what we have seen, otherwise they would have taken an
opportunity to have shown them; for women prize beauty and symmetry of
feature too much, to keep them from public view. You may depend upon
it, they are intolerably ugly, and conscious of that, they showed only
that part which bids fairest for your esteem, concealing the rest for
fear of disgusting you." "That cannot be," returned the Marquis of
Montandre, vexed to hear the idols of his soul so blasphemed; "Nature
could not have joined an ugly face to so fine a shape and air, as the
least perfect of these ladies possesses. No, she could not do her work
so much by halves, or unite contradictions; they must be all of a
piece, all angelic. Besides," added he, "your excellency must observe
conscious beauty and superior perfections in that commanding mien they
both have. A natural defect, especially to the degree of ugliness as
your excellency hints, must communicate itself to every air and
gesture, and confirm a stiffness in this manner, which could never be
concealed. But, sir, in these unknown beauties, this is not to be
observed; they move as conscious of no defect, and command as their
due that adoration which that part of their charms they are pleased to
display certainly claims, and conceal the rest out of pure tenderness
for the beholders, who could not be able to endure the combined lustre
of an angelic face, and the person and majesty of a seraphim."
"Forgive me, monsieur," replied the Ambassador, "I had no serious
intention to detract from the excellence of the ladies; I only hinted
what I offered to allay the solicitude I see you young gallants are
under to know them, and in order to prevent any of you from engaging
too deeply with such visionary beauties, who haunt us like
apparitions, and vanish from our sight without leaving any mark
whereby to trace them to their aerial regions. For my part, I wish I
knew who they were, that I might return the compliment they paid me,
by honouring me with their company, and that I might give you, sir,
some satisfaction; for I observe by the warmth with which you speak of
them, that a passion more interesting than mere curiosity prompts you
to enquire after them. I wish they may prove mortals for your sake,
and I shall do all in my power to find them out. I have all already
sent Petite, who had the management of the masque, to make enquiry,
and I doubt not but he will bring some intelligence that may set us
all at ease, at least as to who they are." The Ambassador had scarce
done speaking, when Petite entered, with whom the Ambassador withdrew
to a window at a distance from the company for some minutes, and
returning, told them, he had got intelligence, that the ladies were
persons of distinction, great fortunes, and no less beauties; that
they came but two nights ago to the city, and lived with a relation of
theirs, one of the deputies for the province of Holland; but, for
reasons of their own, kept very private; and that one of them was that
very morning gone to Brussels, while the other stayed only a few days
with their brother, a young gentleman, who was about to embark for
England.

The whole company were pleased they had got so good an account of the
strangers, though vexed that one of them had already made her escape;
but to none of them the intelligence seemed so agreeable as to
Camillo, who flattered himself he should be acquainted with the one
that remained, as the deputy in whose house she lodged was of his
acquaintance, and one to whom he had particular recommendations from
his friends at Amsterdam. He was now impatient to get out of the
levee, to have an opportunity of acquainting his friend the Marquis
with this piece of good news. He took his leave as soon as possible,
and he and the Marquis were no sooner got into their coach, than he
cried out in a rapture, "The game's our own, my dear Marquis! I am
acquainted with the family where the charming stranger lodges, and
make no doubt but I shall this very day, be so happy as to see that
beauteous angel in her unclouded majesty: yes, I certainly shall be
introduced to her, and have an opportunity to pour out my whole soul
in transports at her feet."

"What," replied the Marquis, somewhat gravely, "all this ecstasy for
yourself! Not one poor thought to bestow on your friend? Must you
alone be happy? Must I find her, only to know that she must be yours,
or that no part of the bliss can be shared with me? But I see you do
not esteem your friend equally with yourself, otherwise you would have
added, as one of the causes of your exultation, that you should have
an opportunity to introduce me also, and give me at least the chance
of being the happy man who shall attract her regard." "How," returned
Camillo, "do you think I can brook a rival in such an affair, or that
I can be such a fool, as to make room for the accomplished Marquis to
elbow me out of her good graces? No, my friend, you may go to
Brussels, and make love to the other that is gone. I may chance to
procure you an introduction there; but here I set up my own standard,
and shall gain the glorious prize, or perish in the attempt." The
Marquis, naturally choleric, was about to make some angry reply, when
the coach stopped at the door, and the presence of De Aubevile and
Vilario turned the conversation on indifferent subjects, for some
time, and gave them both leisure to cool, and reflect upon the folly
of falling out about a woman, who might hold them both in contempt.
However, the Marquis could not get the better of a secret sort of
grudge against Camillo, on the bare prospect of his having the
advantage of making the first impressions on the fair stranger; but
good manners and complaisance obliged him to smother it, and Camillo
went that very day to visit the deputy, and was so happy as to dine
with the fair Leonora and her brother Theodore. If he was smitten with
the person of that charming lady, to what a height did his passion
rise, when he beheld the inimitable beauties of her face, and the
bewitching charms of a delicate wit and solid judgement, which she
discovered on all occasions. In short, the first visit completed the
conquest of his heart, and he felt in himself a strong impulse to love
and esteem the accomplished Theodore, not only as the brother of his
charmer, but for a peculiar sweetness and amiable disposition, which
discovered itself in his countenance.

Camillo had no cause to complain of the reception he met with from
Leonora, which was full of complaisance, and with as much freedom as
could be expected from a lady on the first sight. But Theodore was
privileged by his sex to be less upon the reserve, and expressed a
desire to cultivate an intimacy with Camillo, which he accepted as the
greatest happiness; since it might contribute much to forward the
designs he had upon his fair sister. For than time Camillo took his
leave, and, at parting, young Theodore promised to call on him next
day at his lodgings. When he met his companion in the evening, he was
all life and spirit, and full of nothing but the charms of Leonora,
which he described in such warm feeling language, that his discourse
inflamed the already enamoured Marquis, and made him dote as eagerly
on a face he only knew by description, as on the fine shape and air,
that had ravished him at the Ambassador's.

He saw Camillo had the advantage of making the first attack; and a
prospect of all the opportunities he could wish, to prosecute his
intentions, and began not only to envy him that happiness, but really
to hate him. He was even debating with himself how to quarrel with
him, that he might not be obliged to observe any measures in
supplanting him; but he recollected that possibly he might, by
feigning a continuation of his friendship; and an indifference for the
lady; have an opportunity to get acquainted in the family; especially
as the brother was to make his visit next day.

Camillo, who had no suspicion of his friend, went on in the same
strain of encomium on Leonora's beauty, and the excess of his own
happiness in possessing one of the finest women in Europe; for he
never once doubted his success: he, all sanguine and alert, thought it
was impossible but she must surrender, almost on the first summons;
and when Theodore came to see him, according to promise, he introduced
the Marquis to him, as one of his most intimate friends. Theodore
received the Marquis very politely, and returned the tender of his
friendship with that politeness due to a gentleman of the Marquis's
appearance, and the friend of Camillo, whose prior acquaintance had
challenged the first place in his esteem. The conversation was quickly
turned upon his sisters, and as much said in their praise, as could be
uttered in good manners before a brother. The Marquis was particularly
inquisitive about the sister who was gone to Brussels, and observed
that Camillo had said so much in praise of Leonora, that he doubted if
it were possible for her sister to equal, much less to excel her.
Theodore replied, that Leonora was obliged to Camillo for his
flattering description of her; "But I believe," continued he, "if he
had seen Angelina, my young sister, he would yield her the pre-
eminence in everything. I know," said he, "no reason I have to be
partial in my opinion, in which I am not singular; and I think there
is no comparison between them; though to tell you the truth, I see
nothing in either of them but what I find common to other women."
Camillo replied, it was impossible that anything in nature could excel
or even come up to the perfections both of person and mind, of the
charming Leonora. "As for you, sir, you see her charms with the eyes
of a brother; a thousand nameless beauties escape your notice; they
are either become familiar, or do not interest your passion, as they
do mine: to me she appears all perfection; and to suppose that
Angelina excels perfection itself, is a syllogism in speech, which
none but he who sees Leonora only with a brother's eye, can be guilty
of." "I wish," returned Theodore, "Angelina was here to decide this
dispute, but as she is not, I'll show you her picture, by which you
may form some idea of her face; for I assure you the painter has not
flattered her. As to her person, you have seen it as well as
Leonora's," and, giving him the picture, "I leave you to pass sentence
impartially." Camillo returned the picture unopened, and declared he
would not be guilty of so much injustice to the incomparable Leonora,
as to make a doubt, by offering at a comparison. He saw her fair,
inimitably fair, with all the perfections that he could conceive
capable of attracting the heart of man. This was his faith, and in
this belief he intended to live and die. Theodore, seeing him
obstinate, had no intention to convert him to any other faith, and was
about to put up the picture, when the Marquis begged a sight of it,
which was granted. He gazed upon it with all the tokens of amazement,
crying out, "Good God! Is it possible there can be anything so lovely?
Whatever faith, Camillo, you die in, I am resolved to die a martyr to
this; that if the original comes but near this picture, she is the
most charming of her sex. No wonder," sir, addressing himself to
Theodore, "that your sister came masked to the Ambassador's ball: it
was kind, it was merciful to the men"he would have said more, but
stopped short, as if at a loss for words to express his astonishment.
The picture was put up, the discourse changed to indifferent matters,
and Theodore parted with the Marquis and Camillo, fully pleased with
their behaviour; and promised to spend as much time as possible in
their company, while he stayed at The Hague.

The Marquis was now as much enamoured with the Brussels Lady, as he
supposed himself before with Leonora, and as he and Camillo were
ready, before the discovery, to quarrel for the one, now their contest
was about the superiority of beauty in their mistresses, which each
with great obstinacy claimed as due to his own; but this dispute was
not like to be of such dangerous consequence as if they had both loved
the same lady; for now that little rancour which the Marquis conceived
against Camillo vanished, and was succeeded by a sincere return of
that tender amity that had before subsisted between them. They were
now embarked in the same interest, without interfering, and expected 
to assist each other in their pretensions on the fair Leonora and
Angelina.

The next day Camillo returned Theodore's visit, and carried the
Marquis along with him, who was very well received by the family.
Their visits became frequent, and the intimacy between them and
Theodore daily increased; and Leonora herself, who had naturally very
little of reserve in her temper, entertained them every day with
greater marks of esteem, and less restraint, and indulged them,
particularly Camillo, with all the innocent freedom becoming her sex
and quality.



Chapter X

At first the Marquis bore the little marks of preference granted by
Leonora to Camillo with perfect indifference, being wholly taken up
with the idea of his more charming Angelina: but he was of a temper
not to feed long upon such visionary entertainment, his love required
something more substantial to nourish it, and as he could not expect
that happiness from his absent mistress, whose return was very
uncertain, he began to look about for something to employ that active
flame nearer at hand. He was unwilling to make advances to the
mistress of his friend, and besides had said so many extravagant
things in favour of her sister, he had no reason to expect any
encouragement from her, and attributed the advances Camillo seemed to
make in her affections to a kind of resentment to him. However, an
amorous man, such as he was, could not be so often in the charming
Leonora's company, without confessing the irresistible force of her
attractions. She became every visit less indifferent to him, and the
innocent dalliance that passed between her and Camillo, became less
supportable. He was some time before he discovered the real source of
the uneasy emotions he felt on these occasions and could scarce
believe it to be love, till the disease became too strong for any
remains of delicacy he had on his friend's account, and soon obliged
him to stifle that, and court every opportunity to declare his passion
to the lovely object of it.

When he first opened himself on that subject to Leonora, she received
it only as the effect of the gallantry so peculiar to his nation, and
rallied him with great wit on his sudden change of sentiments, in
regard to her sister Angelina. As he expected no less, he stood the
brunt of her raillery with great patience, and endeavoured all in his
power to convince her that he was serious; which he found less
difficult than he imagined, and received from her, in a short time,
strong proofs that he was far from being indifferent to her.

Camillo soon observed a change in her behaviour towards him, though
she affected to treat him still with great complaisance, on account of
the friendship between him and her brother Theodore. But their
conversation now wanted that softness which used to accompany their
most trifling amusements, and Camillo was too quick-sighted a lover
not to take notice, that she wore a constraint in her words and
actions which she was utterly a stranger to some days before. This
thought put him upon examining the cause of a change that appeared so
visible to him, and it was not long before he discovered how matters
stood between her and the Marquis. He found them frequently together,
when he least expected it, and observed certain marks of confusion in
both their countenances, when he approached them on these occasions;
he fancied at other times he could discover a correspondence between
their eyes, of too tender a nature for indifferent acquaintance; all
these he explained as symptoms of a revoked heart, and cursed his
folly for giving his false friend so many opportunities to supplant
him in the affections of his mistress. In the first transports of his
rage, he would have called the Marquis to a severe account for his
falsehood, by disputing the prize with sword in hand. He more than
once or twice sat down to write him a challenge, but his disposition
naturally timorous, restrained his hand; he wished him out of the
world, at the Devil, or anywhere beyond the reach of the fair Leonora,
but had not the courage to undertake the task himself. Conscious of
his weakness this way, he complained to her brother of the alteration
in his sister's conduct. Theodore endeavoured to persuade him, that if
she was changed, it was scarce worthwhile to trouble his head about
her; that it was the nature of the sex, who were only more obstinate
by opposition to their inclinations, and advised him, as the only
method to give himself ease, to seek out a new mistress, by which he
had a chance of finding her more constant; or, if that was necessary
to his happiness, he might perhaps by that means reinstate himself in
the good graces of Leonora, who possibly had at first countenanced his
addresses, only because the Marquis had declared himself the votary of
Angelina, and he believed had received that gentleman into her
especial favour, only to adorn herself with the spoils of her sister;
and, added he, "If you take my advice, you'll declare yourself in
favour of Angelina, whom I'll find you an opportunity of seeing, and I
think you cannot fail of disturbing the quiet of your unconstant
mistress, and perhaps procure the banishment of your treacherous
friend." This method suited better with Camillo's constitution than
fighting, and he soon agreed to put on a careless behaviour as often
as he was in company with Leonora, and to express no resentment at the
Marquis, but to take all opportunities of praising the absent
Angelina, with whose picture Theodore furnished him, to serve as a
common-place for conversation.

Camillo, who till now had never seen this picture, examined it with
great attention, in order to make himself mater of all its
exellencies, that he might descant upon them at his next visit to
Leonora. At first he looked upon it as a piece of exquisite painting,
and as such admired it extremely; but by degrees he could not help
connecting the idea of this beautiful face with that angelic form he
saw at the ball; which by recurring frequently to his imagination,
soon excited in his heart a growing passion for the original, and of
course raised in him a strong curiosity to see the charming Angelina.

In this disposition of mind he went to pay a visit to Leonora, before
whom he thought he could behave with philosophic calmness, and was
prepared to be very lavish in the praises of his new mistress. When
his coach stopped at the door, the porter was just about to tell him,
that Leonora, for whom he asked, was indisposed, and could not see
company; but Theodore passing through the hall, observed him, and
coming out, desired him not to mind the fellow, but go up to his
sister's apartment as usual. Camillo did so, and entered the chamber
without giving any notice of his approach; but notwithstanding the
resolution he had put on before he left his own lodgings, he could not
help feeling all the pangs of rage and jealousy, when he saw the
Marquis and Leonora reclining on a couch, with her head leaning on his
bosom, and he pressing her hand, and gazing on her charms with all the
eagerness of fond desire; they both started up at seeing him, and
expressed the utmost confusion in their looks. They were all three
silent for some moments, at last Camillo found tongue, and begged
pardon, in an ironical manner, for his unseasonable disturbance.
Leonora coloured, and was about to make a reply full of indignation,
when Theodore entered the room, and gave a turn to the conversation,
by telling Leonora, that he had just received a letter from his aunt
at Brussels, acquainting him, that she and Angelina would be with them
in two days, which added he, addressing himself to the Marquis, "I
suppose is no disagreeable news to you, if you yet preserve the same
faith in which you resolved to live and die, when you saw her
picture." Camillo, without giving him time to reply, returned smartly,
that the Marquis was a man of no such cold imagination, as to continue
long in love with a shadow, if he could find more solid objects to
employ and receive his passion. "In short, my friend," added he,
"there has been a great revolution within these five hours in the
kingdom of Love; the Marquis and I have changed creeds, he dotes on
warm yielding flesh and blood, and your humble servant, like a
fanciful puppy, is over head and ears enamoured with a shadow; but I
have this advantage in the change, taking out Angelina's picture and
looking on it, that I shall find the dear object of my wishes in the
same mind, in the same bewitching attitude, and clothed with that
enchanting smile, that first gave birth to my fond passion; while the
Marquis may expect to find as many changes in his more substantial
mistress, as there are days or hours in the revolution of a moon."
Leonora, nettled at this raillery, so obviously aimed at her, replied,
in a tone that spoke the inward vexation of her mind, that whatever
changes the Marquis might find in his mistress, it was impossible for
her to assume any shape that would be favourable to Camillo, who
perhaps might find his visionary mistress as mutable as other mortals,
and what would be equally mortifying to him, insensible to the great
perfections of that accomplished gentleman, who appeared so full of
himself, as to fancy no lady could give the preference to another,
while he was pleased to put in his claim: with this flung out of the
room, leaving the gallants to settle the remainder of the affair
amongst themselves. Theodore saw by their looks, that no great harmony
could be expected, if they were permitted to enter into dispute;
therefore he endeavoured to reconcile them in the best manner he
could, by telling them, that he was sorry to see the least likelihood
of a breach in their friendship, on the score of Leonora, which he
thought might be prevented by their placing a mutual confidence in
him, a trust which he would not abuse, but convert to their mutual
advantage. "If," says he, you are both engaged to Leonora, you cannot
act a more rational part than to submit the decision of your
pretensions to her, without infringing upon the ties of honour or
friendship; but if you are not, as by Camillo's last discourse I have
some room to think, then you have no cause of quarrel for what is
past, but each should endeavour to serve the other's interest, which a
mutual animosity may destroy." Camillo would have urged that the
Marquis had used him ill, by supplanting him with Leonora, after he
had declared for Angelina, and had been entrusted with the secret of
his passion for her sister; but Theodore declined entering too
particularly upon an explanation of that matter, and asked him only if
he was sincere, as to the change he had spoken of in himself with
regard to Angelina? "If so," said he, "you have no reason to complain,
and both may safely leave it to your mistresses to punish your levity
and mutual disloyalty. If you are resolved for once to hold by the
lots you have now drawn, and determined to make no more interchanges,
I can be of service to you; if not, to prevent the bad consequences
that may happen by a breach between you, on the account of my sisters,
I am determined to send Leonora to Brussels to-morrow, and take care
that neither of you shall see her for the future."

The two gallants found by this declaration, that it was their interest
to fall in with Theodore's proposal, and Camillo gave up all
pretensions to Leonora, in favour of the Marquis, who promised on his
part not to interfere with him in his designs on Angelina. This
settled, Theodore went to his sister, who had retreated to her
dressing-room, and told her of the compromise: she dissembled her
approbation of it, acknowledged herself reconciled to Camillo, and
promised to use her interest for him with her sister, but in her heart
was piqued, that Camillo left her with so much ease; for she was of
that species of women, who love a crowd of lovers, and cannot part
with the flattery, though she despises the man.

Camillo and the Marquis went home together in the same coach; now
friends again, and equally happy, the one in assurance of his
mistress's affection, and the other in expectation, that a few days
would make him superlatively blessed in the company of his now
adorable Angelina.

The next day Theodore called on them, and invited them both to dinner,
where Camillo behaved with as much indifference towards Leonora, as if
she had been his sister. This carriage was not affected, but sincere,
and what he had reasoned himself into, by reflecting on the
inconstancy of her temper, who had so soon yielded to the treacherous
addresses of the Marquis, at a time when she had given him all the
hopes he could reasonably desire of a suitable return to his passion.
Leonora, during all this visit, and one he made her next day, watched
all his looks and motions to discover any latent symptoms of his
former flame; but on finding his behaviour uniformly cold to her, and
that he was warmly eloquent in praise of her absent sister, she was
heartily piqued, and resolved to do all she could to recall him to her
banner. She found frequent means to engage him in particular
conversation, and said a great many things, that might have re-
inflamed a heart less estranged: but in vain; Camillo either did not
understand her, or saw too clearly that pride, not love occasioned
this alteration in her conduct; and therefore returned all her
civilities with bare good manners and complaisance.

Next morning Camillo's valet delivered him a letter, which, he said
was left by a page, who would neither say from whence it came, nor
stay for an answer. Camillo found it in a woman's hand, and in the
following terms;
To the accomplished CAMILLO.
Sir,
If you are not too much taken up with your enthusiastic passion
for a fair picture, the original of which you may never see,
you'll be at the upper terrace of the Gardens of Orange, at six
in the evening, where your attention may be employed on an
object less fantastical, and more agreeable to a reasonable
creature. If sympathy does not direct you to the proper person,
and you are so dull as to want a signal, let a handkerchief,
dropped by you, give the alarm, and point you to one who is
Yours,
As you deserve.


The style and manner of this letter quite confounded our young
gallant; he saw it must be some person acquainted with his affairs,
but whom to suspect, he was quite at a loss. He could not believe the
pride of Leonora capable of stooping to any indirect methods for
reclaiming him; especially such a one as this, which appeared to him
liable to an immediate discovery, and to consequences which might tend
greatly to her extreme mortification. In short; he was quite
embarrassed, yet had too much delicacy for the honour of the ladies,
to expose a message of this kind to gratify his curiosity. But he was
more at a loss to determine whether he should go or not; thinking,
answering an assignation of this kind was a violation of that
allegiance he had inwardly sworn to Angelina, and doubted not but it
might come to her ears, since the person seemed acquainted with the
circumstance of his affection for that lady, who might object it to
him, on his first addresses. However, he thought it would not look
very gallant entirely to disregard a summons of that kind, and at
least determined to obey the appointment, though it were only to
assure the lady, that nothing could alter his affection for the divine
Angelina.

He went to the place assigned, and was there some time before he saw
any appearance of his incognita. At last two women in masks entered
the terrace, and walked two or three turns without taking the least
notice of him. One of them appeared by her air and shape to resemble
Leonora, and the other looked like her waiting-maid. He was chagrined
to see her there as she might make ugly reflections should she
perceive him with his incognita. He was wishing her gone, lest the
other should come, when in passing him, she dropped her handkerchief,
the signal appointed. He was more embarrassed now than before,
thinking the whole only a contrivance to try his fidelity to Angelina.
However, he had presence of mind to stoop to take up the handkerchief,
which he returned her before she had gone many paces, with as gallant
an air as his confusion would permit him. The lady received it, and
returned her acknowledgment in a voice entirely strange to him, and
told him at the same time, that she thought so polite a cavalier as
he, needed not a signal to make his approaches to a lady, in a place
where there were none to interrupt them. Camillo, now out of all dread
of Leonora, resumed his wonted carriage, and told the lady, that he
had come in obedience to her message, only to receive her commands,
and was sorry he was so slow of apprehending, that it was to her he
owed the favour of the epistle he had received that morning. "I am
glad," returned the lady, "that you are not quite so taken up with
your picture, but you can spare some time to converse with substantial
forms. I heard, sir, of your visionary flame, and, out of pure
benevolence, sent for you, to convert you from so whimsical a passion.
The lady I must own is fair, and perhaps as agreeable as her picture;
but then she has a thousand foibles, which counterbalance all her
excellencies; and one which ought to fill you with despair, is, that
she is devoted to the church, both by her own consent and that of her
brother, and the rest of her relations, who only amuse you with hopes
of her, to prevent any falling out between you and the Marquis, on the
score of Leonora, whose marriage is fixed for this day se'nnight,
after which Angelina is to take the veil at Brussels, in the convent
where she now is, and of which her aunt is Lady-Abbess."

Camillo, thunderstruck at this news, was some minutes before he could
utter a word, he was so amazed at the prodigious treachery, now
discovered in Theodore, the Marquis, and Leonora, he asked a thousand
questions at once, in the utmost perplexity, and searched in every
answer of the lady for something from whence he might infer a doubt of
his unhappiness; but she related to him so many circumstances, that he
was fully confirmed that he had been made the dupe of all three: but
added he, "What is all this to my love for Angelina? They have been so
cruel as to raise in me a passion that perhaps may be fruitless; but I
cannot eradicate it; no I will persevere in it, and only endeavour all
I can to break their measures, and prevent her taking the veil;
perhaps I may succeed, and if I have but an opportunity to make my
addresses to her, I may kindle in her a warmer flame than that of
devotion, and spoil, at least, some of the views of my false friends."

"That," returned the lady, "is a vain thought. Angelina is fixed in
her resolutions, and uncapable of being wrought upon by all your
rhetoric". By this time they were arrived at a close arbour, at one
end of the terrace, into which she entered, and continued her
discourse, the maid staying without. "But," added she, "if you have an
inclination to be fully revenged on the treachery of the Marquis for
supplanting you with Leonora, to whom you made the first proffer of
your affections, and who I believe would have continued to make you a
suitable return, if the Marquis had not, to insinuate himself into her
favour, given her a very disadvantageous character of you, I would
advise you to renew your addresses to that lady, with whom I believe I
am able to bring you to a right understanding. This would be a playing
back the Marquis's weapons upon himself, and no reflection upon your
constancy, who cannot rationally be supposed to be in love with a lady
you never saw, and from whom it is impossible you can have any
returns." "No," replied Camillo, impatient till she had done speaking,
"I have seen too much of Leonora's levity and inconstancy of temper,
ever to think of her more. I once prized her as my greatest blessing;
my soul saw no comfort but in her; and all my views of happiness
centred in the hopes of possessing her: but now I have recovered my
senses; the familiar posture I saw her in with the treacherous
Marquis, has erased the idea of her from my mind, and I can only think
with contempt on one who can be so lavish of her favours, to so new an
acquaintance, and at a time too, that she received my addresses."
Leonora, for he now perceived it was she herself who was talking to
him, could hold no longer, or bear to hear herself treated in such a
manner, but flew into the utmost rage, and neglected to falsify her
voice, as she had done in the foregoing part of the conversation. She
loaded him with all the opprobrious epithets she could think of: "Is
it possible," says she, "that such a wretch as thou art, dares think
of Leonora with contempt? Can a thing, meant only for her sport and
pastime, presume to descant with such freedom upon her actions, and
charge her with levity and inconstancy? Dost thou think such an empty
boy as thyself could raise in her mind anything beyond amusement? Art
thou so vain as to think I ever gave thee any encouragement, but
merely to make a jest of thee? Know, now I am acquainted with thy
disposition, I loathe, I hate, and despise thee! But for the future,
when I have a mind to divert myself, it shall be with my lap-dog, or
monkey, rather than with such an unanimated coxcomb as thou art."

Here she ceased, and remained silent for some time, for want of
breath, and in expectation of his answer. For his part, he was as much
amazed, as if a gust of wind had transported him to the Pike of
Teneriff<31>, and perfectly at a loss for an answer suitable to so odd
a rencounter, so unexpected an explanation. At last he made shift to
stammer out, in a very confused tone, "Madam, as you are pleased to
loathe and despise me so much, I shall endeavour for the future, not
to offend you by my presence, and leave you to entertain yourself with
your lap-dog, or monkey, or your less deserving favourite the
Marquis;" and rose from the seat to go out of the arbour: but Leonora,
who now saw that resentment had not the desired effect, and unwilling
to leave any means untried to recover him, in a voice more soft, and
an air of languor in her face and eyes, for she had dropped her mask,
said, "Stay, Camillo, you must not go, I must punish you by my company
some time longer, for the harsh things you said of me, when you did
not think I heard you; stay, and tell me to my face (fashioning it at
the same time into a bewitching smile) is it possible that you can
really think so contemptibly of me? Can that warm passion you
described in such soft, such tender, and persuading accents, but some
days ago, be totally extinct? Do not you find the generous flame
giving new life to the yet warm embers, and ready to repeat again the
same soft vows with which you stole upon my unguarded affections. Yes,
Camillo, I see it in your eyes; those faithful expositors of a fond
heart; I see the soft deity, reassuming his former empire in thy soul;
thy tongue is only withheld by a false punctilio of honour, and an
unaccountable hankering after the visionary beauties of a mere
portrait."

The first part of her discourse had almost melted his resentment, and
brought him on his knees to implore her forgiveness for what had
passed; but the mention of the picture, recalled the original to his
memory, recalled his allegiance to Angelina, and enabled him to tell
Leonora, that as he was too contemptible in her eyes to serve for any
purpose but her amusement, so he had too good an opinion of himself,
to contribute any more to the increase of her mirth at his expense;
begged she would permit him to withdraw, and leave her to pursue her
frolic, where it would be better received, while he, for his part,
would content himself with the ideal pleasure of admiring the picture
of Angelina, till he was so happy to see the dear original. "To
encourage you to go on," returned Leonora, "and feed that hopeless
flame, would be punishment enough, if I designed to deal with you as
you deserve; but faithless as thou art, I cannot suffer thee, Ixion-
like<32>, to pursue a shadow; no, added she, clasping one of his
hands, and moulding it tenderly in hers, while she gazed on him with
all the fondness of wild desire, you must know your own happiness
better, and pursue more substantial enjoyment. I cannot bear to be
rivalled by the picture of my sister: your love is downright idolatry,
unnatural, misplaced devotion, you vowed you loved me; methinks the
tender sounds, the soft thrilling accents, that warmed my virgin
heart, still echo in my delighted ears. Your vows are mine; I claim
them as my due; say then, dear deceiver, why am I forsaken?"
"Because," replied he, "you are unconstant, and first taught me to
change to an object less variable." "No; Camillo," returned she, "you
are but little acquainted with the hearts of women, and far less with
mine. I saw you wavering, and contrived that interview with the
Marquis on purpose to raise your jealousy, which I expected would have
fixed you for ever mine; but I have overshot my mark, and made myself
forever wretched. I hate and despise the Marquis for his treachery to
you, and would sooner let the race of men become extinct, than wed
with such a monster. Doubt not, Camillo, my sincerity, for to what
purpose else this meeting? Why expose myself to the danger of a
discovery, if not to tell you how truly and sincerely I love you, and
how much I repent the trial I made of your temper? An artifice, though
innocently meant, yet I must curse with my late breath, if I cannot
persuade you to forget it, and restore me to my former place in your
affections." She expressed these last words with so much warmth, that
she sunk breathless on the seat in the arbour, and had accompanied
them with such piercing looks, and bewitching gestures, that Camillo
must have been a boy indeed, had he been insensible to so many
temptations, from one of the finest women in Europe. His smothered
passion now began to blaze afresh, and the resentment with which he
was still filled, gave place to the returning raptures of love. He
clasped the almost fainting fair to his bosom, and in an ecstasy cried
out, "Is it possible I can be so happy to find you true as fair? Is it
possible, that all I have seen is but artifice? Repeat the
transporting sounds, and let me breathe my soul in acknowledgments for
thy mighty blessing." She answered him with murmuring sighs, and balmy
kisses, sufficient to have animated a man of snow. The arbour was
surrounded with jessamine that met in amorous folds to shade them from
the sun, and formed a grotto for the God of Love. The earthy seats
were covered with grass and flowers, wrought into a natural carpet,
that of themselves invited to amorous dalliance. The birds, from the
neighbouring trees, warbled in artless melody the tender joys of love;
the whispering zephyrs gently fanned the amorous flame, and joined
with time, place, and opportunity, to beat an alarm to the most
mysterious rites of the last act of love. He pressed her panting
breasts, that gently heaved to meet the amorous touch, and by degrees
proceeded to greater freedoms, which Leonora but faintly resisted; she
chid him gently for his boldness, and bid him go to his picture, and
there play the wanton. Then, as if she had said something too severe,
she made it up with a kiss, and hid her blushes in his bosom. They
were now both wound up to the highest pitch, and Camillo was ready for
a general assault, when the maid came running into the arbour, to tell
them that her brother Theodore, with the Marquis, and some others in
company, were just coming up to the terrace.

This roused them from their amorous trance into the greatest confusion
imaginable, as not knowing how to avoid meeting the Marquis. Leonora
concluded to trust to her masque, and take her chance of passing
unobserved; and Camillo made a breach through the jessamine that
surrounded the arbour, into another walk, and got clear off, promising
to wait on her on the first summons, to settle matters to their mutual
satisfaction. But the lady was not so lucky as she had hoped for, for
the Marquis and her brother knew her, and said they came in search of
Camillo, who, they were told, by one that saw him, was on the terrace
with some ladies. They asked Leonora if she had seen him; to which she
replied, that she had not, and believed he would not choose to have
held any conversation with her, if he had been there; but she spoke
with so much hesitation, and appeared so confused in her conversation,
that the Marquis began to fancy there was something more than ordinary
the matter with her. She left the gardens, after taking two or three
turns; and they went in search of Camillo, whom they found his
apartment, in a very bad humour, both on account of his being
disturbed in so critical a moment, and on reflecting on the treachery
of Theodore and the Marquis, in feeding him with hopes of Angelina,
when they knew the was quite otherwise disposed of. However, he did
not care to come to any explanation, till he had some further
discourse with Leonora, who he believed would soon find means to see
him. He pretended to be indisposed, and by that means got rid of their
company, which was grown very troublesome.

Theodore was no sooner gone, and the Marquis returned to his own
apartment, than he called for Vilario, and told him the whole affair,
with the conversation that had happened between him and Leonora, and
desired his advice how to proceed with the Marquis, and Theodore.
Vilario was prodigiously surprised to hear that Leonora had taken such
an unprecedented step, and the more so, as he had some reason to
believe she had made an assignation with the Marquis that evening: for
though the Marquis had not told him expressly, that he had an
appointment with that lady, yet, by hints which he dropped, and the
knowledge that he had no other intrigue upon his hands, he concluded
that an assignation which he said he had with one of the fairest
kindest girls in the universe, must be with her. He advised Camillo
not to be rash in believing things to the disadvantage of either the
Marquis or Theodore, barely upon her suggestion, since it was possible
the story of the nunnery might be all a contrivance of her own, to
wheedle him back to her purposes; and that from her behaviour on the
terrace, he had reason to believe her of a disposition capable of
jilting both him and the Marquis; and that the best method he could
observe, was to keep himself free from any fresh engagement with her,
till he saw how she treated the Marquis, and he could get some more
light into Angelina's circumstances.

The next morning he received a billet from Leonora, enclosed in a
cover addressed to him; but in the following terms:
"My dear Marquis,
What have you done to bewitch me? It is but two hours since you
left me, and I think them as many ages, and cannot forbear
writing to you, though I have nothing to say to you; but my soul
is so full of your dear idea, and my imagination so charmed with
the rapturous thoughts of last night's bliss, that it's some
relief to my fond passion, to think that what I write, however
trifling, will be read by you, and give a new proof how much you
have charmed all my faculties, and with what sincerity,
I am for ever yours,
Leonora.
P. S. I had almost forgot to tell you, to avoid seeing Camillo
till I have spoke with you, that we may appear both in one story
to him, from whom our happiness must be for some time
concealed."

It is easy to conceive the rage Camillo was in on reading this billet,
which he saw plainly was not meant for him, but must have come by
mistake. He communicated it to Vilario, who was equally surprised and
concerned, not so much at discovering Leonora to be a jilt, which was
no more than he expected, but on account of the difference that might
arise between Camillo and the Marquis; for he doubted not, but the
latter had received the billet designed for Camillo, and from thence
might infer a double dealing from that quarter, contrary to the
engagements Camillo had agreed to but a few days before. He advised
Camillo to avoid seeing him, till he had endeavoured to sound him with
regard to his receipt of any message that morning, from whence they
might take measures. Camillo immediately dressed, and went out
privately to breakfast with an acquaintance, and appointed Vilario to
bring him intelligence at the English Coffee-House.

He had not been gone ten minutes, when the Marquis came, who finding
him abroad, appeared in the greatest rage imaginable. Vilario
endeavoured to find out the cause of his chagrin, but it was some time
before he could get anything out of him; but "Damn such treacherous 
friends!but there was a way to be revenged of them, and he would have
the pleasure of exposing that cursed jilt." Vilario begged to be
informed who the persons were with whom he seemed to be so much
incensed, hoped he could not apply any of those epithets to Camillo.
"Yes, I can," replied the Frenchman, "and he deserves many more
odious. Read that letter, which came under cover to me this morning,
and see if I have not reason to express my resentment in the highest
terms, after the promises made me but a few days ago." Vilario took
the letter, and read as under
"Dear lovely youth,"
How have I cursed the hare-brained Marquis for disturbing us
from so sweet a trance of bliss, as that into which you lulled
me, in the arbour last night: How has my soul been tortured,
that I was obliged to part with you before I had fully cleared
all your suspicions with regard to that odious creature, and
confirmed you fully mine. The conquest was almost, nay
altogether complete; for your sighs, your vows, your trembling
accents, every look, every action, spoke you altogether mine;
but if any doubt still hangs upon your mind, meet me at the same
place and hour this evening, when I hope we shall not be
interrupted by the Marquis, whom I have engaged on a party with
my brother, at too great a distance to give us any disturbance.
I shall be impatient, my dear Camillo, till I see you, and more
so, till I am
Wholly yours,
LEONORA"

Though Vilario was in some measure prepared for this letter, by the
one he had read under Camillo's cover, yet he could not help being
surprised, that a woman, every way accomplished, and who appeared so
circumspect in her carriage, should be capable of such abandoned
practices. He told the Marquis, that he could not blame him at first
sight for condemning Camillo, but he believed, if the matter was
wholly sifted to the bottom, without prejudice or partiality, he might
be far less culpable than he imagined. "How less culpable?" replied
the Marquis, in a rage, "Is it not plain that he has broke his word
with me, and combined with that jilting devil to abuse me? If I search
to eternity, I cannot find more evident tokens of treachery and double
dealing, than this in my hand; but by heavens I will be revenged, and
let him know what it is to trifle with me, since he has set so little
value on my friendship, as to abuse it in so gross a manner." "I would
not have you determine rashly," replied Vilario, somewhat heated by
his threats; "I believe Camillo has too much regard for himself, to
act any part that might give him the least cause for repentance. I am
sensible he values your friendship, and has done nothing to merit your
resentment, which I am sure he dares meet, in whatever shape it
appears; but let me advise you, Monsieur, not to allow your passion to
get the better of your reason, before you have taken the proper steps
to come at an explanation of this riddle, lest you should repent your
rashness when it is too late. I could partly explain this affair, and
let it in such light as to convince you, that the object of your
quarrel is not worth your resentment, and that you should rather join
with Camillo, in exposing a woman, whose conduct merits the utmost
contempt: but you are too warm to hear reason, and I must leave you to
cool yourself in your own way."

The Marquis appeared somewhat cooled by what Vilario said, and desired
him to put himself in his circumstances, and acknowledge if he had not
sufficient grounds to be highly incensed, from the appearance of
things; but he was so desirous to find Camillo innocent, as to his
suspicions, that he would patiently hear what he could offer to
destroy them, and pursue what measures he pleased, to come at the
meaning of this letter. Vilario desired that he would only command his
temper, and permit him to open the affair to Camillo, without whose
consent he would not communicate what he knew, and that he promised he
should have what satisfaction he could wish: to this the Marquis
consented, gave him the letter, and promised not to stir abroad while
Vilario went in search of Camillo: but before Vilario left the room,
Camillo's servant came back with a message, that his master and
Theodore were gone out of town, and would not be at home till towards
evening. The fellow was asked, if he knew where they were gone, and
what company was with them? He said, he knew not where; that he saw
them go out of the English Coffee-House together, and that his master
had given him that message to Vilario. The Marquis began now to be
more enraged than before, believing that Theodore was in concert with
his sister and Camillo, to abuse him; but Vilario told him, he had
reason to have other sentiments, and that he was afraid they were
about to come to some dangerous explanation of that affair, and
requested the Marquis to go along with him in search of them, to
prevent, if possible, the consequences of a quarrel, which he
suspected to be the cause of their going out of town together.

The Marquis consented, and they went to all the places where they
could expect them to be, but their search was in vain, and they were
at last obliged to content themselves with staying for his return at
the Gardens of ; where it was possible he might come at the hour
appointed by Leonora, in case Theodore was in the secret of their
correspondence; there let the reader leave the Marquis to fret and
fume for some hours, that he may be informed how Camillo passed his
time for that space, which was more agreeably then either the Marquis
or Vilario expected.



Chapter XI.

In passing from his friend's, where he had breakfasted, to the English
Coffee-House, he met Theodore, who accosted him with the usual
frankness, but Camillo received him coldly, and told him he was glad
to meet him, though not with their former friendly warmth, yet to
explain something in which he appeared to have infringed that
friendship, which he once thought so happily subsistent between them.
Theodore replied, with a smile, "Come, my life for it, I guess the
cause of this mighty chagrin, some petticoat quarrel, is it not,
Camillo? You lovers are the strangest, peevish, testiest creatures on
earth; your mistress cannot frown upon you, but presently you must
revenge it on your best friends; but we must bear with your foibles,
till you have foibled the girl out of her maidenhead, and then you may
chance to become conversable creatures: but pray let us walk
somewhere, and learn this mighty affair, which makes you look so
prodigiously wise all of a sudden." Camillo, without any reply,
marched on to the Coffee House, and Theodore followed: they went into
a private room, and Camillo addressed Theodore in this manner.

"You may easily guess what is my present quarrel; I am not surprised
at your penetration, but I am shocked to find that a man I thought
actuated by principles of honour, should be conscious of so much
treachery to his friend, and bear the thoughts of being charged with
it so calmly. I have a petticoat-quarrel as you call it, but that I
despise, having one of a more serious nature, with one who wears a
sword, and I hope dares use it. It is with you, sir, I mean, for your
pretending to play the fool with me about your sister in the nunnery,
and promising me your good offices, when you knew at the same time she
is to take the veil at Brussels within this week."Pray, Camillo,"
returned Theodore, laughing most immoderately, where did you sleep
last night? Have you dreamt all this about my sister and a nunnery;
sure you cannot be in your right senses? I assure you my sister
Angelina has not a bit of nun's flesh about her, and never was, nor
never will be within the walls of a nunnery. You knew yourself she has
nothing of the nun in her composition, therefore recollect yourself,
and rouse from this dream, or if you needs must continue in it,
prithee tell me who put the maggot into your head." "By heavens,"
replied Camillo, "this is enough to put me out of my senses such
consummate impudence is sufficient to awake me even from death. How
should I know what composition your sister is made of, who never saw
her in my life, and as things now appear, hope I never shall, nor any
belonging to you; you are all alike all imposters""Hold, Camillo",
replied Theodore, do not go too far with your exclamation: you know my
sister Angelina very well; have seen her, spoke with her, conversed
with, and made love to her, and know more of her than you deserve; but
I see what you are driving at, you are sick of that choice, want to
patch up matters with Leonora, and send poor Angelina to a nunnery,
that you may get her fortune; is it not your own plot which you would
sham upon me? Come, confess all, and I may perhaps set matters right
once more""I would have you, Theodore," said Camillo, interrupting
him, "treat this matter seriously; you have carried your ridicule
beyond the bearing of mortal patience: in short, sir, your sister
Leonora told me, that she and the Marquis are to be married within
this week, and Angelina to take the veil at Brussels, at the same
time: that you knew this, and only amused me, that I might give no
interruption to the match. I expect, Theodore, a proper explanation of
this matter, or such satisfaction for the indignity, as becomes a
gentleman""Pray, sir," says Theodore, "when did Leonora tell you this
fine story, and where?""Last night," returned Camillo, on the terrace
of the Gardens of Orange, about six in the evening, where I met her by
appointment""Now, Camillo," said Theodore, "I see plainly you are
delirious, or possessed, for I assure you on my honour, that you never
received any message from Leonora, made no appointment with her, did
not see her, or speak one word to her of any sort whatever; you are
certainly bewitched; I will send for a priest to exorcise you with
bell, book and candle." "No, sir," replied Camillo, wound up to the
highest pitch of rage, and clapping his hand to his sword, "you have
no occasion to send for a priest to me; I have got something here more
powerful at exorcising than all the priests in Christendom; and with
which, sir, I shall make bold to spoil your mirth, therefore let's go
where our points may speak to be understood, or your tongue is past my
apprehension, though I hope your person is not beyond my chastisement
for your impertinence. Come, sir, follow me; he who is so ready to
give an affront, is always prepared to defend it." "So I must follow
you to fight," replied Theodore, must I? A very pretty jest indeed!
That's laying the plot too deep. I see through it, you design to marry
my sister Leonora, to put Angelina into a nunnery, run me through the
lungs, and so whip into our whole fortune at once: truly, Camillo, you
are a notable politician, but a little too greedy; it is impossible
for me to comply with all your demands, therefore you, and Leonora,
who I suppose has helped to hatch this hopeful project, must new model
it; for in short, I shall not be run through the body for e'er a
sister in Christendom""Damn your sister," said Camillo, she's a wre,
and you are a prating coward, and I will cudgel you, if you do not
follow me, or draw here." "Prithee, Camillo," returned Theodore, "do
not look so fierce; you will fright me by that important countenance;
but, however, rather than be cudgelled, I will follow you, though it
is ten to one, that before evening you will be glad to follow me, on a
quite different errand."

It was on this occasion that Camillo dispatched his servant on the
message above-mentioned, as they were on their way towards the fields.
But they had not parted with the servant above two hundred yards, when
Theodore stopped short, and told Camillo, that as this affair might be
of dangerous consequence to one or other of them, he hoped he would
permit him to step home, to lay out of his pockets some papers of
consequence relating to his family, and write a short note to settle
an affair of importance, which he might perhaps never have the
opportunity of doing, and then he should have what satisfaction he
pleased; and begged that he would go along with him, that he might not
suspect he intended to disappoint his humour for breathing a vein.

Camillo, whose natural timidity, and love of life, had by this time
much abated his rage, consented willingly, not without hopes that some
incident might occur which would prevent the intended engagement. They
went up to Theodore's bedchamber, who begged of him to compose himself
for some minutes, while he stepped into his closet, where he would not
be long settling the affairs of this world, and preparing for a
journey to the next. He then went into his closet, and shut the door
after him, and Camillo walked up and down in great agony of spirit;
for the cheerful and composed air with which Theodore delivered
himself, gave him a very high idea of his courage, and in course of
his own danger in the rencounter. He wished a thousand times to find
out some handsome excuse to avoid it, but he had said so much, that he
could not, without betraying the most abject dastardly disposition,
offer at any evasion. He was far from thinking Theodore stayed long in
his closet, he rather feared that the minutes would fly too swiftly
away, and wished he would take an English precedent of a mile long for
his last will, which he supposed him writing, or that he might stay
where he was to eternity. He now turned his face from the closet-door,
and durst not throw his eyes towards it, lest he should see it open
again; in a word, he was in the most dreadful panic that can be
imagined, when the opening of the closet-door, made his teeth chatter
in his head, and his knees smite one against another; his back was
towards it, and he had scarce life enough left to turn about, when he
heard his adversary say to him, in a merry tone of voice, "The affairs
of this sublunary world are now dispatched, let us with all speed,
Camillo, prepare to take our chance who is to get first to the next: I
hate to be long deliberating about what must be done some time or
other." Camillo then got just strength enough to face about, when his
surprise was almost equal to his fear, on seeing, instead of Theodore,
as he thought, Leonora loosely dressed, in the same gown she had on
last night in the arbour. 	On seeing his amazement, she asked him,
laughing, if she appeared more terrible to him in petticoats, than she
did just now in breeches? "Come," added she, "I have no stays on, I
will stand as fair a pass as any man in the Netherlands, and take a
thrust in this dress as well as in yours. Therefore, let's along."
"Good God!" returned Camillo, who had by this time recovered his
spirits and surprise, "What is the meaning of this? Sure madam I have
not taken you all this morning for your brother Theodore! I could not
sure be such a dunce as not to have perceived the difference. Yes, but
you have, returned she, and are so blind now, when you see me in my
proper dress, that you do not know me, though we have been acquainted
this month, for I am neither Leonora nor Theodore, but your Brussels
nun, Angelina." "Angelina!" returned Camillo, almost wild with
astonishment, and catching her eagerly in his arms, "For God's sake,
madam, explain the amazing riddle, and do not fill me with excess of
surprise; your voice and features are like Theodore's, but more like
Leonora's, for thus she looked, thus she spoke, thus was the dressed
last night in the arbour, and I cannot for, my life perceive the least
difference." "You have not examined me so narrowly as you did the lady
in the arbour," replied she: "but I told you at the coffee-house, that
Leonora did not meet you in the arbour, and now I repeat it, for it
was no other than I, who, at that time personated my sister Leonora,
to try how firmly you were attached to Angelina, whom you supposed,
you had never seen but in miniature, and you know I found you but a
changeling swain, for which I laid a plot this day to have punished
you, and obliged you to repeat to me, in my own person, those tender
sighs you offered me, as proxy for Leonora. But to explain the whole
mystery, you must know my sister Leonora and I are twins, and so
alike; that nothing but difference of dress, and colouring of the
eyebrows, can make us distinguishable by our nearest relations. Our
features, our voice, our mien and gesture are the same, and in our
inclinations there subsists almost as much similitude. We came both to
town together, purely to pursue a frolic; and resolved that one of us
should by turns appear in men's apparel, and personate our brother
Theodore, who is now in the emperor's service, far enough from hearing
of our rambles; and our kinsman, with whom we live, has happily so
good an opinion of our prudence, as to humour us in our conceit,
believing we shall make no bad use of the indulgence he grants us. I
was in the male capacity, when you was first introduced to the family,
and found in myself a disposition to esteem you more than I believe
you deserve, but my real person was supposed to be at Brussels. I was
obliged to receive you afterwards as Leonora, in which shape you made
some overtures, which I received but too sensibly. When the Marquis
was introduced, my sister Leonora conceived the same regard for him,
that I did for you, though unhappily he was at first more taken with
my picture, which was shown you on purpose to have engaged you there,
but you were then in a humour only to be pleased with your supposed
Leonora, and the Marquis gaining ground for himself, you surprised
them together, believing it the person you had first made love to,
though it was not, for I then personated Theodore; you know you
shifted sides, and once more declared yourself Angelina's vassal. But
to try your fidelity, and if resentment had not more the management of
your professions than love, I sent you that billet which brought you
to the terrace, and personated Leonora so well, that I had but little
reason to be pleased with my success in my own person; and to be
revenged of you, we contrived two letters, the one for the Marquis,
which spoke the real sentiments of Leonora; and, the other only as she
was taken for me, which we expected would have set you and the Marquis
together by the ears, the bad consequences of which we had taken
precautions to prevent, but my meeting you in your fighting humour,
has spoiled that project, and obliged me to explain myself in my
proper person, which I should not have done, if I could have prevailed
on my courage to have stood out a battle."

All the while Angelina was giving this account of their plot, Camillo
gazed with eyes wild with love, and every now and then, pressed her
eagerly to his panting bosom. When she had done speaking, he closed
the charming confession with innumerable warm balmy kisses, and
blessed a thousand times his kind stars, that made him so completely
happy, as thus to embrace and encircle in his arms the lovely
Angelina, from whom he swore he would never part, till he had so
transfused his soul into hers, that he might fix a real difference
between her and her sister, and teach himself to know his idol by
unerring sympathy. "Forgive" (added he) "my charming angel, my seeming
disloyalty; my heart was true to my first vows, true to the bright
excellence of Angelina, though my dull senses could not discover the
perplexing cheat with which my charmer was pleased to embarrass me;
but now the cloud is withdrawn, and lest I should be again deceived, I
here swear eternal love and adoration, to the dear person in my arms,
under whatever name she appears, or whatever form she assumes.""What!
replied Angelina, "Will you pay homage even to breeches? Will it not
look a little awkward, to see Camillo in raptures with his friend
Theodore?" "No more doublings, I beseech you, my charming Angelina:
but it is well thought on, pray, what have you done with your male
accoutrements? I must see that you have not them still about you, and
that you do not next day persuade me I have been all this while making
love to a real Theodore." With this he attempted to be a little
familiar with her petticoats, which she endeavoured to hinder, but it
was so faintly, and his curiosity so natural on such occasions, that
she in a manner permitted him to satisfy himself, that she had left
everything that was male about her in the closet, and brought out
nothing but pure, warm, delicate, luscious woman. He was resolved to
remove all doubts, and searched and rummaged every hole, creek and
corner, lest anything virile might have lain concealed, and while he
beat the wanton bush with his fingers, he fanned the fond flame with
balmy kisses, and pressed her with eager transports. They were sitting
on a couch, on which they had both fallen along, in an ecstasy of fond
delight. And now the swain's pulse beat high; the nymph breathed
short, and murmured, "Ah! Camillo! You ruin me with love; cease, my
dear charmer, thus to dissolve my soul in rapture so transportingah
CamilloCamilloyou undo me.I cannot bearoh I cancannot bear the
!" This said, she fainted, sunk, and died away.

Camillo having thus got to the bottom of his mistress's secrets, and
removed every the least shadow of doubt as to her person, by repeated
searches, they had time to think of the embarrassment under which the
Marquis must remain all this while, and out of charity determined to
relieve him. Leonora was called to give her advice on the steps
necessary to clear the prejudices he might have conceived against her,
on the score of the misplaced letter. When she appeared, though in a
different dress from Angelina, yet the likeness was so great, that
Camillo was afraid to trust them out of his sight, lest they should
take another whim into their heads to puzzle him afresh by shifting
sides, notwithstanding all the pains he had taken to be acquainted
with everything about Angelina; however to make him easy, Angelina was
so good as to show a small mole she had on her neck, which might
distinguish her at any time in the light from Leonora; and he had
found out another mole less in sight, by which he could satisfy
himself of her identity, even in the dark. They all resolved to send a
message to the Marquis, in Camillo's name, to meet him at the
apartments of the ladies.

When the Marquis received the message, he was highly chagrined on
finding that Camillo was there, and, was on the point of sending him
back a challenge to meet him in a place more proper to determine their
quarrel: but Vilario, who had never stirred from him all day,
persuaded him to go, and told him, that perhaps he might find
everything cleared beyond his expectation. When the Marquis entered
the room, Camillo and Angelina were setting much in the same posture
in which the Marquis was when Camillo surprised him with Leonora. They
started up at his entrance, and pretended to be much out of
countenance. The Marquis reddened, and could scarce speak with rage;
but addressing himself to Vilario, who had come along with him, "This,
sir," said he, is explanation with a vengeance; I needed not the
testimony of my eyes to convince me of the baseness of a friend, and
the impudence of that damned deceiver Leonora. See, how she stands
self-condemned, with all the marks of conscious guilt in her face! Yet
I believe, if I had the weakness to hear her, she would attempt to
persuade me that all I have seen is mere delusion, but I leave her to
be punished by that traitor there, whom I shall take another time to
expostulate with in a proper manner." At this angry speech, Angelina
and Camillo burst into a loud laugh; whereupon the Marquis, clapping
his hand to his sword, and looking fiercely at Camillo, went towards
the door, where he was met by Leonora, dressed in the same manner as
Angelina. The Marquis started back as if he had seen an apparition,
looked with eyes full of wild amazement, first at the one and then at
the other, compared in his own mind every feature, but could find no
difference. At last, wearied with gazing, he cried out, "For heaven's
sake, some of you speak, and unriddle this mystery; let my ears teach
me, where my devotion is due, since my eyes cannot; for here and there
I see a Leonora, but which is mine, I am utterly at loss to guess."
"If it is Leonora you want, I am here," returned Angelina laughing
"Yes, it is the voice, but you areLet the other Leonora speak but in
that tone, and I am blessed beyond mortal expectation."

"What, monsieur, are you so slow of apprehension," replied Leonora,
"that I must speak to point myself out to you in broad daylight? In
the dark, sir, you might be excused for mistaking, though sure, mere
instinct should find me out, especially in sunshine." "Yes, my
adorable," said the Marquis, "now I find you, and will for ever know
you for the most transcendent of your sex: forgive my dull
apprehension, that could not before discern you from your likeness,
and for those surmises which my fancy, bewildered in this maze, formed
to your prejudice; for though I cannot yet explain the whole riddle,
yet I strongly suspect that Camillo and I have been in an error, and
that you are true as you are fair; and forgive me," added he, turning
to Angelina, "thou perfect likeness of my dear Leonora, for any
rudeness in my behaviour, and teach me by what name to distinguish you
from my better self, or must I multiply my bliss, and pay my devotion
to both." "Hold, replied Angelina, "you have no occasion for a
monopoly; that half there of Leonora may prove enough for you: as for
me, whom you may know by the name of Angelina, I have devoted myself
to this gentleman, to whom I thought you might have afforded same
apology, for the rudeness with which you treated him." Camillo here
interrupted her, and told the Marquis he had no occasion to apologize
to him; that he could forgive anything to his friend, when he had such
good grounds of suspicion: and to keep him no longer in suspense,
after they were seated, Camillo explained the whole riddle to him, and
related very particularly the transaction of that day, and the bloody
combat which he and Angelina, in the person of Theodore, were about to
engage in, with so many diverting circumstances, as made the narration
a very good comedy to the whole company. They spent the evening in
great mirth, till after supper, when the gallants went each to their
several apartments, but not till they had settled a plan for their
more private correspondence for the time to come.

The Marquis, who had not so much aversion to matrimony as Camillo,
married Leonora privately; prosecuted his travels for two years, and
then returning, declared his marriage, and lived happily for many
years with his lady; but Camillo, who still retained his love of
liberty, waived that point with Angelina, making her believe, he could
not marry before his father's death, who had some thoughts of matching
him to the daughter of a neighbouring gentleman, for whom he had
conceived an utter aversion, and that he had extorted an oath from
him, before be set out on his travels, not to marry another while he
lived: he told her, with a thousand oaths, that though he would keep
his promise sacredly with his father, yet, when his death happened, he
would make himself completely happy, in joining his fortune with hers
by the indissoluble bonds of marriage. Angelina, who truly loved him,
could not suspect his sincerity, but believed all he said to be
gospel; and as she had no diffidence of his playing her false, she was
very indifferent about the ceremony, and rather pleased that he would
continue so much longer the lover, and she herself enjoy her natural
liberty, which she knew would be much infringed by the name of a wife,
without bringing her any other real advantage, since she enjoyed
already as much, and perhaps more of the man, than if he was really
her husband.

Camillo continued for some months to be much enamoured of her; she had
so many engaging ways to keep up the fire of love, and so many methods
of making old pleasures seem new, that for some time he quitted all
his rambling inclinations after other women, and scarce ever thought
of pursuing his travels, though his father importuned him almost every
post to proceed to Paris. But he found still some excuse, and remained
at The Hague for eight or nine months, living in the most profuse
manner. He gave frequent balls, masquerades and entertainments to the
ladies, on purpose to oblige Angelina, who was of a very expensive
disposition, and loved these diversions, at which she always presided,
both on account of the preference Camillo gave her to all others, and
on account of her personal excellence, which rendered her the idol of
the men, and the envy of the women.

These diversions were expensive, and more than Camillo's allowance
from his father would admit of; but they were nothing to the sums he
lost at play to Monsieur De Aubevile and Vilario, who took all
occasions to fleece him of his ready money. He drew upon his father,
as long as he could expect his drafts to be answered, and likewise
upon Saphira's fortune, which he had almost exhausted, when he
received advice that his father was at the point of death, and had
commanded him to return, that he might be present at his last moments.
Camillo, who really loved his father with all imaginable tenderness,
was much shocked with this unexpected summons. Though it was natural
for him, as a young man, to wish to be possessed of an estate, yet his
father had treated him with so much indulgence, that he had never
hitherto formed a wish for his death, and scarce knew how to support
the thoughts of it, or that of seeing him in his last agonies,
especially, since by his expensive manner of living since he left
England, he had reason to think his dying father had much ground to be
displeased with him. This thought sat heavy on his mind, but spurred
him to be more speedy in his journey, that he might be so happy as to
find him alive, and obtain his forgiveness for his past conduct.

The moment he received the letter, he gave orders for his departure,
and only took a short leave of Angelina, whom he promised to return
to, as soon as either his father's death, or recovery, would permit
him. He set out that evening, went on board the packet, and in three
days landed in England, where he met the news of his father's death,
with this cutting circumstance, that the wild and extravagant courses
he had followed at The Hague, had been the chief cause of his exit.

On the first news his grief was excessive, and resolutions of a
reformation strong and many: but time, that dissipater of all evils,
soon wore off the gloomy impression, and left the predominant passions
to take their course, and exercise their wonted empire over the soul
of this young libertine. He was now free, of age, and possessed of a
fine estate, with a considerable sum of ready money. His blood was
warm, his passions strong, his appetites keen, and his love of
pleasure, especially the amorous, that most enchanting species of it,
excessive. He had it in his power to gratify all his senses, and
nothing stood in his way but some musty moral principles, which he had
allowed to grow upon him in his melancholy fits, but which he now
found himself inclinable enough to stifle; and the more so, as he had
the advice of the worthy Vilario, on whom he now settled a handsome
pension for life, to bind him for ever to himself; as a boon
companion, not as a tutor or governor to direct him. He soon got the
better of the troublesome, squeamish, moral risings on his conscience,
and once more launched into an ocean of sensual pleasure. He kept
mistresses of all complexions in every corner of the town, and each of
them in the equipage of women of the first quality. These were for his
sober hours of dalliance, while he ranged upon the town, and took up
with game of all sorts, in his more loose moments of tumultuous
gratification, and for five or six months never once thought of
Angelina, nor ever answered her letters, though he received many,
penned in all the variety of style which passion, love, revenge and
disappointment, could dictate to a woman of wit and spirit: but the
novelty of that intrigue was over, and she at too great a distance to
maintain her empire o'er a soul plunged head and ears in all manner of
sensual debauchery, and now taken up in the search of a new face that
pleased his distempered fancy.



Chapter XII

He was one night at the Drawing-room, St. James's<33>, when he saw
presented to his Majesty, the young Countess of *****, whose charms
drew the attention of the whole court, but none so much as Camillo's.
He saw something in her face which he thought familiar to him, and
gave him a warmer emotion than the beauties of her person, which were
truly amiable. He kept his eyes fixed upon her during the whole time
his majesty stayed in the drawing-room, and thought there must be
fascination in her eyes, that could raise a greater commotion within
him, at the first sight, than he had felt on purveying the naked
charms of as complete beauties. He could not take his eyes from her,
so long as to enquire whose daughter she was. The Earl, her husband, a
Peer of Ireland, he knew, and was intimately acquainted with, but had
heard nothing of his marriage, which happened but a few days before,
and was not made public till now. He was among the first to pay his
compliment to the Earl, and extolled his happiness in being possessed
of so fine a woman. The Earl returned his civilities very politely,
but told him, he believed his cousin would not thank him for putting
her to the blush, by the flattery of so near a friend; at this Camillo
seemed much surprised, but more so, when the Earl added, I see Camillo
you are ignorant of the interest you have in my wife, and have forgot
your father's ward Maria. At the mention of that name, so dear to his
infant years, his colour came and went, and he now could perfectly
explain that strange emotion he felt all over him at first sight of
her, and knew it was owing to the yet recent idea of the warm scenes
in the green room, when he first tasted the thrilling pleasures that
soft yielding beauty can bestow. He made his compliments to his cousin
the Countess with more assurance, on this account, than he could
otherwise have done, and a confused throng of ideas of past pleasure
and blooming future hopes, which gave a peculiar sprightliness to his
conversation, and a piercing vivacity to his eyes, which much affected
the Countess, who received him with a mixture of pleasure and pain. He
handed her that night to her coach, and was invited by the Earl to
dine with them next day.

Camillo, when he got home, could not help ruminating in his mind on
those tender moments he passed with Maria, before either of them could
have any perfect notion of the inexpressible joys of love, and the
very idea of the unfinished scenes attempted with her, raised in his
breast every warm desire, and prompted him to feed himself up with the
hopes, that he might presume on their infant intimacy, and build on it
some prospect of being permitted to reap the sweets of that ripe
fruit, which had proved so bitter to him, when green and unfit
together. He now dreamed every night of the beauteous Countess, and
sleeping or waking, thought of the Earl her husband with envy, cursed
his own stars, that he had not thought of her before, and resolved, at
all events, to make an attempt to know if he was more or less
acceptable than he had been formerly; with this view, he dressed
himself one day in the gayest manner, and put on all those airs he
thought capable of attracting the attention of the fair.

He came, and was received by both the Earl and Countess with all the
marks of esteem and friendship; but he could observe a modest blush
and a certain air of confusion in the face of his lovely cousin, as
often as she spoke or looked at him, which he rightly interpreted as
proceeding from reflection on former transactions, a theme he hoped
would now very much employ her thoughts; since he was sure such
thoughts could not fail to inflame the blood, and bring the passions
over to his party, which he knew were so constituted in the fair
Countess, as to be too strong for reason, or education, if once set
afloat. During the time of dinner, he was entertained with the history
of their marriage, which was a match, especially on the Earl's side,
of pure love; for as she had but a small fortune in comparison of his,
yet falling in love with her at first sight, he married her against
the advice of his relations. Camillo applauded his generosity, and
hoped he would never have any cause to repent his choice. But this was
only mere compliment, for that very afternoon he endeavoured to
persuade her to injure him in the most tender point; so faintly is
human nature impressed with common honour or honesty, when it
interferes with their prevailing passions!

After dinner the Earl was obliged to go out upon some business
relating to an office he had at court, and after a proper apology
begged Camillo to divert himself with his cousin, till his return,
which might be in an hour or two. This Camillo looked upon as a good
omen, and resolved to make use of the opportunity, but was yet at some
loss how to introduce the discourse, in a manner suitable to the
delicacy of a woman of her quality, and one so lately married. The
Countess was as much embarrassed as he; the Earl was no sooner gone,
than she appeared all over dyed in a crimson blush; she could not look
at Camillo, as she reflected that this was the first time she had been
alone with him since the discovery of their childish amour, every
circumstance of which came fresh to her memory, and filled her with
shame and confusion. She saw herself alone, with a man, who, from the
early proofs he had, was perfectly acquainted with her amorous
constitution. She saw him yet more lovely than her infant fancy had
thought him, and capable of giving warmer joys than those which though
unfinished, and at such a distance of time, yet the very idea of, gave
a warm glow to the coldest particle about her; she knew by the
tumultuous beating of her heart, that her cousin had yet a strong
place in her affections, and would be able to make strange impressions
if he pursued his advantage, in spite of honour, duty, and the
affection and gratitude she owed the Earl: for, in fact, she had very
little real regard for that nobleman, and had consented to the match
purely to gratify her ambition of being a Countess. All these ideas,
crowding upon her at once, gave her great uneasiness, and made her
quite unable to entertain Camillo with any evenness of temper. Her
accent was unassured, her answers sometimes not to the purpose, and
the whole of her conversation bespoke the inward perturbation of her
mind. Camillo saw it, guessed the cause, and thought it the critical
minute to make his first attack. They were both standing at a window,
looking into the fields; and not far from them Camillo saw some
haymakers busy loading and carrying off the hay, from whence he took a
hint to put in her mind of the first scene of their amorous intimacy.

He observed how happy these country people were, who, free from the
toil and fatigues of pomp and grandeur, enjoy all they wish, and an
uninterrupted stream of pure natural pleasure. "I remember," added he,
"a time, my dear Lady  when I had no cause to envy those happy
swains. It was much in such a scene as that now before us, when you
and I interchanged our infant hearts; but how, alas! is that scene
altered! You have forgot our rural joys, and exchanged them for a
coronet; you have forgot your Camillo, as much as if he had never
been, though I can only, with the dissolution of my being, forget
those happy tender moments we passed together, before vain pomp and
empty titles had force enough to distract our senses. Tell me,
charming Maria, for I must still call you by that dear name, have you
forgot me quite, have you made no reserve, kept no small corner of
that warm panting heart, for your once beloved, but now wretched
Camillo?" He spoke this with so tender and passionate an emphasis,
that the Countess, who at first resolved to take state upon her, and
reprove him for his boldness, felt so many friends within, pleading
warmly in his behalf, that she could not help being moved at what he
uttered, and with a countenance all softness, replied, "You, sir, of
all men living, should be the last to call back past scenes of folly
to my view, in order to replunge me into the errors of my infancy.
What passed in those childish moments ought now to be forgot, and you,
who should be the guardian of my honour, ought to cultivate in me
sentiments becoming the state of life I am now in. Consider, Camillo,
if I were to listen to the dictates of mere sense, in favour of
another, how much you would think your family dishonoured by my
conduct, and I should expect you to join with my Lord in punishing my
transgression; how then can you endeavour to take advantage of former
circumstances, to involve my peace, and the honour of your own family,
in so many fatal consequences, as may attend the pursuit of a
discourse of this kind?""Ah my charming Countess," replied Camillo,
"you speak like one at ease, not on the torturing rack of wild desire,
as I am! Had you still remaining but the smallest grain of that young
but artless love, which once filled your breast, for the once happy
Camillo, all these bugbear mountains of honour, &c. would appear as
molehills. What are all these fanatic notions, but mere prejudices of
education, manacles with which the cunning priest and politic
statesman have contrived to govern the ignorant multitude, and enslave
free-born souls; but none of them observe their own ruses in private:
there the mitred prelate, and the most dignified politician, throw off
the painful disguise, and solace themselves with all the freedom they
please. Why, my dear Maria, should we be less kind to ourselves? Why
deny indulgence to those natural passions which injure no man, and
communicate such great delight? You know I love, as I professed it
when I was incapable of deceit; it was part of any original make and
constitution, grew up with my limbs, and gathered strength in
proportion as I grew towards manhood; and now, unless relieved, must
prey upon my vitals, and become the curse of a life, that has been
only supportable by the bare idea of those joys you can bless me
with."

He had almost brought the Countess to a compliance, when the Earl
returned, just time enough to supersede the expediting of his patent
for a place in heaven, for that time at least. However, it was but
prolonging the evil day; what must be, must be; he was predestinated
to be dubbed a knight of the horned order<34>, into which he was
installed at a milliner's, where Camillo had learnt that the Countess
used to buy trinkets, and where many a husband is furnished with an
head-dress too. Here Camillo met the Countess, and finished what he
had but just entered upon in the green-room.

For a month or two, the secrecy they were obliged to observe in their
meetings, gave their commerce the air of novelty, which inspired
Camillo with some relish beyond the embraces of his kept madams; but
that did not last long, and their mutual ardour was just upon the
decline, when it accidentally met with so abrupt a period, as had near
proved fatal to one or both. Camillo, in some of his rambles, had
taken in a foreign fire, which he communicated to the Countess,
without knowing anything of the matter, till some time after, when the
peer her husband found he had catched the flame. On the first
discovery, he scratched his head, and muttered something between his
teeth to his lady, which gave her to understand, that he suspected his
forehead had not been dealt fairly by. But the Countess was not easily
daunted; she received the charge with great spirit, and resented the
affront offered her, by suspecting her honour and fidelity, in the
true style of an English wife; and told my lord, that she supposed
himself had caught the odious infection from the creatures he kept
company with abroad, had given it her, and, as atonement for such base
usage, like a brute as he was, would endeavour to clear himself at her
expense. She spoke this only by guess, as a thing that possibly might
be; but, fortunately for her, it happened to be really true; the peer
had, in fact, been dabbling with a certain lady of distinction, noted
for not being over reserved of her favours; and he judged it possible
that he might have set fire to his lower tier by her means, and that
his lady might be innocent, at least it was for his peace to think so,
till he had more flagrant proofs of the real existence of his horns,
which for this time he had pocketed, and made up matters with his
wife; which he could not do at a less expense than exposing the whole
intrigue with Lady B, and promising never to see her more.

The Countess having gained this advantage over her husband, easily
forgave his suspicion, and submitted to the cure, without any further
murmuring; but she never forgave her gallant, from whom she knew, by
some chronological circumstances, she had received the precious gift,
though she had, by downright dint of assurance, fixed the scandal upon
my Lord and his paramour; and she never afterwards would allow Camillo
to repeat the old familiarity, since he took so little care of either
his own or her reputation, as to risk his goods in hands that could
give them such an ugly taint, while he was in her service.

Camillo received his dismission with great calmness and Christian-like
resignation; for he now found that all was vanity, and the difference
between a noble commodity and a mere vulgar one, was purely imaginary.
Besides, he had another reason to comfort himself for the loss of the
Countess, which was, that Angelina, wearied out with his obstinate
silence, had at taken the resolution to come over in the packet, and
beat up his quarters in her male dress.

She was no sooner arrived, than she took measures, before she
discovered herself to Camillo, to be informed both of his
circumstances and manner of life, and found, to her great
mortification, that however wild and extravagant his behaviour had
been in Holland, his conduct here was much more abandoned, as there
was scarce any species of vice, or youthful folly, which he had not
fallen into.

This account of him left her no comfort but this, that how much soever
he gave way to the sallies of ungovernable passion, yet he had
preserved the character of a gentleman, and acted nothing that spoke
him meanly wicked; therefore she concluded, that as he might soon be
cloyed with these extravagancies, so he would then naturally return to
a wiser course, and by the help of good advice, be brought to listen
to the dictates of his own reason and to abandon the pursuit of those
pleasures which experience would soon teach him had nothing in them
capable of engaging the affections of a rational creature. She saw his
errors with much concern, and the danger she herself ran by continuing
her affection for him. She even endeavoured to form a resolution of
never seeing him more, and returning to Holland to her friends, who
were yet strangers to the criminal intimacy betwixt them. Her reason
suggested this to her, as the wisest course, since she had scarce any
prospect of aught but ruin and infamy by continuing her connection
with Camillo, and but a small probability remained, that he would ever
be so just to her, as to perform those promises of marriage, which he
had so solemnly made her; for amongst the other parts of his
character, she had learned, that he had always expressed the utmost a
version to matrimony, and made that, and religion, the constant
subject of his ridicule.

Yet, notwithstanding these kind admonitions of her reason, and the
suggestions of her calmer hours of reflection, love, that unreasonable
monitor, who takes pride in baffling every appearance of human
prudence, got the better of her resolutions, and kept her a slave to
its dictates. That bewitching passion had taken such deep root in her
soul, that it found arguments to palliate all Camillo's follies,
glossed over his grossest vices, as little peccadillos, and the
natural frailties of youth and heat of blood; and fed her with
sanguine hopes, that as soon as he should see her, his passion for her
would rekindle and chase away from his mind every inferior object that
now usurped her place in his soul, and that she would then have so
much influence over him, as to induce him to alter his hare-brained
courses, and reclaim him to the paths of virtue and honour.

To a person in love nothing seems impracticable; mere possibilities,
by the warmth of imagination, soon become probable, and probabilities
grow up to absolute certainties, on which the amorous soul builds as
on a rock the hopes of its future happiness. This was the fair
Angelina's case; she no sooner found it possible for Camillo to be
reclaimed, than she believed it probable, and in a day or two, that
probability became so absolutely sure and certain, that she no longer
hesitated to discover herself to her wild gallant, and concluded, that
like Cæsar she had nothing to do but to come, to see, and to conquer
that hideous train of vices which blackened the soul of her Camillo,
and banned her from her place in his heart.

This resolution taken, she and her maid, dressed en cavalier<35>,
called pretty early one morning at Camillo's lodgings; the young rake
was abed and asleep, having been up late the night before on a
debauch, and the servant seemed unwilling to disturb him, but desired
the gentlemen, as they seemed to be, to walk into the dining-room for
some little time, when it was possible his master would be soon
stirring. They went in and sat for half an hour, not a little
chagrined that they were obliged to wait so long: every moment, to the
enamoured Angelina, seemed an age, since her fond heart had feigned to
herself a thousand raptures at an interview of this sort, after so
long a separation; these ideas fluttered her spirits, and warmed her
imagination in proportion as the approached nearer his lodgings, and
could not fail of being highly agitated when in the next room to the
object of her wishes, where she could almost hear him breathe, and yet
was denied the pleasure of rushing to his arms. To amuse her
impatience, she began to look about the room for something to divert
herself, and at last cast her eyes on a handful of papers and letters
lying on a table, which it seems his valet had taken out of his pocket
when brushing the clothes he had on the day before; for by them lay
his snuff-box, handkerchief, and a piece of a broken fan. The very
sight of the last article, gave poor Angelina the utmost concern; for
she thought it no less, than the trophy of some favourite mistress.
She took it up and looked at it, but as she could not guess the owner,
she threw it aside, and took up the snuff-box, which she immediately
knew to be one she had given him, with her picture in enamel in the
inside of it; but how great her surprise, when instead of her own
picture, she saw a very obscene piece placed in the lid! She would
have thrown it that instant into the fire, had not her maid prevented
her by snatching it out of her hand, and telling her, that it was
luckier for her to see her picture supplanted by such as that, than by
the portrait of any other woman. "A few years," added the girl, "may
cure him of these things: such frolics and pranks as young gentlemen,
left to themselves, encourage one another in, cannot rival you long;
his natural good sense must sooner or later get the better of them;
but had he been seriously engaged with any lady of honour and virtue
here you might indeed be alarmed at that; but this convinces me, he
has not at present reflection enough to amuse himself with anything
but trifles. Your presence, madam, must soon awake him from this dream
of delusive pleasure, and teach him once more to relish the superior
delights afforded by a sincere and virtuous passion." "Thou
representest him, girl, as thou wouldst wish him for my sake," replied
her mistress, "but I am afraid he is so habituated to loose pleasures,
that it will prove difficult to reclaim him, while the heat of youth
lasts. But let us see these papers: I'll make bold to look at the
inside of this epistle; "tis sealed and directed to my Lady ***** with
my inconstant's own hand. This is some billet-doux, that he has forgot
to send, and I am resolved to see its contents. She immediately broke
open the seal and read as follows:
"My adorable Lady L ***,
How industrious you are in throwing obstacles in the way of our
mutual happiness? And how cruel is it to keep me thus in the
agonies of death and despair? Is it not enough, that I had
waited for several weeks to have that unconscionable husband of
yours out of the way? How many hours, nay ages, of misery did I
feel, while debarred your sight, by his Lordship's unseasonable 
jealousy? And yet, when fortune paved the way for transporting
bliss, and opportunity spread her golden wings, to conceal the
dear delicious theft, you, tyrant-like, trifled with my passion,
and instead of rewarding my former sufferings, could blast my
hopes on the very brink of fruition, and reward my ardent,
constant, generous flame, with your unreasonable jealousy of a
quondam Dutch mistress. Good Lady L ***, can you have so mean an
opinion of me, as to disbelieve everything I have told you of
that lady, whom have left at the distance of The Hague, and long
since broke off all correspondence with. How often have I swore
to you that I never loved her, but as a temporary amusement, and
to pass away the dull hours, in a very dull climate. But since I
returned to dear England, that emporium of beauty and pleasure,
I have never once thought of her; and, by heavens, since I saw
your Ladyship, I have had no idea of any other woman. Lay aside
then, for God's sake, these unnecessary fears, and set us not
lose the precious moments afforded by my Ld's absence, but
devote them to those immortal transports of pleasure, which only
you can communicate to,
Madam,
Your constant adorer,
Camillo."

Angelina, on reading this letter, felt all the pangs of jealousy,
which a woman so highly affronted could possibly feel; for she made no
doubt but the Dutch lady mentioned with so much contempt, was herself.
She was scarce able to restrain her rage within any bounds, or hinder
herself from rushing into his chamber, and with her sword taking
vengeance on her perfidious betrayer. However, reason still held the
reins of government tight enough to restrain her from so rash a
procedure, and at last inspired her with the resolution of quitting
the house, to avoid the possible consequences of an interview with one
she found herself, at that instant, so terribly out of humour with.
She put the letter in her pocket, and in going out, told the servant,
whom they met in the hall, that as they saw no likelihood of his
master's rising soon, they did not choose to disturb him, nor could
they conveniently stay any longer, but would wait on him another time.
Angelina returned to her lodgings in the most piercing uneasiness, and
was some time before she could come to any resolution, as to her
further proceedings. At last a thought suggested to her an opportunity
of seeing this rival, to whose charms Camillo had so basely betrayed
her:it was this, the letter she had in her pocket was under cover,
which she wrapped up in a fresh one, having first taken a copy of it,
and directed and sealed it as at first; then ordered a chair to be
called, and gave directions to carry her to Lady L***'s in her
cavalier dress, which was very elegant, and gave her all the
appearance of a person of distinction, with which her air and mien
perfectly corresponded. She was soon introduced to the lady, whom she
found at her toilet, in a very rich but negligent morning dress. She
was truly a fine woman, in the bloom of youth, with a carriage and
gesture full of majesty, and very suitable to her high birth and
dignity. Angelina saw it with surprise, and owned her truly charming,
notwithstanding the prejudice she had conceived against her, and was
amazed that a woman every way so accomplished, and in whose face there
appeared so much modesty, should give encouragement to the
dishonourable addresses of so wild a young fellow as Camillo.

Our pretended gallant told the lady, on his first entrance, that he
owed the honour which he now did himself in waiting on her, to a
friend of his, who had charged him with a commission on some private
business; on this the lady ordered her women to retire, and then
Angelina delivered Camillo's letter, acquainting her, that an affair
of the utmost consequence detained that gentleman from the pleasure of
waiting on her Ladyship, and therefore he had done him the honour to
make him the bearer of his letter.

On mentioning Camillo, Lady L****blushed, and on reading the letter,
was not able to conceal her confusion. However, after a short pause
she assumed a more composed air, put the billet carelessly into her
pocket, and told the messenger that Camillo needed not have been so
anxious about an affair of so small consequence. "But, sir," added
she, "as your friend has troubled you with a commission to me, you
will find yourself in some measure obliged to take the further trouble
of one from me to him. I have a very sincere regard for Camillo; he is
the son of a lady to whom I am under many obligations, which renders
everything belonging to her very dear to me. He is also an intimate
acquaintance of my Lord's, who has taken great pains to oblige him,
and done him some signal good offices; and would do more, were that
young gentleman more his own friend than he is; but since his coming
from abroad, he has led such a wicked profligate life, that all honest
men are become ashamed of his company, and every woman of reputation
shuns him as a pest. My lord has taken the liberty to advise him of
his impending ruin, and used all the arguments to reclaim him before
destruction has quite overtaken him, that could be suggested by the
most tender and disinterested affection. Ever since his arrival in
England, he has behaved with very great respect to me; on which
account my Lord advised me to use my influence to persuade him to
forsake a particular set of bad acquaintance, who will certainly, in
the end, eradicate every principle of virtue and honour in his mind,
and reduce him to beggary into the bargain. Willing to save the
representative of a noble family, who had been a happiness to their
friends and neighbours and an honour to their country, I cheerfully
complied with my Lord's commands, and took several opportunities of
lecturing Camillo; and for that purpose my Lord has frequently left us
alone. At first he heard me rail at his foibles very patiently, and
joined with me in ridiculing them, but I observed his continual aim
was to turn the conversation from the serious, and give it an air of
gallantry, and in a little time I discovered that he was weak enough
to impute the pains I took to convince him of his folly, to a criminal
passion, which his vanity suggested to him I had conceived for him. I
was highly chagrined at this affront, but, as he had not yet spoke
plainly, I durst not resent it; nor could I help continuing my
endeavours to reclaim him, without acquainting my Lord with what I
feared. This encouraged the wild Camillo to become more familiar, and
to give his conversation a looser turn than usual; and about two days
ago he had the assurance to make me a downright declaration, and that
at a time when it was difficult for me to resent the indignity. For my
Lord being out of town, he came to pay his visit as usual, and found
me in a little library at the lower end of the garden, out of hearing
of any of the family. When he entered, he seemed somewhat flustered
with liquor, and his eyes and actions soon spoke the disorder of his
passion. Though shocked at the danger I was in, I had presence of mind
enough to think it better to dissemble, than by an unseasonable rigour
to expose myself to the rudeness of a young rake, inflamed by the
fumes of wine, and to my knowledge under very few, or at least very
weak ties of honour.

"I heard his wild declaration with undissembled confusion, but feigned
not to resent it, as I certainly should had I been less in his power.
He proceeded to great indecencies, from whence I could only divert
him, by urging the insincerity of his passion, and telling him that I
wondered how he could pretend to offer me a heart, which I knew was
mortgaged to a lady in Holland. This made him fancy the conquest half
over, and gave him hopes that he should be able to succeed by fair
means; and therefore he began very warmly to clear himself of any
previous engagement. I started several objections to what he offered
in order to prolong the debate, in hopes that some of the servants
would come to my relief: I had my wish; for just when he seemed in the
height of his assurance, and ready to gratify it at any rate, my maid
came to inform me, that a lady of my acquaintance was come to see me.

"On the strength of this interview, sir, he has writ me the letter
which you brought, which contains only some scattered hints of what he
said the other day, and is wholly of a piece with the rest of his
conduct; only I cannot account for his being so weak as to entrust
such a letter with any person breathing, let the suppositions on which
it is founded be either true or false; but as his conduct is every way
unreasonable, I shall not trouble myself about it, but hope, sir, that
you, as a gentleman of honour, will let Camillo know that his presence
here will be no longer suffered, and that if he persists to disturb me
with his insolent passion, I shall be obliged, in vindication of my
own virtue, to expose him in such manner, as may bring him to a sense
of what is due to my rank in the world, and to the wife of his
benefactor."

Angelina heard this relation with a mixture of pleasure and pain; she
was glad to find she had no reason to fear so dangerous a rival as
Lady L must have been, had she encouraged Camillo's addresses, and
shocked to find a man on whom she had built all her hopes of worldly
felicity, showing in the whole of this affair, such an abandoned turn
of mind. This thought filled her with the deepest anguish, and when
Lady L had done speaking, her soul was so full, that she could not
utter a word, but sat silent for some moments, with the tears railing
from her eyes, which was a very odd scene to the lady, and very much
perplexed her, till Angelina at length broke silence, and with a deep
sigh, begged that the lady would excuse the imposition she had put
upon her; "For," added she, "I am not, Madam, what I seem, but the
unhappy person of whom you pretended to be jealous. I am, Madam, of a
very honourable family in Flanders, and possessed of a fortune
sufficient to entitle me to the alliance of the first nobility in any
of the provinces; but I saw the false, perjured, wandering Camillo: I
saw him, loved him, and to his faithless vows gave up my innocence.
He, in the most solemn and specious manner, promised marriage as soon
as his father's death should happen; and when that did happen, so
great was my opinion of his sincerity and honour, that I entirely
believed him, when, setting out for England, he promised to return and
fulfil his vows to me in a few weeks, and that he would write to me
constantly till his return. But how have I been deceived? Since he
left me, I never once received a line from him, though I wrote to him
almost every mail; many weeks and months passed over in this
ungrateful silence; at last, tired out with vain expectation, and
willing to know the worst of my fate, I pretended to my relations to
go and pass the winter at Paris, but privately came over to England,
where I heard but too soon of the abandoned courses of my unhappy
wanderer; but still I hoped my presence might give a new turn to his
inclinations, and restore him to himself, to honour, and to me; full
of this pleasing expectation, I went to his lodgings this morning, in
the disguise I am now in, but he was not stirring. I waited some time
in his dining-room, where I chanced to cast my eyes on a table, on
which I saw his snuff-box, with several papers, and amongst the rest,
the letter which I just now delivered your ladyship, sealed and
directed by Camillo's too well known hand. Female curiosity, or rather
the interest I had in his commerce with the ladies, prompted me to
open it, and by it I learnt enough to fire my jealousy and animate my
revenge. Enraged at the contempt with which my name was treated, I
left the house without seeing the perjured wretch, went home, and by
some kind instinct was prompted to come here, and act the part I have
done, which I do not repent; for, Madam, since I see much compassion
in your temper I am sure you will continue your endeavours, in
conjunction with mine, to reclaim the too thoughtless Camillo; at
least, I hope you will sympathize so much with my misfortune, as to
afford me your protection, while I try the utmost in my power to
recover his heart, and oblige him to repair, in some measure, the
injury he has done me."

The truly compassionate Lady L, sensibly touched at the moving
relation Angelina gave of her misfortunes, embraced her tenderly, and
assured her, that she was now under a double. obligation to be anxious
about reclaiming the wild Camillo, both account of her esteem for the
worthy family he so unworthily represented, and to render him
deserving of that affection, which a lady of Angelina's merit was
pleased to bestow on him; and that she would do all in her power to
contribute to her happiness, and think herself highly honoured if she
would make free with her house, till she could bring. matters to bear
with her inconstant.

Angelina returned the compliment in terms fully expressive of her
gratitude, and without any scruple accepted of the proffer she made
her of her house, and took leave but for an hour or two, to return to
her lodgings, and put herself in a dress suitable to her sex, and the
family into which she was now entering, and accordingly returned with
her maid some time before dinner.

Lady L and she dining alone, made but a short repast, that they
might be relieved from the company of the servants in waiting, and at
liberty to indulge a conversation suitable to the circumstances and
impatience of Angelina, for whom that virtuous lady began to conceive
the most tender affection.

After dinner they retired to a closet, and began to discourse on the
proper measures to be taken with regard to Camillo. Lady L was of
opinion, that it would not be proper to let him know immediately, that
Angelina was in England, but that she should surprise him in some
lucky moment, when his soul was least clouded with the vapours of
unruly passion, when her well known charms might steal unawares into
their wonted place in his heart, where it would be easy for her to
maintain her empire; "For," added she, "though Camillo is wild, yet he
is naturally open and generous, and in his cooler hours, an enemy to
those guilty scenes which he is only hurried into by want of thought,
the impetuosity of his temper, and the force of bad company. If,"
continued she, "we combat his foibles by reason and argument, it is
ten to one we do not succeed. Some minds are more ashamed of owning
one error, than of committing a hundred, and often continue in a
course which their own sense and conscience abhors, merely because
they are ashamed, by a contrary behaviour, to acknowledge they were
once in the wrong. Of this class of men I take Camillo to be, and
therefore we must attack him by stratagem, and take him at some
unguarded hour, when surprise may get the better of shame, and when
his guilt must appear to himself so flagrant, that he has no recourse
left but to own his error, which is more than half-way towards a
reformation."

Angelina agreed with her ladyship, that these were the only principles
on which they could proceed with any hopes of success, but was utterly
at a loss how to bring about that happy moment that would be so
propitious to her sufferings. "That," replied Lady L, "is not so
difficult perhaps as you imagine, for I apprehend the passion he has
taken into his wise head, to conceive for me, may be of some use to
that end, provided you have so little of the jealous in your temper as
to permit me to tamper with him without being alarmed." "After the
unreserved account you have given of the whole affair betwixt you and
Camillo," returned Angelina, "I should be certainly mad to the last
degree, were I to harbour any thought to your prejudice; but give me
leave, madam, to acknowledge, that when I compare your ladyship's
superior charms, with the poor accomplishments I can boast, I am under
some doubt, that Camillo, from very small encouragement, may conceive
so deep an affection for your ladyship, as to render his return to me
the more difficult, if not altogether impracticable; for if I know
anything of his temper, difficulties but whet his passion, and
resistance, or even impossibilities, make him but the fonder of the
object, which compliance would soon cloy." "Your doubt," said Lady L
with a pleasant smile, "is very rational, on the supposition of those
charms you are pleased to fancy me possessed of: but though these may
be purely visionary; yet I think either much resistance, or much
yielding on my side, will not promote our end. I did not mean to
tamper with him, so as to raise his hopes too high; but suppose he
should call here today, or tomorrow, as it is ten to one but he does,
that I should give orders for his being admitted, as formerly (for I
have directed the Swiss at the gate to refuse him access) I say,
suppose I should countermand these orders, that I should receive him
where you may be within hearing, that I should suffer him to declare
his passion, and again tax him with his engagements to you, and hear
what he can say on that subject; and that when he has in the plainest
terms renounced you, as he probably will, you should then appear, and
confront him with his perjury; I believe he must be then in a
situation of mind which has no resource but in frankly owning the
guilt, and offering to make all the reparation he can: thus he must
see the folly of his design upon me, and be so much ashamed of being
caught so palpably out the road of his duty to you, that if he has the
least tincture of virtue, or the smallest spark of generosity, he must
beg your forgiveness; and give you all the security you can expect for
his future loyalty."

Angelina liked the project, and expressed with great warmth the sense
she had of the generosity of Lady L, whom she now looked upon as her
better genius, and sent her by heaven to restore her to peace,
happiness and innocence. Orders were immediately given to admit
Camillo as soon as he came, and that Lady L should be denied to all
other visitants for that afternoon.

In about an hour after, Camillo came, finely dressed, and as gay and
full of spirits as a bridegroom. He had missed the letter, but
troubled his head little about the matter, imagining it lost out of
his pocket in the drunken frolic he had been engaged in the preceding
night. Just as he entered Angelina retired into the closet, near which
the scene of action was to be, and whence she could hear every word
that passed. Camillo accosted Lady L with his usual gaiety, but
before he sat down, slyly bolted the door, of which the lady seemed to
take no notice, a circumstance which was taken by the amorous Camillo,
as no very bad omen.

"As I live," says he, "looking very wistfully at the lady, your
Ladyship looks charmingly today. There is such a lively bloom in your
complexion, and such a bewitching softness in those charming eyes
that, let me die if you are not enough to set all mankind in a blaze:
there is such poison in those enchanting smiles, that unless you
carried the antidote about you, no man could be sure of his life one
moment, while he looks on them. But my charmer (drawing near her, and
snatching her hand) can cure as well as kill, and I see by that warm
blush, and that panting bosom, on which I long to die, that my destiny
is to be determined this day, and I am to be the happiest of mortals."

Lady L could hardly bear to see herself used with so little
ceremony, yet for the sake of the purpose she had in hand, she stifled 
her resentment, and only struggled to get her hand loose from him; and
told him, with a blush, which she needed not feign, that she was not
used to be treated with such familiar gallantry; but as she knew it
was but common-place with him, she would not resent it as she ought;
"But," added she, "if your foreign mistress Angelina were here, I
believe you would scarce pay me the compliment you have now made me:
you know all you can say is due to her, therefore I beg the favour of
you, when you are over-burdened with compliments, to send them by the
first packet to that lady, who will, no doubt, take as current coin
anything that comes from you.""Always harping," said he, "on that
string! Is it impossible for me to convince you, that I have forgot
everything in Holland? I do not remember so much as the country, much
less any of its phlegmatic inhabitants. What, though I might have
amused myself with some of the half-animated things, when deprived of
other entertainments, does it follow that I must dote upon them to
eternity, and carry the dull idea of them to England? No; my dear
lady, your fears of Angelina are vain; you know too, you know the
force of your own charms too well to be alarmed at the power of a
heavy Dutch woman, whose beauty is estimated by her bulk; and
measured, like their ship's burthen, by the ton: but let us not trifle
away this precious opportunity, love calls to arms, the place, the
season, everything warms us to the soft charge, every fleeting minute
chides us for our unkind delay, and complains that it is not employed
in the ravishing scene." "How," (replied the lady, quite astonished at
his impudence) "would you look if the ghost of Angelina was to appear
to confute the gross falsehoods you have uttered, and punish you for
the monstrous contempt you have expressed for her beauty, which you
once exaggerated with all the power of eloquence, as much as you now
debase it? How ridiculous does a man look, when detected in a manifest
falsity? I know her fair and beautiful, in spite of the blasting
tongues of all your sex, or the envy of her own. But tell me truly,
did you never love her; did you never enter into solemn engagements,
and by these, have you not gained upon her unguarded innocence? Tell
me the truth, for on that alone I shall determine how far a lady ought
to trust you with her favours." "Well, madam, to satisfy you," said
Camillo, "I own to you, when first I saw her, a kind of warm
stuttering flame blazed about my heart, which I interpreted as love. I
paid her a few compliments, in which I really do not know whether I
was sincere or not, but I believe she fancied me so: and this is all,
as I hope to be happy with the finest woman in England"-"And on that,"
said Lady L, you presumed to ruin her, and leave her like a
villain?""Umph!" replied Camillo, "matters did not go quite so far
neither, but that was none of my fault; it was in her stars to be
over-virtuous for my constitution. But I was sent for in a hurry over
to England, where I have been so happy as to drown her remembrance in
a nobler passion." "This, sir, "said Lady L, "doth not satisfy me. I
have heard your affair with that lady represented in a quite different
light, and unless you swear that you never loved her, and never will
see her more, you must expect never more to see me." "Swear!" said
Camillo, "that I will, my charming angel," (snatching her to his
bosom:) "and then shall I not revel in infinite delight? Oh the dear
delicious sweet temptation, what would not a man risk to be so
exquisitely blessed!Swear; yes by heaven I will swear."at this word
Angelina rushed out of the closet, crying, "Ah! Perjured Camillo,
swear no more; heaven is already witness to too many of your false
oaths; tempt it no more, lest some signal vengeance should seize you,
loaded with the full measure of all your guilt, and plunge you
headlong to eternal ruin. I can forgive the unmanly scoffs you have
thrown upon me; but, good God! There remains a stingI can give thee
back thy false vows, but wilt thou restore to me my peace, my
happiness, and lost innocence? No, that, fiend as thou art, is not in
thy power, and nothing is left for me but endless misery: Oh!
Wretched, ruined and undone Angelina"Then, with the vehemence of her
speech, and the agitation of her passions, she sunk away on the
carpet.

Camillo, on her first appearance, started from Lady L, and like one
quite bereft of his senses, stood with all the marks of confusion and
inward remorse; but when he saw her fall upon the floor, the tears
first started to his eyes, and running to assist her, he cried out,
"Oh! My Angelina, thou dear, lovely, injured maid, look up, and bless
my eyes, take me to thy lovely bosom, there let me grow, and with my
tears heal the wounds my cruelty has given thee. His well-known voice,
when tuned to the soft accents of love, soon recovered the fainting
maid, and finding herself in her adored Camillo's aims, his face wet
with penitent tears, and his tongue uttering the tender language of a
heart reclaimed, the was quite overwhelmed with joy; all her faculties
confessed the mighty rapture, her frame being scarce able to sustain
so sudden a change, from the extremes of such powerful passions. Lady
L congratulated the lovers on their happy reconciliation, and to
give no room for unseasonable repentance, she called her own chaplain,
and saw them fast locked in the indissoluble bonds of matrimony; being
sure that this ceremony once over, the poor husband would be unable to
break his chain: but it happened that Angelina tempered love, and the
conjugal bed with so much discretion, that she perfectly reclaimed the
once wild Camillo, and made him own, that one hour's happiness with
her, was worth an age of those guilty scenes which he had spent so
much money, time, and youth, in the pursuit of.

THE END.


NOTES
 


1. For about fourteen hours &c.: (Footnote in the original.) In this and the preceding paragraph, our author espouses that hypothesis, which supposes generation to depend chiefly upon the men, and that the woman, on her part, only furnishes a proper nidus to nourish the embryo. This doctrine was more controverted, and less understood, till the ingenious Mr. Leeuwenhoek, by his microscopal observations, discovered the animalculæ in the semen humanum, which has put the question beyond all controversy. Our author supposes one of these animalculæ to be a whole man in miniature, only the parts of the body, folded up in that state like the parts of a plant in its bud, or those of a butterfly in its aurelia; he even supposes the soul to animate that minute body, and to receive the first perception of its existence in that state. Few authors have enquired when the soul animates the foetus; the common opinion I suppose is, that the existence begins from the moment of conception; but he has gone a step further back, and supposes it to commence while yet the animalcule is in the loins of the parent: which is by no means unreasonable, since it is certain, the semen, after it leaves the blood, and is prepared in the testicles, is discharged into a repository called by anatomists vesiculae seminales, where it remains till it is discharged in the act of coition; now, as the semen has undergone all the several preparations, which are necessary to render it complete in its passage through the spermatic arteries, the testicle, pærastatæ, and the vasa deferentia, before it comes to the vesiculae seminales, it is plain the animalcule must be then animated, if so, the existence of its being may be dated from that period, and there it must first have the perception of its own existence.

2. Skipped into the ovaria of his mother: (Footnote in the original.) Those who maintain the hypothesis which our author has espoused, account for the process of human generation in this manner. The penis on the part of the man, being erected by a conflux of blood to that part, the glans tumified, rubbed, and highly excited in coitu, an ejaculatory contraction follows, by which the seed is pressed out of the vesiculae seminales, and injected into the uterus of the female with some force. At the same time, the clitoris of the female being erected, and the parts adjacent swelled, the better to embrace the penis, and a viscous liquid being compressed from the glands the better to lubricate the passage, in the instant of the male injection, the fallopian tubes grow stiff, and closely embracing the ovaria, squeeze off some of the ripest of them; these meeting the male seed, either in the uterus or the tubes themselves, are impregnated by the animalculæ, and conveyed into the womb, the mouth of which, at other times close shut, is by the contraction of its fibres, now open for the reception of its new guest.

3. (Footnote in the original.) After the ovum has entered the womb, it swims for some days in the humours contained in it, till the pores, to be found on one side of it, have imbibed part of them, by which it is gradually enlarged, and the rudiments of a placenta formed, the egg and the new placenta, or covering which envelopes it, growing by the fermation of the juices within it daily larger, it at last fills the capacity of the womb, and at length its stem or calix grows to the concave side of it, and forms the funiculus, or navel string, which serves as a root to nourish the embryo, which now partakes more of the vegetable life than the animal.

4. (Footnote in the original.) See Dr. Mead on poisons, and his treatise on the smallpox.

5. On the approach of fear, &c.: (Footnote in the original.) Our author here attempts to assign the mechanical cause of the influence which the mother's fright has upon the infant, and to account for the reasonableness to suppose, that there may be a period in which the seeds of these passions are not in the soul, but that they are planted there by the carelessness or caprice of the mother, during her pregnancy, or by the ignorance, or mistaken indulgence of those who have the care of the education; and this instance of cowardice, contracted in the womb, is far from being uncommon; we have many instances of it, but one vouched by almost every historian, that is, of King James the First, who received such an impression at the death of David Rizzio, who was murdered in his mother's presence while she was pregnant of him, that he never after could bear the sight of a drawn sword without bewraying himself; which ought to make ladies very cautious, how they subject themselves to accidental frights, or indulge, during that important period, any turbulent passion.

6. Raw-head and Bloody-bones: Imaginary bogeys used to frighten children.

7. Crasis: Composition; the word was used to denote the proportions of the four "humours" in an individual person's body.

8. Such a notion &c.: (Footnote in the original.) Our author here would intimate to the reader, that the soul of man without the interposition of the sexes, is uncapable of finding out the distinction of sexes, and that however natural we may suppose the appetite of propagating our species is, yet we learn the means of gratifying it by induction, or example, as we do any other act; and would insinuate, that if it was possible, to keep a man all his life-time from seeing or hearing of women, or any other similar object, he would be as ignorant of the means of generation as of astronomy, or any other art acquired by the most painful study. The heat of his blood might stimulate an erection, which is merely a mechanical effect, and he might find uneasiness in himself, which he could not know how to alleviate, but could never hit upon the most remote idea of the art of generation, without the gradual steps which the author in the following part of this narration has observed, as the method of Camillo's becoming possessed of the appetite lust, from whence this useful lesson is to be learned; that the utmost care ought to be taken to keep youth in ignorance of this matter, till their reason is able to guide them, in the use and subjection of it.

9. (Footnote in the original.) Our author in this paragraph, inclines to caution his readers from supposing, that Camillo's desire to be pursuing his new discovery, proceeded from the impulse of lust or appetite, and would persuade them that curiosity alone is sufficient to account for this inclination. And though to common apprehension, it would seem the effect of the first dawnings of the natural appetite of lust, yet I am inclinable to fall in with our author's sentiments, because I apprehend curiosity to be one of the earliest motives in the human mind; and that which in its infancy, has the least to do with the body. For as the first faculty of the soul is perception, and as it has no other exercise but perception of new objects, or reflection upon former ideas, which become so many new perceptions, and as every new perception renews and confirms the idea of its own existence, it is evident every new perception of whatever kind, which does not raise the idea of fear, anger, or disturbance in the soul, must give pleasure to the mind: and as generally speaking it has received greatest pleasure from those perceptions, which it obtained with some difficulty, so wherever its designs are opposed, it measures the satisfaction it proposes to itself by such pleasing ideas, and becomes more urgent to make the discovery. Thus self-love is the motive of curiosity, and the pursuit of pleasure, the foundation of the force of novelty, so natural to the mind of man. In children, or persons of weak understandings, this curiosity is confined to the external figures of objects and mere trifles, but in advanced age, and those of deeper reflection, it operates upon things of greater extent and utility. However all of them, the curiosity of little Master to see a puppet show, or the inside of a rattle, or the more sublime searches into nature by the philosopher; have the same source, and proceed from the active principle in the soul, which is always in search of new perceptions and fresh ideas to employ its reflecting powers: these being the materials, it only can work upon, and without which it must remain in a state of stupid insensibility, and be incapable of measuring time, so it's only by its new perceptions that it knows that it has existence, whose periods it divides by their number; for supposing, according to our author, that the human soul existed in the animalcule, it could there have but one perception, that is an abstract perception of its own existence, and as that was but one, could be compared with nothing else, so till the organs of sense, became capable of furnishing another idea, by a new perception, the soul was uncapable of measuring time: and consequently the whole time from its first existence, to the discovery of new objects, which is at least sixty-two days, would appear but as one instant, and the intervening space inconceivable, therefore no wonder if every new perception gives pleasure, and that curiosity should act with greater force than most other passions, and perhaps the whole of them might be explained into this alone; but this curiosity, we have been hitherto speaking of, is pure and abstracted, unmixed with the other passions, but it may receive great addition when blended with these, especially when mixed with the appetite lust: for the sight of a new object, suppose that of a fine woman we never saw before, in adult persons raises the appetites, puts the blood in a ferment, all which raises a pleasant sensation in the most sensible organs, little inferior to actual enjoyment; and as persons of experience expect and know the effect of obscene sights, it's no wonder they are eager in the pursuit of them, since the body is gratified by new sensations, as well as the mind with new perceptions: but this could not be the case of young Camillo, for hitherto, he had no more erection or emotion at the sight of his sister's supposed wound, than of a melon; yet it pleased him more, as it was more a novelty.

10. Obstructing hymen: (Footnote in the original.) Our author here falls in with the common received opinion, that there is such a thing as an hymen, which is supposed a test of virginity, and was received as such by the Hebrews, who preserved the sheet whereon the blood shed on that occasion remained, as a testimony of their daughter's honesty. And they looked upon the want of that membrane, as so infallible a sign of prostitution, that if the spoils of it were not to be seen the next day, the husband had a right to repudiate his wife, who was stoned to death before her father's door: happy for England, that this severe law does not prevail here, though it has a prophet for its author.
            Not only the situation, shape, size, and figure of this symbol of a maidenhead is controverted by anatomists, but the very existence expressly denied by some of them, though as strongly asserted by others. One Degraaf, a man who had made many curious researches into this hidden region, says plainly, that all the subjects he has examined, and whence he might expect it, if any such membrane had been in nature, he had never found the least footsteps of such a thing. All the difference he pretends to have observed in the female organ of generation, considered in straitness and wideness, and different corrugations, which appeared according to the age and constitution of the party, or the use that had been made of the organ.
            On the other hand, Dr. Drake, and others maintain, that they never missed it in subjects where they had reason to expect it. They suppose it a thin membrane like fine parchment, perforated in the middle, with a small hole for the passage of the menses and other humidities collected in the upper region, and stretched like a drum-head in the neck of the womb above the nymphae [i.e. The labia minora of the vulvaEd.] and the urinary passage at the entrance of the vagina of the womb, against which it is drawn as a curtain or barricado to stop the entrance of the penis. But in most women, this membrane is of so frail a texture, that it yields to the efforts of a vigorous enemy, and being torn in the act of coition, or other deep carried wantonness, it shrivels up, and takes the form of little fleshy knots, called by the learned, carunculæ myrtiformes, and aids now in the pleasures it formerly pretended to obstruct. In some, especially old maids, who are so cautious as to preserve this precious mark, the membrane by age grows so tough and callous, that not without great pain to themselves and the operator, it is removed, and in most there is on this occasion a small effusion of blood.
            This is the state of a maidenhead, or the flos virginis, so much prized by us, and yet so little in esteem in other countries, I think it is Pedro de Cicca, in his history of the Incas of Peru, who says, that in that country they never marry but on condition somebody is at the trouble of taking the maidenhead, and I think the same has been reported of some of the Indian nations of Carolina; and along the banks of the river Mississippi, and it would seem that the taking of it is no pious work, since by a canon of the eleventh council of Carthage, the husband, out of regard to the matrimonial benediction, was prohibited taking his wife's maidenhead for the three first nights, but whether it is a pious work or not, Camillo, it seems found it a very laborious one.

11. (Footnote in the original.) I believe our author has in view in the character he has given of Vilario, to caution parents from being imposed upon by an outside show of sanctity, in those whom they entrust with the direction of their children at such a stage of life; and to point out the cause of the little benefit accruing from travels; which he would insinuate, is occasioned by employing persons, either of the character of Vilario, or such as are ignorant of men and manners, and know no more of the countries they pass through than the roads, and the most trifling curiosities. And in the latter part, he seems to hint, that frequently the knowledge of vice is conveyed by the very means which are used to guard against it; such as by giving monstrous narratives of the effects of vice and vicious habits, by which means youth have often an idea of the thing itself, long before they would naturally come at it, without the help of such lectures, and of course have a longing and vehement inclination growing upon them, to try by way of experiment, what pleasure can result from things, for which they hear others have run such great risk. In short, curiosity, and the natural desire the mind of man has to be prying into things which are forbidden, and of difficult access, hurries us to more enormities than the natural calls of the appetite. I remember a case which may serve to illustrate this argument, which happened in Scotland when I was there about a dozen years ago. It happened that a lady and a daughter about sixteen years of age, came to Edinburgh from the country, where Miss had been brought up in the greatest simplicity of manners, and ignorance of everything relating to the act of procreation. She knew no more of it, nor possibly so much, as she did of the square of the circle. The first and second Sunday after she came to town, she went to the West-church to hear divine service, where, unhappily for her, there was a delinquent on the stool of repentance, against whom the pious parson railed so pathetically, and explained not only the heinousness of the crime, but the nature of it so feelingly, and in terms so free from ambiguity, that all the young people in the church, thought themselves highly edified, and our country virgin listened with so much attention, and sucked in the luscious reproofs so greedily, that she was from that day almost as learned in the theory of propagation as her mother: which took such deep root in her mind, that she could not get the thought out of her head till she had put an experiment in practice, which showed her an adept in the art, since she was able in nine months to bring matters to projection, and favour the world with a young sinner, got by the instruction of a very devout saint, delivered from the chair of verity.

12. Merely because he was prohibited, &c.: (Footnote in the original.) Here our author would insinuate, that there is a natural inclination the mind of man, to be more solicitous of obtaining those things which he is prohibited, than those that we are at liberty to use, or are more easily attained. That the fact is true, is past all dispute, every man's experience of the disposition of his own mind, as well as his observations of the behaviour of others, will convince him, that half the pleasures we pursue, owe their chief relish, either to their being forbidden, or being difficult to come at. The love of liberty, and hatred of restraint, is the common reasons assigned by moralists for this contradictory disposition, and divines attribute it to the depravity of human nature, which they suppose, since the fall, has a natural bent towards everything that is evil: but in my opinion, neither the one nor the other comes up to a solution: for the love of liberty is not a first, but a secondary principle in the mind of man, nor is it easy to suppose, that it can have so much as an idea of liberty abstracted from the use of it, that is, to procure its happiness. A desire of liberty to do things indifferent, or contradictory, to its happiness, never enters into our minds, for were happiness not the end of every rational action, it's impossible that the soul could act at all, and therefore no action can be indifferent with respect to our happiness. And it's impossible to conceive, that a rational creature can desire anything knowingly contradictory to, or in the least degree destructive of its happiness. I say knowingly it can have no such desire, though it may vehemently desire many things which in reality are pernicious to its well-being; but these are sought after under the colour of real good, though, in themselves, and in the event, they prove real evil. Therefore, I conclude, that the desire of abstracted liberty cannot produce the disposition we are speaking of, nor is the general charge of the depravation of human nature more satisfactory, since that amounts to no more, if it has any meaning at all, but that by the fall, men's intellectual faculties are dulled; that they are not capable of making right elections, and oftener since that supposed period, make false elections, than they were capable of before: but though I make a false choice, I do not do it knowing it to be such; on the contrary, I believe I am in the right, and the error is, with leave of the divines, in the will, not in the judgment; therefore the divine has left the question just as he found it, since it remains to account for a prohibition of anything, that represents that thing in a light more capable of communicating happiness, than it appeared to the mind of man before that prohibition took place, which must undoubtedly be the case, otherwise it could have no effect in determining a rational mind. If the effect of the thing desired is a secret, or unknown to the mind, then it is easily accounted for on the same principle with curiosity, and flows from the general desire of happiness, and multiplying our perceptions; for in that, case, the prohibition intimates to the mind a new perception, and the soul promises itself pleasure from every new perception, where its reason, that is, its experience, does not represent it hurtful; and unless that reason is absolute, and under no manner of doubt in representing the thing hurtful, no prohibition can be of force sufficient to restrain the agent from endeavouring to come at the knowledge of it, because the desire of any degree of happiness is stronger than any authority abstracted from that possibly can be. Thus the thing in this manner is easily accounted for, when the effect of the prohibited action is a secret, but where it is known, there is greater difficulty to account for it rationally, unless we suppose that the agent may fancy the degree of pleasure to be greater than it really is, and that the prohibition flows from malice in the person, or authority, prohibiting. As for instance, wine is prohibited by a precept in the al-Koran; a Turk may fancy there is more pleasure in drinking wine, than there is, or he has experienced in former trials, and that there is a mixture of envy in the precept, which would restrain the use of that liquor, and therefore he may have a greater desire to drink it perhaps than a Christian, who by experience knows its utmost power, and lies under no restraint; and the Turk, by the force of this prepossession may really taste it with a higher relish than if he was under no such prohibition. Thus then he may define the thing prohibited as a perception new in degree, and by supposing envy in the authority, and frequently thinking of it, may work up the mind to a prepossession which may heighten its natural value.

13. (Footnote in the original.) Our author here would intimate that in young persons of little experience in the world, while their blood boils over, and nature stimulates unchaste desires, it is almost impossible to listen to the dictates of calm reason, or think on the consequences of things, while the humours are in that state, and for that reason it would be unnatural to prescribe absolute celibacy to a youth of a healthy vigorous constitution, but that nature must have its discharges, in order to preserve their proper tone, and to permit the intellectual faculties to act with full force, and that it would be better to make some allowances, though not altogether consistent with the strict rules of rigid morals, than to endeavour by the meet force of philosophy, to dry up the natural juices, or direct them to another channel, a thing in itself physically impossible; for as the several fluids in the body are secreted into their proper vessels and receptacles by stated mechanical laws, there must be a plethora unless discharged by some means or other; and while the body is in that state, with regard to any of the humours, but especially those of the hotter class, as this we are speaking of, there must follow great disorders in the whole animal economy, and a confusion, or stupefaction in the intellectual faculties: whereas, if a moderate discharge of those superfluities is permitted, the whole machine moves regular, and philosophy has its proper influence on the understanding. In a word, it's absolutely necessary in the bringing up of youth, either that their diet and exercise be so ordered that these humours may not be secreted in such quantity as to give disturbance, which in some constitutions may be the case, or if they are permitted to accumulate as they naturally will in a sound constitution, and a plentiful regimen of diet, it is prudent to connive at the natural means of their discharge: and this by way of physic, as was the practice in monasteries of old, when the monks were allowed, by their institutions, the use of a particular number of girls ad purgandos renes;[for the relief of the loins] and after such natural physic, it may then be proper to preach as long as you please against the excess of that much beloved cordial: but you must expect to be heard as patiently delivering a lecture half a mile long on temperance and abstinence, and against gluttony, to a man who is famishing for want of bread, or against drunkenness to a man perishing with thirst as in both cases your labour would be lost, you may as well preach to the north wind, but if you give the one a small portion of bread to support nature, and the other a moderate glass to quench his thirst, they both may chance to hear with some degree of patience, and perhaps profit by your advice.

14. The last years of the usurpation: The reign of Cromwell and the Puritans.

15. Throwing in a small dash of flattery, &c.: (Footnote in the original.) The prejudice Camillo at first sight conceived against Captain Wearwell, appears very natural: it is impossible for the mind to guard itself against these prepossessions at the first sight of things, especially when they appear in any remarkable point of light. We love or hate on such occasions, without being able to account for so doing, and generally speaking, that first judgment, formed without any seeming rational foundation, happens to be just. The cause of this quick discerning faculty of the soul, is not easily to be determined. It seems to act in the manner we conceive of intuition; at least it is hard to account for it by any of those rules which in other cases govern our understanding. At first sight we seem to know a man, and enter into every circumstance which distinguishes him from other mortals, and in an instant we are biased in his favour, or hurried away by an unaccountable hatred. Those who are fond of showing their skill in unravelling all the mysteries of nature, ascribe this to physiognomy; they suppose the eye and other features of the face, to be marked with certain legible characters, declaratory of the inward dispositions of the mind; they would go a great length towards solving the difficulty, if those who are thus determined at first right, could describe those legible characters to themselves or others; but I appeal to every man's experience, whether he has not been violently prejudiced towards a person at first view, without being able to assign any cause, or to point out those features, which so much pre-engaged his judgment, or even to guess at those dispositions of the mind, which the physiognomist supposes are indicated in the face and eyes; all he can say is, he finds a strange kind of inclination, or aversion, a nameless invisible Something not to be described, which inclines him to esteem or disesteem such a person. Therefore I am led to conclude, that this is some unknown power of the soul, which exerts itself without the interposition of the senses, and may give us a faint idea of the manner whereby we shall know one another, when relieved from the encumbrance of the body, and our present grosser senses. Now, we are obliged to know by degrees, and progressively, but then, it is probable we shall know each other at one view, as being capable of discerning at once the specific difference between us and all other beings, but, by whatever means we are possessed of these prejudices, it is certain they lay strong hold of us, and are with great difficulty shaken off; our author seems to have been aware of their strength, when he employs one of the strongest batteries that can be planted against human nature, to overthrow Camillo's prejudice against Captain Wearwell, viz. flattery. Self-love is the parent of this darling and universal foible, and not to be pleased with it would be somewhat unnatural, and entirely to disregard it might prove of the utmost detriment to human society. For, though our pride will scarce permit us to own it, applause is the strongest motive of all our actions, and that we may enjoy it with less scandal, we have found out names to disguise it, and risk life, peace, and everything that is dear to us, to have the pleasure of it, under some soft denomination, such as to be admired, esteemed, to be popular, &c. while we would almost spit in the face of that man who should offer us the charming incense under a less agreeable appellation. To explain this, let us go to the bottom of this habit of the mind: we are naturally pleased with ourselves, and self-flattery tells us that we have many perfections which perhaps we are utter strangers to; but so far are we from being satisfied with the silent approbation of our self-complacency, that we should lose half the satisfaction in life, if we did not think that our neighbours, and as many of mankind as know us, did not join in sounding our praises. This we have disguised under the specious name of the love of fame, ambition of the good-will and esteem of mankind, &c. And this by all the world is reckoned laudable, and ranked among the moral virtues, and no doubt have considerable influence upon the affairs of mankind; for no man is so wicked as to despise the good opinion, or well merited praise of others: but as this praise is coveted by all, and self-love prompts every man to believe he merits it, and obliges him to hate all who would deny him the due tribute of praise which he has stamped upon his actions, it was necessary for human wisdom to find out an expedient to be satisfied with the silent approbation of each other, without being obliged to speak out their sentiments on all occasions, lest the whole conversation of the universe should be confined to an echoed panegyric: for by the good-will of most men, left to their natural inclinations, they would hear no other discourse; which would be very inconvenient, and greatly interrupt the commerce of men one with another, and involve them in many difficulties: as perhaps a panegyric upon one man would be a satire upon another, which might beget hatred and animosity. To avoid all these, by the tacit consent of mankind, they have bestowed the name of flattery on all praises bestowed to one's face, and annexed an idea of contempt to the word.

            I might, perhaps, make myself very uneasy, if I thought my neighbour was not sensible of my merit; yet, for fear of incurring the scandal of being pleased with flattery, I would not suffer him to pay me the outward expressions of praise, but content myself with his silent approbation. My neighbour, on the other hand, who, perhaps, has but a very mean opinion of both my parts and understanding, possibly thinks I am wholly taken up contemplating his intrinsic excellence, and on that score treats me with a show of complaisance, and thus we are mutually deceived, but mutually pleased with each other; and thus peace, content, and self-conceit are kept up amongst all the degrees of men by this management, this distinguishing between praise delivered before one's face, and the same thing uttered behind one's back: but in spite of this, young minds, who make not the distinction, are easily wrought upon by flattery; and are secretly pleased with adulation, however gross; and if it is covered but from vulgar observation, we are all ravished with it: thus, though we cannot bear to have our great merit applauded in our hearing, yet we can suffer any man to tell us to our faces, that we hate flatterers, which is the greatest piece of flattery we can possibly hear: from whence I may conclude, that the love of flattery is natural to all mankind, and our hatred of it but the effect of habit and dissimulation. It's true, we sometimes see a blush arise in the countenance on hearing some open commendation, but that proceeds either for fear lest it should be discerned that we take pleasure in it, and consequently subject ourselves to the reflections which the company are supposed to make on such as suffer it publicly; but the blush oftener proceeds, especially in young people, who have not acquired a fixed habit of dissembling their sentiments, from the emotion of pleasure the soul feels on being applauded for perfections it either supposes itself possessed of, or wishes to have ascribed to it.

16. And the natural blush, &c.: (Footnote in the original.) One would imagine by the epithet natural, which our author has added to his blush, that he supposed what we vulgarly understand by modesty, to be a natural property of the soul, and the uneasy emotions which women sometimes feel, and commonly express, on the discovery of, or on hearing any conversation on, their secret parts, or the act of generation, is the effect of some innate principle natural to the sex. I have all the value in the world for modesty, but I cannot agree to this notion of its original. It is certainly the greatest ornament of the sex, but for all that, it is no more than a mere habit, founded on convenience, and nourished by custom; for the soul, in its natural state, has not the smallest idea of it, nor is it possible for us to find the least footsteps of it in the works of artless nature. Let us view the brute creation, nay, all the animate part of nature, where we can trace the marks of love, hatred, anger, lust, revenge, with all the other passions and appetites that inhabit the human soul, yet there we meet with not so much as the shadow of this same modesty. They go about the act of multiplying their species, like Diogenes, in open day-light, and neither male nor female are any more ashamed of what they are doing, than when they are eating or drinking, or performing the baser offices of nature. Then let us take little Miss in her infancy, and examine what tokens of modesty she displays before her nurse has taught her, that to take up her petticoats before the footman, is a naughty trick. From the strictest observation, I find, that naturally she is inclined to do everything her brother does, and if the bottom of her belly itches, the would scratch it if twenty were in company, call it by its proper name, if she knew it, and make as free with it in all shapes as she would with any other part about her. Where then lies all this innate modesty of the sex? The soul seems in no measure acquainted with it, though it has by this time discovered the rudiments of all the other passions. But why should we recur to the infant state, when we see in adult age, in some parts of the world, those things practised, without the least imputation of immodesty, which among us would raise a blush from the most licentious? For instance, the Indians, who, both men and women, go naked without being thereby excited to take any more immodest liberties with each other, than we Europeans do; nay, they are more severely virtuous than many of our woman, who would blush, perhaps, to tie their garter before their husbands. Now, if this thing called modesty were natural, it would discover itself in those climates as well as here, for it's agreed on all hands, that the Indians are born with as many natural perfections as we are, and fall short of us only in the improvements of art. We see in our own climate the marks of modesty rise and fall with the fashion of our clothes, and what our grandmothers would have reckoned down-right impudence, is by us modest moderns esteemed but polite freedom of dress or conversation. I think there is nothing on this subject in which men are agreed, except in covering their actual nudities, and of these, it seems, old mother Eve was not ashamed till after the fall, but since that fatal transgression, all her daughters have found it convenient to conceal their affairs from public view. The inconveniences which must arise from exposing a particular part to constant view, gave us the first notion of that female virtue modesty. Had that been left naked to the eye, it would be impossible on some particular occasions, to conceal the emotions of the mind acting upon the organs of sense, which would prevent the growth of dissimulation in female discourse, and oblige them to speak truth on all occasions; which according, to the system of policy which now governs human society, would be troublesome and of dangerous consequence. The first moralists, foreseeing these inconveniences, feigned a supposititious virtue, which they cried modesty, and recommended it to the fair sex; this answers all the purposes of a real passion, and keeps that sex within limits they would be naturally prone enough to leap over, if not guarded by this imaginary fence. Modesty, with regard to dress &c. is certainly a mere chimera of the imagination. I believe every woman may be as virtuous in her inclinations, with little or nothing to cover her nakedness, as when guarded by that seven-fold fence her petticoats; and if it were the custom, she might expose any part of her person as well as another, without abating one ace of her chastity. That modesty which is natural to the soul, is an abhorrence of everything that can debase its nature, dull its faculties, or divert it from the pursuit of rational happiness; it endeavours to shun such objects as raise ideas destructive of its tranquillity, by putting the humours and appetites of the body in a tumult, and render them less obedient to the dictates of calm reason: and modesty in this sense is as natural to man as woman, and equally productive of their peace. However, even the other factitious species of modesty, which that sex arrogate peculiarly to themselves, may answer all the ends of a more real virtue, saves the women from a deal of perturbation, and therefore ought to be cultivated with the utmost care; and that care may be pursued with greater alacrity, since there is no creature on earth, but by early habit may attain it, and consequently if women want it, the blame must lie upon those who have had the care of their early education. And as it is acquired as soon as any habit, so it is lost sooner than any other; for as the only way to obtain it, is to preserve the mind from impure ideas, which obscene objects or discourse naturally raise, so if a lady, however virtuously educated, accustom herself to loose conversation and immodest sights, the abhorrence of them wears off by degrees, and the soul, urged by the sensations of the body, soon learns to take pleasure in what sets the lascivious spirits afloat, and then farewell modesty, and all its boasted effects.

17. Bona Roba: A wanton woman or whore.

18. Yellow-boy: A gold coin.

19. Crop-sick: Sick in the stomach, nauseous.

20. Than twenty street-walkers, &c.: (Footnote in the original.)  Though it appears by the sequel, that the alderman had more interesting motives to induce him to keep Camillo and Saphira asunder, than those he so strenuously urges: yet in some cases, perhaps in most, it may be dangerous to trust young persons of different sexes with too intimate an acquaintance with one another, and to warn them of that danger, I apprehend was our author's reason for being so particular in this conversation, which he might have abridged without any apparent disadvantage to his narrative. Nor do I think he agrees with the alderman entirely, in his unmannerly assertion, that the company of one virtuous woman is more dangerous than that of twenty harlots: this is only an hyperbolical expression, suitable enough to the character and designs of our alderman, and is to be understood with proper restrictions. The whole, the author, as I apprehend, would here intimate is, that however virtuous young persons may be, yet it is dangerous to contrast a friendship with those of different sexes, for though in speculation, we may easily conceive it possible for friendship to subsist without respect to sexes, yet when we come to reduce it into practice, we find the animal appetite mixes itself in spite of us, with the pure stream of social love. A young lady may say, "I can esteem such a man; I can allow him all the intimacy, and preserve for him all the friendship I could have for a sister, and yet never think of him as a man." but when she has admitted her platonic friend, from one degree of intimacy to another, she must be more than woman, or he less than man, if the body, the mere carnal appetite, does not come in for its share of the social pleasures. It is impossible it should be otherwise, as long as we see, we feel, we embrace our friend with carnal senses about us, and by the interposition of bodily organs. The soul, while it remains united with flesh and blood, must receive its pleasures, its joys, and ecstasy, by the direct and indirect mediation of the latter; of which it is impossible it can hinder the body from mutually partaking, nay, the material part of us generally ravishes its share of our delight without consulting the mind, and is never asleep when any opportunities offer of regaling its senses; and this same kind of friendship we are talking of, does but too frequently afford such opportunities. Let the female Platonist, look upon her male friend, and contemplate the charms of his person, which in spite of her philosophy she cannot help, does it not recur to her mind that he has certain unseen, untouched, ravishing parts, made for some use or purpose? If her mind is too much spiritualized to think of the mysterious rites of love, yet the blood and animal spirits are not so enthusiastically employed, they run in their proper channels, and awaken every dormant appetite. If she has no opportunity, or if her platonic friend has not chanced to be in the same train of thinking, she may escape for that time: but if they chance to be critically moved at the same instant, as it is not very unreasonable to suppose may happen in the course of a settled acquaintance, let her keep her virtue, if she can: for my part, I shall never believe it in her power. I look on all intimate friendships between persons of different sexes, except in cases where age, or other natural circumstances may interfere, to be but a specious pretext for a more sensual commerce. And, for the reasons hinted at by the alderman, I would keep young people asunder as much as possible, till experience had taught them to bear with the temptation, and their reason gathered so much strength as to prevent their contracting any intimacy with each other, which may sooner or later bring on the grosser affections. But this is not to be avoided by entirely shunning women's company; for the effect of that would be, to make them in love with the first female face they saw less ugly than their nurse's, but by making youth of both sexes early acquainted with company, and a promiscuous conversation of both sexes, without any particular attachment, the danger of novelty, which is the strongest incitement to young persons, is taken off, and they are enabled to look upon youth and beauty with indifference, till their judgement and reason discover attractions of the mind more interesting and capable of laying the foundation of a more elevated affection than what is possible to spring from the beauties of the person. But let them beware of being familiar with every object of merit, for the more merit the more danger of being entangled, if other circumstances do not concur to render the union propitious.

21. The famous day of Joshua: Joshua, leader of the Jews after the death of Moses, prayed during a battle for the sun to stand still and not set till the enemy had been defeated. See Joshua chap. 10 v. 13-15.

22. Surfeit-water: A remedy for the discomfort caused by over-eating; usual ingredients were alcohol, dried fruit, and poppy flowers.

23. Breach of capitulation: Breaking the terms of a surrender.

24. Whose very idea chilled his vigour: (Footnote in the original.) The author in this scene between Rebecca and Camillo, has given a notable instance, how easily the imagination is deceived in affairs of this kind, and how strong an effect it has in all the pleasures of the body. If we are to suppose only the brutal part of man concerned in the joys of venery, and that the senses only are partakers of the fleeting bliss, it will be hard to determine how an object can please in the dark, which becomes frightful in day-light; because, if the organs employed are rightly fitted to their proper uses, the pleasure results from the pure mechanism of the parts, which must hold universally at all times and season, like the regular effects of any other perfect machine, when disposed to its proper use. But we find it quite otherwise; for even where the organs are otherwise disposed, and rather unfit, imagination supplies the deficiency, and gives pleasure where pain only ought to be the effect, from the laws of motion, and the real mechanism of the parts. I make no doubt but Rebecca, ugly as she was in her countenance, was yet capable in reality of communicating as much pleasure in the mere act of enjoyment, as Saphira; if nothing was wanting but organs fitly disposed, he found no difference, all was ecstasy and unspeakable rapture, while the idea of Saphira was annexed to the venereal rites; but as soon as that was changed to the less amiable Rebecca, his courage failed, his natural vigour chilled, his pulse beat backward, and his strong nerves lost their tone. Strange incantation! That the mere sound of an indifferent, should have such influence upon the human mechanism, in spite of experience, and the demonstration of all his senses; at least of that sense, which, as it comprehends all the rest, so is the least liable to be deceived, viz. his feeling. Though Camillo was convinced he had felt all the pleasure he could conceive from Saphira, in the person of Rebecca; yet now he loathes the very idea of those rapturous moments, because he knows Saphira did not bestow them. It's impossible there can be a natural caprice of the soul, nor can we conceive that our peculiar organization has any hand in the strange whim. The brute creation know no such distinctions; to them all are alike, both in the dark, and in daylight; the animal knows no difference; but when stung with natural appetite, seeks and takes relief from the next kind She that is disposed for his use, and reaps a pleasure, if we may judge by appearance, as luscious as man's, when wantoning in the arms of the greatest beauty the most luxurious fancy can create. To what then can we ascribe the difference between us and them, if it is not to some other latent snare or quality which we enjoy, and which they have not? This may be the sense of beauty or order hinted at by the famous Mr. Hutchinson; which, if we suppose strongly connected with the appetite of lust, the whole affair is rationally accounted for: for then, to the desire of possessing Saphira, to which Camillo was spurred on, first from the supposition that she had organs fitly disposed to allay the prevailing appetite, there was another motive of desire raised in his soul, from the sense of beauty and order, which constantly recurred. As often as the other idea of desire appeared, or helped to increase each other. Now Rebecca possessed the first, viz. a mechanical power of assuaging lust; but she was not an object of his sense of beauty or order, but of the contrary; therefore no wonder if hatred succeeded the storm of pleasure upon the discovery of the deceit, especially when that appetite, which was by much the strongest, was allayed, and the blood permitted to glide gently through its common channels. However, I own there are difficulties attending this celebrated hypothesis of a sixth sense, and dare not pretend that the application answers the difficulties in the case, but it's the best solution I can find for the strange caprice which Camillo shows on the discovery of the deceit.

25. Anility: A state of helplessness and stupidity, like a senile old woman.

26. In the gayest pleasures of the senses: (Footnote in the original.) There is something that seems very unaccountable in the passion of grief; we seem to feel the most violent anguish and racking pains, and express them in the same manner as if we felt the tortures of the wheel or rack, yet the soul at this time is in a different state, from what it feels on any other occasion. At other times, when anything assaults the mind, that creates pain, horror, or uneasiness, we are pleased when the object is removed, and the soul exerts all its faculties to release itself from that which creates the uneasy sensation. Thus, if we are assaulted by anything that creates fear, the soul starts into the innermost recesses of its habitation, shrouds itself from the dreadful object behind every idea that it supposes can screen it, and is highly pleased when the hated apparition is removed. In the passion of anger, the soul breathes nothing but choler and revenge, and does all in its power to destroy the object of the emotion; but when that is gone, or its resentment satiated, it subsides into a calm, and is delighted with everything that contributed to allay the commotion. But it is quite otherwise in grief; we choose to indulge it, the soul takes pleasure in contemplating the object of its sorrow, and receives a kind of happiness from everything that heightens the gloomy sensation, and is at perfect enmity with everything that would divert it from the mournful scene, though at the same time it expresses these sensations with the same outward symptoms, such as tears, groan, cries, and agonies, as if it felt the most excruciating pain. From these observations, which everyone who has had any great occasion of being sad, may easily experience, it would seem hard to define the passion of grief, since we cannot call it a sense of pain, at the same time that the soul takes pleasure in enduring it, and is uneasy at all endeavours to remove it; for that is contrary to the very idea of pain. Nor can we call it a sense of the pleasure it feels, because that would be equally absurd to suppose it pleased with a loss which it laments: but in grief, or settled melancholy, there is certainly a mixture of pleasure and pain, and I believe, however absurd it may appear to assert it, there are more moments of pleasure than of pain. I can only offer a hint to explain it, since I never met with any author, at least that I remember anything of, who treated it in this light. I suppose, on the review of some great loss, the death or suffering of some near and dear friend, or whatever greatly affects us, the soul is so much shocked, that the animal spirits are called in great quantities to the sensorium, which is in a manner overwhelmed. This frequently produces fainting; and swoonings, convulsions, and sometimes death itself, either by a violent hurry of the blood to the heart (which according to the degrees produces either swoonings or death) or of the spirits to the brain, which produces convulsions or madness: either of these effects are produced by the imagination, moved with the object or relation, and working upon the arterial blood and spirits, which produces real pain and uneasiness, as it disorders the whole frame of the human machine. Now this is not grief, but the first step towards it: for either the soul by reflection, resumes its functions, and disperses the crowded spirits to their proper channels and vocation, or they are dispersed by revulsions, occasioned by the help of the physician, &c. That is, they are directed in their tendency that way, either by the natural powers of the soul, or by art; but they cannot recover their former course so quickly, because they return by the common laws of their own gravity, and the mechanism of the vessels through which they are to pass, without any violence; whereas they were protruded into their present state by a foreign, and superior force, which increased the velocity of their egress, beyond that of their regress; but lest the heart and brain should suffer by their. slow retreat, there are flood-gates opened to detach part of them by the canals of the eyes, and by sighs their motion is accelerated, so that both tears, sighs, groans and cries, help to relieve the soul from its former pressure. When we see these we term it grief, sorrow, or affliction; but these are really the only means the soul has to relieve itself from the original shock. No wonder then if it is pleased to remain in that state, which is most opposite to what it last felt. The soul then from these resources feels a relief from pain, which is the only idea we have of pleasure, and as must feel satisfaction in them, as long as the idea of the first pressure remains, but as that wears off by degrees, the humours take their wonted channel, and our sorrows cease; but it frequently happens that the first impressions have been so strong, that the soul assumes grief for a habit, and the spirits and humours of the body have been so long accustomed to flow in that course, that they station themselves there, being assisted with the more plentiful excretion, at that time of heavy humours, by which means the crasis<Note 7 above> of the blood is quite altered, a sullen gloom occupies the whole man for the remainder of his life, and becomes his natural disposition.

27. Flip: A drink of beer, spirits and sugar mixed together and drunk hot.

28. Rasp-house: A kind of prison, where the prisoners were set to work shaving dye-wood.

29. Went snacks with them: Shared in what they had stolen.

30: First Partition Treaty: The First Partition Treaty (also known as the Treaty of Den Haag or the Treaty of The Hague) was signed on October 11, 1698 between England and France. The accord attempted to resolve who would inherit the Spanish throne, proposing that Joseph Ferdinand of Bavaria be the heir.

31. Pike of Teneriff: Mount Teide on Tenerife, Canary Islands; It is the highest mountain in Spain at 3718m. (12,198 ft)

32. Ixion-like: In Greek mythology, Ixion grew lustful for Hera, Zeus's wife. Zeus found out about his intentions and made a cloud in the shape of Hera, and tricked Ixion into coupling with it.

33. Drawing-room, St. James's: A large room in St. James's Palace, London, where the King held an audience to receive homage and petitions.

34. The horned order: A man whose wife was unfaithful was said to wear horns.

35. En cavalier: In man's clothing.
