THE NEWGATE CALENDAR


Edited by Donal Ó Danachair

Supplement 3


Published by the Ex-classics Project, 2016
http://www.exclassics.com
Public Domain


SIR HENRY MORGAN. 
Pirate who became Governor of Jamaica (1688)

The distinguished courage of Sir Henry Morgan, and the scenes in which 
he engaged, entitle him to occupy the first station in this history. 
He was a native of Wales, and descended of a respectable family. His 
father was a wealthy farmer, but young Morgan had no inclination to 
that industrious mode of life. Abandoning his father's house, he 
hastened to a sea-port town where several vessels were bound for the 
isle of Barbados. He went into the service of one of these; and, upon 
his arrival in the island, was sold as a slave. Having obtained his 
liberty, he went to Jamaica. Finding two pirate vessels ready to go to 
sea, he went on board one of them, with the intention of becoming 
pirate. Having performed several successful voyages, he agreed with 
some of his companions to unite their wealth to purchase a vessel; 
which being done, he was unanimously chosen captain.

With this vessel he went to cruise upon the coasts of Campeachy, and, 
capturing several vessels, returned in triumph to Jamaica. Upon his 
arrival, one Mansvelt, an old pirate, was equipping a fleet with the 
intention of landing upon the continent and pillaging the country. The 
success of Morgan induced Mansvelt to choose him for his vice-admiral. 
With a fleet of fifteen ships and five hundred men, they set sail from 
Jamaica, and arrived at the isle of St. Catharine. Here they made a 
descent, and landed the greater part of their men.

They soon forced the garrison to surrender, and to deliver up all the 
forts and castles, which they demolished, only reserving one, into 
which they placed an hundred men, and the slaves they had taken from 
the Spaniards. They proceeded to an adjoining small island, and, 
having destroyed both islands with fire and sword, and made what 
arrangements were necessary at the castle, which they had garrisoned, 
they set sail in quest of new spoils. They cruised upon the coasts of 
Costa Rica, and entered the river Calla with an intention to pillage 
all the towns upon the coast. Informed of their arrival and of their 
former depredations, the governor of Panama collected a force to 
oppose the pirates. They fled at his approach, and hastened to the 
isle of St. Catharine to visit their companions that were left in the 
garrison. Le Sieur Simon, the governor, had put the large island in a 
posture of defence, and cultivated the small island with such care, 
that it was able to afford fresh provisions to the whole fleet. The 
vicinity of these islands to the Spanish dominions, and the ease with 
which they could be defended, strongly inclined Mansvelt to retain 
them in perpetual possession.

With this view, he returned to Jamaica to send out greater numbers, 
that so they might be able to defend themselves in case of an attack 
from the Spaniards. He signified his intentions to the governor of 
Jamaica, upon his return home; but, afraid of offending the king of 
England, and of weakening the strength of his own island, the governor 
declined complying with his wishes. Baffled in his designs, he went to 
the island of Tortuga to solicit reinforcements from the governor, 
but, before he could effect his purpose, death suddenly put an end to 
his wicked career. Meanwhile, the governor of the garrison of St. 
Catharine receiving no intelligence of his admiral, was greatly 
anxious concerning the cause of his long absence. The Spanish governor 
of Costa Rica, apprised of the injury whch would accrue to his master, 
by these two islands remaining in the hands of the pirates, equipped a 
considerable fleet to retake the islands. But, before proceeding to 
extremities, he wrote to Le Sieur Simon to inform him, that if he 
willingly surrendered, he should be amply rewarded, but if he 
resisted, severely punished. Having no hope of being able to defend 
the islands against such a superior force, he surrendered them into 
the hands of their rightful owner. A few days after this, an English 
vessel arrived from Jamaica with a large supply of men, women, and 
stores. The Spaniards, seeing the ships from the castle, prevailed 
upon Le Sieur Simon to go on board to decoy them into the harbour; 
which he dexterously effecting, they were all made prisoners.

But the active and intrepid mind of Morgan was soon employed in the 
execution of new plans. He at first equipped one ship with the 
intention of collecting as many as he possibly could to form a strong 
fleet to carry on his depredations. Being successful in collecting a 
fleet of twelve sail, with seven hundred men, he rendezvoused in a 
certain part of the island of Cuba. This island is situated in twenty 
to twenty-three degrees north latitude, one hundred and fifty leagues 
in length, and about forty in breadth. Its fertility is equal to that 
of Hispaniola, is convenient for commerce, and affords plenty of the 
hides called hides of Havana. It is surrounded with a number of small 
islands, which obtain the general name of Cayos. These are a place of 
refuge for the pirates, where they hold their councils concerning 
their attacks upon the Spaniards. It is plentifully watered with 
copious streams and pleasant rivers, and many convenient harbours 
adorn the coasts of this beautiful island. There are two principal 
cities to which all the other cities and villages are subject. Hides, 
tobacco, sugar and Campeachy wood, are the principal articles of 
commerce, of which great quantities are annually transported to 
Europe. Captain Morgan had only been two months in the south of Cuba, 
when he called a council of his fleet to concert measures for 
attacking some part of the Spanish dominions. Several proposals were 
agitated; but it was finally resolved to attack the town of el Puerto 
del Principe. When arrived in the bay of that place, a Spaniard, who 
was on board the pirate fleet, swam on shore during the night, and 
gave intelligence of their designs to the governor and inhabitants of 
the town. They hastened to conceal their riches, and to muster their 
whole force to oppose the invaders. Having collected about eight 
hundred men, cut down trees and placed them across the roads to impede 
the march of the pirates, and placed several ambuscades, and taken 
possession of a pass through which they behoved to penetrate; the 
governor, with the remainder of his forces, drew up in an extended 
plain in the vicinity of the town. Captain Morgan, finding the 
passages to the town impenetrable, made a circuit through the woods, 
escaped several of the ambuscades, and, with great difficulty, arrived 
at the plain where the Spaniards were waiting to give them a warm 
reception. A detachment of horse first attacked them, but Morgan 
formed his men into a semicircle, and so valiantly and dexterously 
assailed the Spaniards, that they fled towards the woods for safety; 
but before they could reach the woods, the greater part fell under the 
swords of the invaders. After a skirmish of four hours, Morgan and his 
men entered the town, but the inhabitants, having shut themselves up 
in their houses, fired upon the enemy. Being severely annoyed by the 
inhabitants, in this position. Captain Morgan threatened them, "that 
if they did not surrender willingly, they should soon behold their 
city in flames, and their wives and children torn to pieces before 
their eyes." Thus intimidated, they submitted to the discretion of the 
pirates.

The pirates then proceeded to unexampled cruelty; shut up men, women, 
and children in the several churches, and pillaged the town; then 
searched and pillaged the whole adjacent country, and began to feast 
and rejoice, while they left their prisoners to starve. Unsatisfied 
even with this, they began to torment them, in order to constrain them 
to reveal where their money or goods were concealed. Finding no more 
to pillage, and provisions becoming scarce, they meditated a 
departure. With this intention, they intimated to the wretched 
inhabitants, "that if they did not ransom themselves, they should all 
be transported to Jamaica, and their city laid in ashes." The 
Spaniards accordingly sent some of their number to search the woods 
and the country, for the required contributions. In a short time they 
returned, informing Captain Morgan that they had been unsuccessful, 
but requested the space of fifteen days, in order to obtain the 
required ransom. To this he consented, but, in a short time, a Negro 
was taken with letters from the governor of St. Jago, requiring the 
prisoners to labour to gain time from the invaders, until he should 
come to their assistance. Upon this, Captain Morgan ordered all the 
spoils to be put on board the ships, and informed the Spaniards, that 
if they did not on the following day pay the ransom, he would set fire 
to the city.

The inhabitants replied, that it was totally impossible for them to 
give such a sum in so short a time, since the messengers whom they had 
sent were not in all the neighbourhood. Morgan knew their intention, 
but deeming it unsafe to remain longer in that place, demanded of them 
four hundred oxen or cows, together with sufficient salt to prepare 
them, with the additional condition, that they should put them on 
board his ships. Under this stipulation he retired with his men, 
taking six of the principal inhabitants as hostages for the 
performance of the stipulation. With all possible expedition, the oxen 
were slain, salted, and put on board, the hostages were relieved, and 
Captain Morgan took leave of that place, and directed his course to a 
certain island where he intended to divide his booty. Arrived at that 
place, he found that he had only fifty thousand pieces of eight in 
money and in goods. This sum being insufficient to pay their debts in 
Jamaica, the captain proposed that they should attempt new exploits 
before returning home. To secure success, he admonished them to 
confide implicitly to his direction, and he would certainly accomplish 
the desired object. The Frenchmen, however, discording with the 
English, departed and left Captain Morgan and his countrymen, to the 
amount of four hundred and sixty, to seek their fortune in their own 
way. This rupture did not intimidate the heroic captain, but, 
labouring to inspire his men with the same spirit, he, with a fleet of 
nine ships, directed his course towards the continent.

Meanwhile, he concealed his intentions from every person in the fleet, 
only assuring them that, by following his directions, he would 
certainly enrich them with immense spoil. Arrived upon the coast of 
Costa Rica, he informed them, that his intention was to attack the 
town of Puerto Vela by night. He encouraged them to this bold 
enterprise with the assurance of success: as he had communicated his 
design to none, therefore the inhabitants would be taken by surprise. 
To this some objected, on account of the fewness of their numbers; but 
the captain replied, "If our number is small, our hearts are great, 
and the fewer persons we are, the more union, and the better shares of 
the spoil." Stimulated with the hope of great riches, they unanimously 
agreed upon the attack.

This place is esteemed the strongest that the king of Spain possesses 
in the West Indies, except Havana and Carthagena. There are two 
castles situated in the entry of the harbour, which are deemed almost 
impregnable. The garrison consisted of three hundred men, and the town 
is inhabited by about four hundred families. The place being 
unhealthy, on account of certain noxious vapours which descend from 
the mountains, the merchants only reside here when the galleons come 
and go from Spain. Captain Morgan being thoroughly acquainted with the 
whole coast, and all the approaches to the city, arrived in the dusk 
of the evening, at a place about ten leagues west of the town. He 
proceeded up the river to another harbour called Puerto Pontia, and 
came to anchor. Leaving the vessels with a few men, the rest went into 
the boats and canoes, and about midnight they went on shore, and 
marched to the first watch of the city. An Englishman, who had been 
prisoner in that town, was their guide; and he was commanded, with 
some others, either to take or slay the sentinel. They seized him 
before he could give the alarm, bound his hands, and brought him to 
Captain Morgan, who asked him, "how matters went in the city, and what 
force they had," with many other questions, threatening him with 
instant death, upon his refusing to declare the truth. He then 
advanced towards the city, with the sentinel walking before, and when 
he arrived at the first castle, he surrounded it with his men.

In this position, he commanded the sentinel to accost those within the 
walls, and inform them, that if they did not surrender, they would all 
be cut to pieces without the least mercy. But, regardless of their 
threatenings, they instantly began to fire, which gave the alarm to 
the whole city. The pirates, however, took the castle, and having shut 
up the officers and men into one room, they blew up the castle with 
all its inhabitants. Pursuing their victory, they attacked the city. 
The governor not being able to rally, the citizens fled to one of the 
castles, and from hence fired upon the pirates. The assault continued 
from the dawn of the morning until noon; and victory remained in great 
suspense, until a troop of those who had taken the other castle, came 
to meet their captain with loud shouts of victory. This inspired the 
captain with new resolutions to exert every effort to take this castle 
also. He was the more stimulated to this, as the principal inhabitants 
with their riches, and all the plate belonging to the different 
churches, were deposited in that fort.

With this view, he caused ten or twelve ladders to be constructed with 
all expedition; and having brought a number of the religious men and 
women from the cloisters, he commanded them to place these upon the 
walls. The governor of the castle was, however, little influenced by 
the superstition of his countrymen; therefore, he was deaf to all 
their cries and entreaties to surrender and save their lives and his 
own. That brave commander declared, that he would never surrender the 
castle, and, continuing to fire upon the besiegers, many of the holy 
brothers and sisters were slain before the ladders could be fastened 
on the wall. This, however, being at length effected, the pirates 
ascended in vast numbers, carrying in their hands fire-balls and 
earthen pots full of powder, which they kindled at the top of the 
walls, and threw among the Spaniards.

Unable any longer to defend the castle, they threw down their arms and 
surrendered. But the brave governor would not submit, and not only 
slew many of the invaders, but even some of his own men, because they 
would not continue to repulse the enemy. Unable to take him prisoner, 
they were constrained to put him to death, who, nevertheless of the 
lamentation and entreaties of his wife and daughter, remained 
inflexible, declaring, "that he would rather die as a valiant soldier, 
than be hanged as a coward." Having taken the castle, they placed all 
the wounded by themselves, leaving them to perish in their wounds, and 
the men and women in separate apartments, with a strong guard upon 
them, and gave themselves up to all manner of debauchery and riotous 
excess. They next proceeded to torture the prisoners, to constrain 
them to inform them where they had deposited their money or their 
goods.

Meanwhile, intelligence of their disasters, and of the taking of the 
city, were conveyed to the president of Panama, who immediately 
endeavoured to raise such a force as might expel the pirates. The 
unhealthfulness of the climate, their own debaucheries, and the sword, 
having greatly lessened the number of his men, Captain Morgan gave 
orders to carry on board all their spoils, and to prepare to sail to 
another port. While these preparations were advancing, Captain Morgan 
requested the inhabitants to pay one hundred thousand pieces of eight 
as the ransom of their city, or he would reduce it to ashes.

In this unhappy dilemma, two messengers were dispatched to the 
president of Panama, to inform him of their misfortunes, and to 
solicit his assistance. Having an army collected, he marched towards 
Puerto Vela. But Morgan, stationing an hundred of his men in a narrow 
pass through which it was necessary that he should come, the Spaniards 
were instantly put to flight, and the president returned home with the 
remainder of his forces. Thus abandoned to their cruel fate, the 
wretched inhabitants collected the sum demanded, and Captain Morgan 
having victualled his fleet, and taken several of the best guns from 
the castles, he sailed for the island of Cuba to divide his spoils. 
These he found to amount to two hundred and fifty thousand pieces of 
eight, with a large quantity of cloth, linen, silks, and other goods. 
With this immense wealth they sailed for Jamaica, and, arriving there, 
gave loose to their usual riot and excess.

After having lavished the wealth which they had acquired, Morgan gave 
orders to his fleet to rendezvous at Cow Island. Rendered famous by 
his recent adventure, many other pirates joined him, and he soon saw 
himself at the head of a more powerful fleet than he had ever 
commanded. The French, however, that joined him, diffident of his 
fidelity to them, abandoned his flag, and went to pursue their own 
measures. Leaving that place, Captain Morgan set sail for the island 
of Savona, with a fleet of fifteen ships, and a full complement of 
men. He proceeded on his voyage until he arrived at the port of Ocoa. 
Here he landed some of his men, and sent them into the woods to seek 
water and fresh provisions. They returned with several beasts which 
they had slain; but the Spaniards, dissatisfied with their conduct, 
laid a snare to entrap them in their second attempt to hunt in their 
territories.

They ordered three or four hundred men from Santo Domingo to hunt in 
all the adjacent woods, and emptied them of animals. The pirates, 
returning in a few days to the hunting, could find none, which induced 
them to venture farther into the woods. Watching all their motions, 
the Spaniards collected a herd of cows, and committed the care of them 
to two or three men. The pirates slew several of them; but the moment 
they were about to carry them off, the Spaniards fell upon them with 
desperate fury, and constrained them to retreat to their ships; but, 
during their retreat, they frequently fired upon their pursuers, so 
that they fled in their turn, and were pursued into the woods, and 
many of them slain. Enraged at this attack. Captain Morgan next day 
landed two hundred men, and ranged the woods; but finding no enemy, he 
set fire to the scattered cottages of the peasants, and so returned to 
his ships.

Having waited, with no small degree of impatience, for some of his 
ships that had not arrived, he sailed for the isle of Savona. Arrived 
at this place, he was still disappointed in seeing the remainder of 
his fleet join him; and while he, with great impatience, waited for 
them, he sent some of his men to fetch provisions. The Spaniards, 
however, were now so vigilant, and so well prepared to defend 
themselves and their property, that they were constrained to return 
empty-handed.

Despairing of the arrival of his other ships. Captain Morgan made a 
review of those who were present, and found them to amount to five 
hundred men, provided with eight ships. With this small number he was 
unable to pursue his original plan, and, by advice of a Frenchman who 
had been at the taking of Maracaibo, he resolved to sack that place a 
second time. After watering at the island of Ruba, they arrived at the 
sea of Maracaibo, and, after some hot actions, in taking possession of 
the forts at the entrance, they arrived at the city in small boats and 
canoes. The inhabitants deserted the city at their approach; and, 
after taking what property they could find, and exercising unheard-of 
cruelties and tortures upon the prisoners they found in the 
neighbourhood. Captain Morgan resolved to sail for Gibraltar, and run 
the hazard of a battle. Some of the principal prisoners he took with 
him, and sent others to Gibraltar, to tell the inhabitants of the 
barbarous cruelty they had seen exercised towards their townsmen, and 
to assure them, that unless they surrendered to Morgan, they would 
share the same fate. Notwithstanding a show of resistance at first, 
every person in the city, with the exception of an idiot, fled when 
the pirates approached, taking with them their riches and gunpowder, 
and destroying the guns of the fortress.

This solitary individual who had remained in the city, notwithstanding 
it was evident to Morgan and his associates that he was an idiot, they 
tortured with unparalleled cruelty, to force him to discover to them 
the retreat of the inhabitants; of this he knew nothing, yet he died 
under their ferocious hands. Detachments were sent to scour the 
country round in search of the fugitives, whom, when they found, they 
treated with the most barbarous inhumanity. One of these was headed by 
Morgan himself, who directed his search against the governor, but the 
latter retired to a high mountain, and completely foiled Morgan and 
his army. The heavy rains, and want of ammunition, had reduced the 
pirates to great distress; and if the Spaniards had not been so 
dismayed, they would, at this time, have found their invaders an easy 
prey.

Morgan returned to Gibraltar with a great many prisoners, who 
negotiated a ransom to save the city from being burnt. He then 
returned to Maracaibo, where he was informed that a Spanish fleet, 
consisting of several large vessels, lay at the entrance of the 
strait, to prevent his escape; which struck his men and himself with 
great consternation. He assumed a fictitious courage, and sent a 
letter to the admiral, demanding a very high ransom to prevent the 
town of Maracaibo from being committed to the flames. This, however, 
met with no gracious reception, and the Spanish admiral would listen 
to nothing but the surrender of all the prisoners, hostages, and 
property. In this dilemma, Morgan assembled his men, and asked them, 
whether they would give up what they had acquired with such toil and 
danger, or fight their way through the enemy? To the latter 
proposition they unanimously agreed.

Despair sharpened their invention and their courage. They set about 
immediately to prepare a fire-ship, with which they intended to 
destroy the Spanish admiral's vessel, and considerably strengthened 
their other vessels. Captain Morgan sailed with his fleet, and 
attacked the enemy early in the morning: the fire-ship grappled with 
the largest vessel, and soon destroyed her; the other two fled towards 
the castle at the entrance, where one of them was sunk by her own 
crew, and the other surrendered to the pirates. Elated with this 
signal victory, the pirates immediately landed, hoping to find the 
castle surrender at their appearance. In this they were, however, 
disappointed, for they met with a most spirited resistance, and were 
at last obliged to fly to their ships.

The Spanish admiral escaped on shore, and was greatly dismayed to see 
so many of his brave countrymen perish in the waves, rather than 
permit themselves to be taken prisoners by the pirates.

Morgan again sailed for Maracaibo, where he repaired the large ship he 
had taken, on board of which he hoisted his own flag. He again sent to 
the Spanish admiral, demanding a ransom for the city of Maracaibo, to 
which that brave officer would not listen, but threatened vengeance on 
the pirates. The inhabitants, however, offered the sum of 20,000 
pieces of eight, besides 500 beeves to victual his fleet, if he would 
spare the town, and free the Spaniards he had made prisoners. To this 
last clause, however, he would not agree; he feared the Spanish 
admiral might destroy his fleet with the guns of the castle, in 
passing through the strait; and, for this purpose, he wished to retain 
the prisoners, to hold out a bribe to the admiral. He sent some of 
them to the castle, to inform the governor, that unless they were 
permitted to pass the castle unmolested, he would hang every prisoner 
in his power. The admiral would not listen to the supplications of 
these unfortunate prisoners, but accused them of cowardice, and 
returned for answer, that he would oppose the passage of the pirates 
by every means in his power.

This resolution made Morgan pause for a while, before he decided what 
was to be done. In the first place, they divided their plunder, which 
amounted to 250,000 pieces of eight, besides an immense quantity of 
merchandise and slaves. Morgan then harangued his men, and took 
counsel what steps they were to follow, in order to get past the 
castle. A stratagem was at length agreed upon, in which they 
succeeded. During the day time they sent on shore their boats loaded 
with men, as if they intended to attack the castle by land. The canoes 
were hid from the castle for some time, by the trees on the banks, but 
in a short while returned, with the appearance of only two or three 
men in them, to deceive the enemy, while they were all lying in the 
bottom of the boats. The Spaniards expected the forces that had been 
landed would attack the castle at night; they removed all their heavy 
guns to the land side, and left that which commanded the sea without 
any, by which the pirates passed unmolested during the night.

When the Spaniards perceived that they were about to escape, they 
transported their guns to the other side of the castle, and commenced 
a dreadful fire upon the pirates; but they effected their escape 
without much loss or damage. Captain Morgan now sent a canoe to the 
castle, with some of the prisoners, and fired seven great guns as a 
farewell salute.

In this voyage they were suddenly overtaken with a great tempest; were 
constrained to cast anchor, and again to put to sea; and were 
alternately harassed with the dread of being overwhelmed in the deep, 
or cast upon shore and murdered by the Spaniards or Indians. 
Fortunately, however, for Morgan and his crew, the tempest was calmed, 
and they arrived safe at Jamaica.

Not long after their arrival there, their excesses emptied their 
coffers, and constrained them to seek for new spoils. Having collected 
his men at Port Caullion, he held a council to deliberate upon their 
next adventure. Meanwhile it was found necessary to send four ships 
and one boat, with four hundred men, to the continent, to pillage some 
coast towns for provisions, and to search the woods for wild beasts. 
These vessels were for some days becalmed in the mouth of the river 
Cow, which informed the Spaniards of their arrival, and gave them time 
to hide their money and goods, and to prepare for their own defence. 
Here they seized a ship richly laden, and landed in defiance of all 
the resistance of the Spaniards, whom they pursued into the woods, 
and, by torture, constrained many of them to deliver up their money 
and property. Dissatisfied with all that they had received, they, upon 
their departure, demanded four thousand bushels of maize as a ransom 
for the town.

The return of these ships, and their great success, was cause of 
exultation to Morgan and his men. Having equally divided the spoil, 
they directed their course towards Cape Tiburon; the fleet consisting 
of thirty-seven sail, with two thousand men, besides marines and boys. 
The captain divided his fleet into two squadrons, and gave the command 
of the second squadron to a vice-admiral. He then summoned a council 
of all his captains, and, besides other directions, enjoined them to 
carry on hostilities with the Spaniards, as the enemies of the English 
nation.

From Cape Tiburon, Morgan sailed for St. Catharine's, then in the 
possession of the Spaniards; landed a thousand men, and advanced to 
the governor's residence: but he found that the garrison had retired 
to the adjacent small island, and fortified themselves in the 
strongest manner.

Upon their approach, they received such a warm reception, that they 
were under the necessity of lying all night upon the ground, destitute 
of every kind of provisions. But a flag of truce being hoisted, a 
capitulation took place, and it was finally agreed to surrender the 
island to Morgan and his crew. Having become masters of the island, 
they hastened to satiate their hungry appetites, and to indulge in all 
manner of riot and excess. After some time, they pillaged the store-
houses of powder and other stores, carried on board the principal 
guns, destroyed the remainder, and directed their attack upon the 
castle of Chagre.

This castle is situated at the entrance of the river, upon a high 
mountain, and surrounded with wooden pallisadoes. On the land side, it 
has four bastions, and is wholly inaccessible by sea. Unintimidated by 
these obstacles, these pirates made an attack, but were repulsed with 
some loss. In the action one of the pirates was wounded with an arrow, 
which he instantly pulled out, wrapped it in cotton, and discharged it 
from his musket. The arrow fell upon a house thatched with palm-
leaves, and the cotton being kindled by the powder, set the house on 
fire, which communicated to a large quantity of powder, that blew up 
and caused a dreadful conflagration. While the Spaniards were 
labouring to extinguish the flames, the pirates set fire to the 
pallisadoes, and in a short time entered the place. The governor was 
slain, and the greater part of his men chose rather to leap into the 
sea, than await the tortures of these cruel pirates.

Upon the intelligence of this fortunate adventure, Morgan left St. 
Catharine's, and hastened to that place, where he was received with 
every demonstration of joy. Having garrisoned the place, and seized 
all the vessels, he directed his course towards Panama, at the head of 
twelve hundred men; but, too confident of the smiles of fortune, he 
took a small stock of provisions with him. In their march they 
suffered much from famine, but in the space of nine days he beheld 
Panama.

On the morning of the tenth. Captain Morgan arranged his men; but, by 
the advice of one of his guides, he did not take the direct road to 
the city, and therefore escaped some of the ambuscades that were laid 
for him. The governor of Panama came out to meet him with two 
squadrons, four regiments, and a number of wild bulls driven by the 
Indians. Upon the approach of the Spaniards, their number and hostile 
appearance almost intimidated the pirates; but, despairing of all 
mercy from the hands of those whom they had so often offended, they 
resolved to give them battle. They were first attacked by a party of 
horse, but, routing them, the foot soon followed their example, and 
victory declared upon the side of the pirates. The greater part were 
either slain or taken prisoners. A Spanish captain was also taken 
prisoner, who informed Morgan concerning the strength and position of 
the town; which inclined him to attack the town in another direction.

Morgan and his men were bravely repulsed, and suffered much from the 
great guns placed in every direction; but, in defiance of every 
opposition and danger, the pirates, in three hours, carried the town. 
Thus victorious, they slew all who came in their way, and seized upon 
all the property of the place. To prevent his men from intoxication, 
(that the Spaniards might not have an opportunity to fall upon them,) 
Morgan assembled his men, and prohibited them from tasting the wine, 
assigning as his reason, that the Spaniards had mingled it with 
poison.

The captain gave secret orders to set fire to the city in different 
places. His own men being dissatisfied with this measure, he 
endeavoured to throw the odium upon the Spaniards themselves. After 
doing incredible harm, the pirates retired from the town, and encamped 
in the fields. They, however, upon finding themselves safe from a 
second attack, returned to the city, and conveyed away a large 
quantity of plate and other valuable articles which the fire had not 
consumed.

While Morgan continued at Panama, he sent out parties in all 
directions, who so pillaged the country, that he departed from that 
place loaded with immense plunder, both in money and in goods. About 
half way to Chagre they were  all searched, beginning with the captain 
himself, to find whether they had concealed any part of the booty. 
Several of the company, however, boldly accused the captain of 
concealing some of the more valuable jewels, as it was impossible that 
no more than 200 pieces of eight should fall to the share of each man, 
from such an immense spoil.

The captain, finding his authority lessened, endeavoured to escape 
from St. Catharine's with two or three ships; but the arrival of a new 
governor in Jamaica put a period to the depredations of Morgan and 
many of his associates 



MAJOR STEDE BONNET. 
Wealthy Landowner turned Pirate, Hanged 10th December 
1718

THIS pirate was a gentleman of a considerable fortune in the island of 
Barbados; it was therefore surprising that he should embark in such a 
dishonourable and dangerous undertaking. Having formed his resolution, 
he equipped a small vessel of ten guns and seventy men at his own 
expense, and in the night commenced his voyage.

In this vessel, named the Revenge, he sailed for the Cape of Virginia, 
where he captured several vessels, which he plundered. After several 
good prizes, he directed his course to Long Island, where he took a 
sloop bound for the West Indies, and then landed some men at Gardner's 
Island, paid for whatever provisions were necessary, and retired 
without doing any injury. His next adventure was the capturing two 
other vessels.

The major found no small difficulty in reconciling the different 
opinions of his crew, on what course they should next steer; being 
himself no sailor, he was frequently under the necessity of yielding 
to the erroneous opinion of others. He at last found an accomplished 
coadjutor in Edward Teach, commonly called Black Beard. To him the 
major's crew united their fortunes, while he himself went on board 
Teach's ship, and remained as a private sailor. In this station, 
Bonnet soon began to reflect upon his past life, and was filled with 
remorse and shame in consequence of his conduct. This change in his 
sentiments was discovered by his companions, and he avowed his ardent 
wish to retire into some foreign country, to spend the remainder of 
his days in solitude.

Black Beard some time after surrendered to the royal proclamation, and 
obtained pardon. The major then assumed the command of his own ships, 
immediately sailed to Bath Town in North Carolina, and likewise 
surrendered to his majesty's proclamation.

The war now commenced between the triple allies and Spain, and Major 
Bonnet went to the island of St. Thomas, to obtain leave of the 
emperor to privateer upon the Spaniards. Upon his return, he found 
that Black Beard had pillaged the great ships of money and arms, and 
set on shore on a desolate island seventeen of the men; which Bonnet 
being informed of by two who had escaped, he sent the long-boat to 
their assistance; so that, after remaining two days without food, and 
in the prospect of a lingering death, they were all taken on board the 
major's ships.

Bonnet then informed his men, that his intention was to take a 
commission to act against the Spaniards; and that he would take them 
along with him if they were inclined. To this they all readily 
complied. Just, however, as they were about to sail, they received 
intelligence, that Black Beard was not far off, with only eighteen or 
twenty men. The major pursued, but was too late to apprehend him. 
Disappointed in their pursuit, they directed their course to Virginia. 
When off the Capes, they met a vessel, out of which they took twelve 
barrels of pork, and four hundred weight of bread, and, in return, 
gave them eight or ten casks of rice, and an old cable. Two days 
after, he captured a vessel off Cape Henry; in which were several 
casks of rum, and other articles of which they stood greatly in want.

Under the name of Captain Thomas, Major Bonnet suddenly resumed his 
former depredatory courses. Off Cape Henry, he took two ships bound 
from Virginia to Glasgow, which only supplied them with some hundreds 
weight of tobacco. The following day he seized one bound to Bermudas, 
which supplied him with twenty barrels of pork, and in return, gave 
her two barrels of rice, and a hogshead of molasses. From this ship, 
two men entered into their service. The next prize was a Virginiaman 
bound for Glasgow, from which they received nothing of value. In the 
course of their cruising, several vessels were captured, though of no 
considerable amount.

Our pirates next sailed for Cape Fier river, where they waited too 
long, because their vessel proved leaky, and they could not proceed 
until she was refitted. A small shallop now afforded the materials for 
this purpose. Meanwhile, the intelligence was received, that a pirate 
was discovered with her prizes at no great distance; upon this 
information, the Council of South Carolina was alarmed, and two 
vessels were equipped and sent in search of the pirates. After a 
considerable search, they were discovered, a severe engagement ensued, 
and Bonnet and his crew were made prisoners. In a short time, however, 
the major and one Herriot made their escape. This greatly alarmed the 
inhabitants, lest he should again find means to get a vessel, and 
wreak his vengeance upon them. Accordingly, one Colonel Rhet was sent 
in pursuit of him, and a reward of seven hundred pounds offered for 
his apprehension.

They were discovered; Herriot was killed upon the spot, the major 
surrendered, was brought to Charlestown, and, along with several 
others, was tried, found guilty, and received the sentence of death, 
which was carried out in Charlestown, 10 December 1718.



ANN HOLLAND 
Wife of a highwayman with whom she robbed many 
people. Executed 1705

This woman was born of obscure parents. She possessed a great share of 
natural accomplishments; which was, perhaps, more unlucky for her than 
if she had been deformed and ugly. She entered into the service of 
several families, but as regularly decamped with some valuable booty. 
She at last was bar-maid at a low coffee-house, where she served her 
master's customers in a double capacity; and here she became 
acquainted with a Mr. French, a comb-maker, who was fascinated with 
her appearance. He never once suspected her virtue, and paid her 
honourable courtship: a match was concluded. She, however, proved as 
bad a mistress as she had been a maid; and, after forcing her husband, 
by her bad conduct, to turn her out of doors, he went to Ireland, and 
there died.

Ann Holland again found herself a wandering vagabond, and left to 
shift for a livelihood among the wicked. In this she was not 
unsuccessful; for, being young and very cunning, she played her cards 
to great advantage. She was soon after married to James Wilson, a 
noted highwayman of the time, who found her very serviceable in the 
way of his profession. The justice of the law, however, deprived her 
of her second husband, and Nan was again a widowed vagabond. Her 
misdemeanours introduced her into Newgate, where she became acquainted 
with one Tristram Savage, with whom she continued in company after 
their liberation.

This pair once waited upon a conjuror. Savage being disguised as a 
woman, and she in her own character. They wished to have their 
nativity calculated, and told the doctor they would pay him well. 
After a great deal of unintelligible jargon. Savage says to the 
conjuror, "Can you tell me, sir, what I think?" The conjuror replied, 
with a surly countenance, "It is no part of my profession to tell 
peoples' thoughts." "Why, then," replied Savage, "I'll show them you. 
I was thinking as how you must be very rich, and able to spare some of 
your money: so I now demand, upon the pain of instant death, whatever 
money you have about you." The old conjuror seemed magic-struck; and 
so powerful an argument was Savage's pop, (as thieves call their 
pistols,) that he gave them twenty guineas, a gold watch, a silver 
tobacco-box, and two rings of his finger; after which they bound and 
gagged him, telling him to raise the devil to his assistance.

Holland and her associate got clear off with this valuable booty, and 
we have no further account of her until 1705, when she was executed at 
Tyburn. Instead of imploring mercy for the pardon of her offences, she 
execrated the hard heart of her judge, the rigour of the laws, and 
abused the executioner; forgetting to repent of the guilt which 
brought her to this disgraceful end, and would, unrepented of, deliver 
her soul into the far less merciful hands of another hereafter.



DICK MORRIS. 
Cunning and audacious swindler, executed 1706

WE have no account of this malefactor's birth and education, but they 
were probably very obscure. His transactions were remarkable for 
ingenuity; and, without endeavouring to trace his life, we shall 
relate the most remarkable of his exploits.

One time Dick, drinking at an inn in Winchester, overheard the 
conversation of two gentlemen, in which they discovered their mutual 
misfortune in loving two ladies who utterly slighted them. He put on a 
bold face, intruded himself upon their company, and rendered himself 
agreeable, by pretending to have received from his late master, an 
eminent astrologer and magician, the infallible power of turning the 
affections of women's hearts on whom ever he pleased. The gentlemen 
stated their cases to him, and he agreed that, at the height of the 
moon, he would work his enchantment upon the fair ones, provided they 
could procure some of their hair, which the lovers promised to obtain. 
It was some time until the moon should be at her full, during which 
interval Dick was sumptuously entertained at the expense of these weak 
lovers.

Dick next ordered them to buy a new sack, a small stout cord, and 
another larger one, a new knife, a chain, and a brush, which were 
delivered into his custody. The long looked-for period having at last 
arrived, the gentlemen, by- Dick's directions, dressed themselves in 
their richest apparel, and mounted their best horses, with plenty of 
money in their pockets. The three rode about two miles out of the city 
to a quiet road, the place where this magical trial was to be put into 
execution. They alighted, and Dick began immediately to make strange 
sour faces, drew a circle on the ground, all the while muttering 
unintelligible words, and turning himself in strange postures, 
sometimes towards the east, sometimes towards the west, performing 
most surprising ceremonies with his hands and feet, and making the 
gentlemen no less astonished than fearful.

Dick having finished his own manoeuvres, began with the first 
gentleman, whom he ordered to strip, at the same time teaching him to 
repeat certain insignificant words in pulling off each article of 
clothing, which the other faithfully performed. Though it was in the 
depth of winter, he was stripped naked, and a knife placed in his 
hand, with which he was directed to make some stabs to the different 
quarters of the globe; and then to creep into the sack, with his head 
foremost, and there to remain in perfect quietness for half an hour, 
for if he stirred a limb, he was told he would be in Barbary in a 
minute. Thus terrified into compliance, he followed implicitly Dick's 
directions. 

The other gentleman he conducted to a tree, round which he drew a 
circle, into which the gentleman had to walk completely naked. His 
hands were tied with a twisted cord of his mistress's hair, and a rope 
tied round his body, and fixed to the tree. He gave the same 
injunction as to the other, with regard to quietness; and, having thus 
secured his prey, he packed up their clothes, which he hoisted on the 
back of the best horse, mounted, rode off, and arrived in London early 
next morning.

The fire of love, which flamed with such ardour in the breasts of 
these two gentlemen, was somewhat allayed before they were released, 
for they were found almost dead with cold. One of them remarked, that 
the poets had good reason to feign love blind, because, if they had 
not been so, they would have perceived the pretended power of the 
conjuror to be ridiculous, and his promises nothing but a trick to 
obtain their money and their clothes.

Morris being at Northampton, he made repeated attempts to rob a rich 
Presbyterian parson, who lived in the neighbourhood; but had been as 
often unsuccessful: he was averse, however, to leave the country thus, 
outwitted by "a fusty piece of divinity," and once more tries his 
ingenuity. Knowing the parson to be ignorant and superstitious, Ke 
obtained a waggoner's linen frock, which he daubed thick with paste, 
and stuck it full of card matches. He entered the church unseen by the 
woman who was preparing it for Sundaymounted the pulpitstruck a 
light with his tinder-box, and set his frock on fire; then, standing 
upright, quoth Dick, "Woman! Woman! hearken unto my voice!"

The old woman, upon sight of this blazing spectacle, run out in great 
alarm, but Dick called after her, saying, "Woman! unless thou comest 
back, and hearkeneth unto my voice, thou shalt presently perish." She 
trembling returned, but he encouraged her, and told her not to be in 
fear, for he was an angel come to order her to go to the minister of 
the meeting-house, and to tell him of what she had seen, and that his 
soul was required of him that very day. That he must bring all his 
money and plate along with him, but to be sure not to come with a lie 
in his mouth; for if he did, he would fare the worse in the place to 
which he was to carry him. The woman made a church curtsey, and went 
with all speed to the parson's house, to deliver her fateful message. 
Morris descended from the pulpit, freed himself of his angelic garb, 
and followed the woman. She wrought so much upon the superstition and 
terror of this hypocrite, that he proceeded to pack up his plate, and 
bundle his money; and, calling his servant, told her, that his time 
was come, and that he must leave her, as an angel was in waiting for 
him. She expressed her sorrow at the loss of her kind master, and, 
reminding him of past favours, hoped he would not leave her unprovided 
for. "That's true," said the parson, "and I pity you with all my 
heart. There is ten pounds in that silver tankardgo take it; for, 
perhaps, as it is an act of charity, it may be forgiven."

These words were overheard by Morris, who concealed himself at the 
inside of the door; upon which he returned with all expedition to the 
meeting-house, where he assumed his former posture and appearance. The 
parson soon appeared, and observing the awful brightness of the angel, 
approached him trembling. Morris repeated to him the purpose for which 
he had been sent, and inquired whether lie had brought all his money 
and plate along with him.

The parson answered he had. "Where, then," cried Dick, "is the ten 
pounds that was in the silver tankard?" "Ah!" replied the parson, 
trembling, "see thou art really an angel, for thou knowest the secrets 
of men's hearts." So, telling Dick he would go and bring it, he ran 
straight home to his maid, saying to her, "Oh! Hannah! Hannah! you 
must let me have the ten pounds again, for the angel knew I had not 
brought all my money." The maid restored it to him, for fear it should 
be a hindrance to his salvation, and when he returned with it to Dick, 
the latter pointed to a large sack, and said, "Go into that, and if 
you meet with any difficulties in your spiritual journey, you must not 
complain, because narrow is the way which leads to life, and few there 
be that find it." Then, tying him close up, he threw him over his 
shoulders; but many a hard knock had the poor parson, as he carried 
him over gates and stiles; and, about a quarter of a mile from the 
meeting-house, he threw this lump of ignorance and iniquity into a 
hog-sty, and there left him.

Some of the servants coming up soon after, and observing something 
moving in the sack, they were affrighted, and ran to tell their 
master, who, also coming, said to the servant, "Take the pitch-fork 
and run it through;" upon which the poor parson, imagining that he had 
arrived at the infernal regions, and that this was the command of 
Satan to his angels, called out for mercy. Upon opening the sack, they 
were astonished to see their parson, who, after amazing them with the 
recital of his adventure, returned to his maid Hannah above a hundred 
and twenty pounds poorer than when he left her.

Our adventurer, was travelling between Settlingbourne and Rochester, 
at a time when he was disguised like a farmer. Overtaking a cart of 
hay, he conversed with the driver, and assisted in preserving the 
equilibrium of the cart at any low part of the road. While passing 
through Chatham, an innkeeper asks him the price of his hay, supposing 
him to be the owner. The driver not hearing this, proceeds, while 
Morris, taking a handful to the vintner, bids him smell it, and say if 
he ever saw better hay. The innkeeper liked it very well, when, after 
some pro's and con's about the price, he paid Dick one pound eight for 
the hay, out of which they had some ale. Dick then observes to the 
vintner, "I suppose you will know my cart again from the rest in the 
market; go, and bid my man bring the hay to your house, and to make 
haste home with the team." After which, he made off with all 
convenient speed. The innkeeper, however, after a battle with the 
bumpkin, appealed to a justice of peace, who ordained him to lose the 
money for his credulity.

Morris was soon after detected, tried, condemned, and executed, with 
Arthur Chambers and Jack Goodwin, at Tyburn, in 1706.



WILLIAM NEVISON 
Highwayman who robbed his fellows. Executed at York, 
4th May 1684

THE progress of the arts and sciences is not more rapid than that of 
folly and vice. The latter is natural, while the former is acquired. 
In the following memoir it will be demonstrated, that the best 
education may be perverted by vicious dispositions.

William Nevison was born at Pomfret in Yorkshire, and his parents 
being in good circumstances, conferred upon him a decent education. He 
remained at school until he was about thirteen years of age. During 
that period, his blooming talents promised a luxuriant harvest. But 
the general bent of his future character, and the ruling motive of all 
his actions, were exhibited at that period. He commenced his 
depredations by stealing a silver spoon from his own father. The too 
indulgent parent, instead of chastising him for the crime, transferred 
the unpleasant work to the schoolmaster. That father who loses the 
authority over his own children, may either expect to lose them 
altogether, or have his heart grieved, and his family dishonoured by 
their conduct. The schoolmaster having punished young Nevison for his 
theft, he spent a sleepless night in meditating revenge. He knew that 
Syntax had a favourite horse who grazed in an adjacent park. William 
rose early in the morning, moved quietly into his father's closet, 
stole his keys, and supplied himself with cash to the amount of ten 
pounds. Then taking a saddle and bridle from his father's stable, he 
hastened to the park where the schoolmaster's horse fed. He saddled 
and bridled the animal, and with all haste rode towards London. About 
a mile or two from the capital, he cut the throat of the poor horse, 
for fear of being detected. Arrived in London, he changed his name and 
clothes, and then hired himself to a brewer.

Though under the necessity of being laborious, in order to obtain the 
necessaries of life, his mind was always upon the stretch to invent 
some more expeditious mode of acquiring money, than the slow return of 
annual pay. He often, ineffectually, attempted to rob his master. One 
evening, however, the clerk happening to use his bottle too freely, he 
followed him to the counting-room, and while he was enjoying a 
recruiting nap, he stole the keys of the desks, and relieved them of 
their burden, to the amount of about two hundred pounds. Without 
waiting to discover whether the clerk or the servant should be blamed 
for the cash, he sailed for Holland.

But change of climate did not change his dispositions. Through his 
instigations the daughter of a respectable citizen robbed her father 
of a large sum of money, and a quantity of jewels, and eloped with the 
Englishman. They were pursued, taken, and committed to prison. Thus 
detected, Nevison would certainly have finished a short but villainous 
career in a foreign land, had he not made his escape.

With no small difficulty he arrived in Flanders, and enlisted into a 
regiment of English volunteers, under the command of the Duke of York. 
In that station he behaved with considerable reputation, and even 
acquired some money. But his restless temper and avaricious 
disposition did not permit him to remain in a situation of industry or 
sobriety. He deserted, went over to England with his money, purchased 
a horse, together with all other necessaries, and commenced his 
depredations in a systematic form His success was uncommon, and he 
every day found means to replenish his coffers, and to nourish his 
extravagancies. Nor would he unite his fortune with any one, who, from 
selfish motives, might interrupt him in his lucrative employment. One 
day when Nevison was in search of booty upon the highway, he met two 
countrymen, who admonished him not to proceed in his journey, as the 
place was infested with robbers, and they had just been rifled of 
forty pounds. He requested them to turn back with him, to show him the 
road the robbers had taken, and he would engage to recover their 
money. They complied, and they soon came within sight of their 
plunderers. He then requested the countrymen to remain at a distance, 
and he would manage the matter alone. He accosted the first one, 
saying, "Sir, by your dress, and the colour of your horse, you appear 
to be the person that I was in search of; and if so, my business is to 
demand the repayment of the forty pounds you borrowed from two friends 
of mine." "How," quoth the highwayman, "forty pounds, sir!what! is 
the fellow mad?" "So mad," replied William, "that your life shall 
answer me, unless you give me better satisfaction." Then instantly 
presenting his pistol to his breast, the robber cried, "My life is at 
your mercy." "No," says our hero, "it is not that I seek, but the 
money you robbed these two men of, who are riding up to me, which you 
must refund." He delivered what he possessed, informing him that his 
companions had the remainder. Upon this Nevison causes him to 
dismount, and delivered him into the custody of the two countrymen, 
while he himself mounted the thief's horse, and rode after his 
associates. Supposing, from the colour of the horse, that it was their 
friend whom they had left behind, they, upon his appearance, waited 
his arrival.

"How now. Jack," says one of them, "what made you engage with yon 
fellow?" "No, gentlemen, you are mistaken in your man: Thomas, by the 
token of your horse and arms, hath sent me to you for the ransom of 
his life, which comes to no less than the price of the day, which, if 
you presently surrender, you may go about your business; if not, I 
must have a little dispute with you at sword and pistol." At which one 
of them let fly at him, but, missing his aim, Nevison lodged his 
bullet in the right shoulder of his antagonist. The other robber 
seeing his companion wounded, called for quarter. After some 
negotiation, it was agreed that their friend should be liberated, upon 
condition of their delivering their cash, which amounted to about one 
hundred and fifty pounds. William took his leave of them, returned to 
the countrymen, delivered them their forty pounds, and released the 
prisoner, according to agreement. He, at the same time, rallied the 
countrymen upon their cowardice, in so tamely surrendering their 
money.

In all his exploits William was tender of the fair sex, and bountiful 
to the poor. He was also a true loyalist, and never made any 
contributions upon that party. He one day fortunately encountered a 
rich usurer, stopped his coach, and demanded that he would deliver the 
money which he had extorted from poor widows and orphans.

The pistol presented to his breast, and the reproaches of William, 
filled his guilty mind with inexpressible terror, and he began to 
expostulate for his life. "That shall be granted," replied Nevison, 
"upon condition of your surrendering your gold." He reluctantly drew 
out sixty pieces of gold; but this sum being inadequate to the 
necessities of William, he constrained the usurer to mount upon the 
postilion's horse, and allowed the coach with three ladies in it to 
proceed. The poor Jew, now thinking that the hour was at hand when he 
would be bereft of his life, and separated from his treasures, 
experienced all the violent emotions of terror, chagrin, and despair. 
William compelled him to draw a note upon sight for five hundred 
pounds upon a scrivener in London. He then permitted him to ride after 
his friends to acquaint them with his misfortunes; while he himself 
rode all night, that he might have the money drawn before advice could 
be sent to prevent it.

After several adventures of a similar nature, William one day robbed a 
rich grazier of four hundred and fifty pounds, and then resolved to 
retire. Accordingly he returned home, and, like the prodigal son, was 
joyfully received by his father, who, not having heard of him during 
seven or eight years, supposed that he had been dead. He remained with 
his father until the day of his death, living as soberly and honestly 
as if no act of violence had ever stained his hands. Upon the death of 
his father, however, he returned to his former courses, and in a short 
time, his name was a terror to every traveller upon the road. To such 
a degree did he carry his plan, that the carriers and drovers who 
frequented that road, willingly agreed to leave certain sums at such 
places as he appointed, to prevent them being stripped of their all.

Continuing his wicked courses, he was at last apprehended, thrown into 
Leicester jail, put in irons, and strictly guarded. But, in spite of 
all the precautions of the county, he effected his escape. One day, 
two or three of his trusty friends visited him; one of whom being a 
physician, he gave out that he was infected with the plague, and that, 
unless he was removed to a larger room, where he might enjoy free air, 
he would not only himself perish, but communicate the infection to all 
the inhabitants of the jail. He was instantly removed, and the 
jailor's wife would not allow her husband to go farther than the door 
of his room, for fear of the infection; which afforded Nevison and his 
friends time to perfect their scheme. The physician came twice or 
thrice every day to see him; and continued to declare his case 
hopeless. At last a painter was brought in, who painted all his body 
with spots, similar to those that appear upon a person infected with 
the pestilence.

In a few days after, he received a sleeping-draught, and was declared 
to be dead. The inquest who sat upon his body were afraid to approach 
in order to make minute inspection, and thus a verdict was returned 
that he had died of the plague. His friends demanding his body, he was 
carried out of prison in a coffin.

This interview with a coffin only rendered him more callous and daring 
in vice. He, with redoubled vigour, renewed his depredations, and, 
meeting his carriers and drovers, he informed them that it was 
necessary to increase their rents, to refund his expenses while in 
jail, and his loss of time. It was at first supposed that it was his 
ghost, who carried on the same pranks that he had done in his 
lifetime. The truth of this, however, came to be suspected, and the 
jailor offered a reward of twenty pounds to any person who would 
restore him to his former dwelling.

Resolved to revisit the capital, he upon his journey met a company of 
canting beggars, pilgrims, and idle wanderers through the earth. 
Continuing in their company for some time, and observing the merry 
life that they pursued, he took an opportunity to propose himself as a 
candidate for admission into their honourable fraternity. Their leader 
applauded his resolution, and addressed him in these words: "Do not we 
come into the world arrant beggars, without a rag upon us? And do we 
not all go out of the world like beggars, saving only an old sheet 
over us? Shall we then be ashamed to walk up and down the world like 
beggars, with old blankets pinned about us? No, no, that would be a 
shame to us, indeed. Have we not the whole kingdom to walk in at our 
pleasure? Are we afraid of the approach of quarter-day? Do we walk in 
fear of sheriffs, sergeants, and catchpoles? Who ever knew an arrant 
beggar arrested for debt? Is not our meat dressed in every man's 
kitchen? Does not every man's cellar afford us beer? And the best 
man's purses keep a penny for us to spend?" Having by these words, as 
he thought, fully fixed him in love with begging, he then acquainted 
the company with Nevison's desires; in consequence of which they were 
all very joyful, being as glad to add one to their society, as a Turk 
is to gain a proselyte to Mahomet.

The first question they asked him was, if he had any loure in his 
bung. He stared on them, not knowing what they meant; till at last, 
one informed him it was money in his purse. He told them he had but 
eighteen pence, which he gave them freely. This, by a general vote, 
was condemned to be spent in a booze for his initiation. Then they 
commanded him to kneel down, which being done, one of the chief of 
them took a gage of booze, which is a quart of drink, and poured the 
same on his head, saying, "I do, by virtue of this sovereign liquor, 
install thee in the Roage, and make thee a free denizen of our ragged 
regiment. So that henceforth it shall be lawful for thee to cant, and 
to carry a doxy or mort along with thee, only observing these rules; 
first, that thou art not to wander up and down all countries, but to 
keep to that quarter that is allotted thee; and, secondly, thou art to 
give way to any of us that have borne all the offices of the wallet 
before; and, upon holding up a finger, to avoid any town or country 
village, where thou seest we are foraging for victuals for our army 
that march along with us. Observing these two rules, we take thee into 
our protection, and adopt thee a brother of our numerous society." 
Having ended his oration, Nevison rose up, and was congratulated by 
all the company's hanging about him, like so many dogs about a bear, 
and making such a hideous noise, that the chief, commanding silence, 
addressed him as follows: "Now that thou art entered into our 
fraternity, thou must not scruple to act any villainies, whether it be 
to cut a purse, steal a cloak-bag or portmanteau, convey all manner of 
things, whether a chicken, sucking pig, duck, goose, hen, or steal a 
shirt from the hedge; for he that will be a quier cove (a professed 
rogue) must observe these rules. And because thou art but a novice in 
begging, and understandest not the mysteries of the canting language, 
thou shalt have a doxy to be thy companion, by whom thou mayest 
receive instructions." And thereupon, he singled him out a girl of 
about fourteen years of age, which tickled his fancy very much; but he 
must presently be married to her, after the fashion of their patrico, 
who amongst beggars is their priest. The ceremony was performed after 
this manner:

They took a hen, and, having cut off the head of it, laid the dead 
body on the ground, placing him on the one side, and his doxy on the 
other; this being done, the priest standing by, with a loud voice, bid 
them live together till death did them part; then shaking hands, and 
kissing each other, the ceremony of the wedding was over, and the 
whole group appeared intoxicated with joy. Night approaching, and all 
their money being spent, they betook to a barn not far off, where they 
broached a hogshead, and went to sleep.

Nevison, having met with this odd piece of diversion in his journey, 
slipped out of the barn when all were asleep, took a horse, and posted 
directly away. But, coming to London, he found there was too much 
noise about him, to permit him to tarry there; he therefore returned 
into the country, and fell to his old pranks again. Several who had 
been formerly robbed by him, happening to meet him, imagined that his 
ghost walked abroad, having heard the report of his pestilential death 
in Leicester jail. In short, his crimes became go notorious, that a 
reward was offered to any that would apprehend him; this made many 
waylay him, especially two brothers named Fletcher, one of whom 
Nevison shooting dead, he got off; from thence going into a little 
village about thirteen miles from York, he was taken by Captain 
Hardcastle, and sent to York jail, where in a week's time he was 
tried, condemned, and executed, at the Knavesmire on 4 May 1684, aged 
forty-five 



CAPTAIN AVERY 
Pirate who died penniless, having been robbed of his 
booty by merchants

During his own time, the adventures of Captain Avery were the subject 
of general conversation in Europe. It was reported that he had married 
the Great Mogul's daughter, who was taken in an Indian ship that fell 
into his hands, and that he was about to be the founder of a new 
monarchy; that he gave commissions in his own name to the captains of 
his ships, and the commanders of his forces, and was acknowledged by 
them as their prince. In consequence of these reports, it was at one 
time resolved to fit out a strong squadron to go and take him and his 
men; and at another time, it was proposed to invite him home with all 
his riches, by the offer of his Majesty's pardon. These reports, 
however, were soon discovered to be groundless, and he was actually 
starving without a shilling, while he was represented as in the 
possession of millions. Not to exhaust the patience, nor lessen the 
curiosity, of the reader the facts in this man's life shall be briefly 
related.

He was a native of Devonshire, and, at an early period, sent to sea: 
advanced to the station of a mate in a merchantman, he performed 
several voyages. It happened, previous to the peace of Ryswick, when 
there existed an alliance between Spain, England, Holland, and other 
powers, against France, that the French in Martinique carried on a 
smuggling trade with the Spaniards on the continent of Peru. To 
prevent their intrusion into the Spanish dominions, a few vessels were 
commanded to cruise upon that coast, but the French ships were too 
strong for them; therefore the Spaniards came to the resolution of 
hiring some foreigners to act against them. Accordingly, some 
merchants of Bristol fitted out two ships of thirty guns, well manned, 
and provided with every necessary; and commanded them to sail for 
Corunna, to receive their orders.

Captain Gibson commanded one of these ships, and Avery was his mate. 
He was a fellow of more cunning than courage; and, insinuating himself 
into the confidence of some of the boldest men in the ship, he 
represented the immense riches which were to be acquired upon the 
Spanish coast, and proposed to run off with the ship. The proposal was 
scarcely made, when it was agreed upon, and put in execution at ten 
o'clock the following evening. Captain Gibson was one of those who 
mightily love their bottle, and spent much of his time on shore. But 
he remained on board that night; which did not, however, frustrate 
their design, because he had taken his usual dose, and so went to bed. 
The men who were not in the confederacy went also to bed, leaving none 
upon deck but the conspirators. At the time agreed upon, the long-boat 
of the other ship came, which Avery hailing in the usual manner, he 
was answered by the men in her, "Is your drunken boatswain on board?" 
which was the watchword agreed between them. Avery replying in the 
affirmative, the boat came on board, with sixteen stout fellows, who 
joined in the adventure. They next secured the hatches, then softly 
weighed anchor, and immediately put to sea without bustle or noise. 
There were several vessels in the bay, and a Dutchman of forty guns, 
the captain of which was offered a considerable reward to go in 
pursuit of Avery, but he declined. When the captain awoke, he rung his 
bell, and Avery and another conspirator going into the cabin, found 
him yet half asleep. He inquired, saying, "What is the matter with the 
ship does she drive? what weather is it?" supposing that it had been 
a storm, and that the ship was driven from her anchors. "No, no," 
answered Avery, "we're at sea, with a fair wind and good weather." "At 
sea!" says the captain, "how can that be?" "Come," says Avery, "don't 
be in a fright, but put on your clothes, and I'll let you into a 
secret. You must know that I am captain of this ship now, and this is 
my cabin, therefore you must walk out; I am bound to Madagascar, with 
a design of making my own fortune, and that of all the brave fellows 
joined with me."

The captain having a little recovered his senses, began to understand 
the meaning. However, his fright was as great as before; which Avery 
perceiving, desired him to fear nothing; "for," says he, "if you have 
a mind to make one of us, we will receive you; and if you turn sober, 
and attend to business, perhaps, in time, I may make you one of my 
lieutenants; if not, here's a boat, and you shall be set on shore." He 
accepted of the last proposal; and the whole crew being called up to 
know who was willing to go on shore with the captain, there were only 
about five or six who chose to accompany him.

They proceeded on their voyage to Madagascar, and it does not appear 
that they captured any vessels upon their way. When arrived at the 
north-east part of that island, they found two sloops at anchor, who, 
upon seeing them, slipped their cables, run themselves ashore, while 
the men all landed, and concealed themselves in the woods. These were 
two sloops which the men had run off with from the West Indies, and, 
seeing Avery's ship, supposed that he had been sent out after them. 
Suspecting who they were, he sent some of his men on shore, to inform 
them that they were friends, and to propose a union for their common 
safety.

The sloops' men were well armed, had posted themselves in a wood, and 
placed sentinels to observe whether the ship landed her men to pursue 
them. The sentinels only observing two or three men coming towards 
them, unarmed, they did not oppose them. Upon being informed that they 
were friends, the sentinels conveyed them to the main body, where they 
delivered their message. They were, at first, afraid that it was a 
stratagem to entrap them, but when the messengers assured them that 
their captain had also run away with his ship, and that a few of their 
men, along with him, would meet them unarmed, to consult matters for 
their common advantage, confidence was established. They were mutually 
well pleased, as it added to their strength.

Having consulted what was most proper to be attempted, they 
endeavoured to get off the sloops, and hastened to prepare all things, 
in order to sail for the Arabian coast. Near the river Indus, the man 
at the mast-head spied a sail, upon which they gave chase; as they 
came nearer to her, they discovered that she was a tall vessel, and 
might turn out to be an East Indiaman. She, however, proved a better 
prize; for, when they fired at her, she hoisted Mogul's colours, and 
seemed to stand upon her defence. Avery only cannonaded at a distance, 
when some of his men began to suspect that he was not the hero that 
they supposed. The sloops, however, attacked, the one on the bow, and 
another upon the quarter of the ship, and so boarded her. She then 
struck her colours. She was one of the great Mogul's own ships, and 
there were in her several of the greatest persons in his court, among 
whom, it was said, was one of his daughters going upon a pilgrimage to 
Mecca; and they were carrying with them rich offerings to present at 
the shrine of Mahomet. It is a well-known fact, that the people of the 
east travel with great magnificence; so that these had along with them 
all their slaves and attendants, with a large quantity of vessels of 
gold and silver, and immense sums of money to defray their expenses by 
land; therefore, the spoil which they received from that ship was 
almost incalculable.

They took the treasure on board their own ships, and plundered their 
prize of everything valuable, and then allowed her to depart. As soon 
as the Mogul received this intelligence, he threatened to send a 
mighty army to extirpate the English from all their settlements upon 
the Indian coast. The East India Company were greatly alarmed, but 
they found means to calm his resentment, by promising to search for 
the robbers, and deliver them into his hands. The noise which this 
made over all Europe gave birth to the rumours that were circulated 
concerning Avery's greatness.

In the meantime our adventurers made the best of their way back to 
Madagascar, intending to make that place the deposit of all their 
treasure, to build a small fort, and to keep always a few men there 
for its protection. Avery, however, disconcerted this plan, and 
rendered it altogether unnecessary.

While steering their course, Avery sent a boat to each of the sloops, 
requesting that the chiefs would come on board his ship to hold a 
conference. They obeyed, and being assembled, he suggested to them the 
necessity of securing the property which they had acquired, in some 
safe place on shore, and observed, that the chief difficulty was to 
get it safe on shore; adding, that if any of the sloops should be 
attacked alone, they would not be able to make any great resistance, 
and thus she must either be sunk or taken with all the property on 
board. That, for his part, his vessel was so strong, so well manned, 
and such a swift-sailing vessel, that he did not think that it was 
possible for any other ship to take or overcome her. Accordingly, he 
proposed that all their treasure should be sealed up in three chests;
that each of the captains should have keys, and that they should not 
be opened until all were presentthat the chests should be then put on 
board his ship, and afterwards lodged in some safe place upon land.

This proposal seemed so reasonable, and so much for the common good, 
that it was accordingly agreed to, and all the treasure deposited in 
three chests, and carried to Avery's ship. The weather being 
favourable, they remained all three in company during that and the 
next day; meanwhile Avery, tampering with his men, suggested, that now 
they had on board what was sufficient to make them all happy; "and 
what," added he, "should hinder us from going to some country where we 
are not known, and living on shore all the rest of our days in 
plenty?" They soon understood his hint, and all readily consented to 
deceive the men of the sloops, and fly with all the booty; this they 
effected during the darkness of the following night. The reader may 
easily conjecture what were the feelings and indignation of the other 
two crews in the morning, when they discovered that Avery had made off 
with all their property.

Avery and his men hastened towards America, and, being strangers in 
that country, they agreed to divide their booty, to change their 
names, and separately to take up their residence, and live in 
affluence and honour. The first land they approached was at the island 
of Providence, then newly settled. It however occurred to them, that 
the largeness of their vessel, and the report that one had been run 
off with from the Groine might create suspicion; therefore they 
resolved to dispose of their vessel at Providence. Upon this 
resolution, Avery, pretending that his vessel had been equipped for 
privateering, and having been unsuccessful, he had orders from the 
owners to dispose of her to the best advantage, he soon found a 
merchant. Having thus sold his own ship, he immediately purchased a 
small sloop.

In this he and his companions embarked, and landed at several places 
in America, where, none suspecting them, they dispersed and settled in 
the country. Avery, however, had been careful to conceal the greater 
part of the jewels and other valuable articles; so that his riches 
were immense. Arriving at Boston, he was almost resolved to settle 
there; but as the greater part of his wealth consisted of diamonds, he 
was apprehensive that he could not dispose of them at that place, 
without being taken up as a pirate. Upon reflection, therefore, he 
resolved to sail for Ireland, and in a short time arrived in the 
northern part of that kingdom, and his men dispersed into different 
places. Some of them obtained the pardon of King William, and settled 
in that country.

The wealth of Avery, however, now proved of small service, and 
occasioned him great uneasiness. He could not offer his diamonds for 
sale in that country, without being suspected. Considering, therefore, 
what was best to be done, he thought there might be some person at 
Bristol he could venture to trust. Upon this he resolved; and, going 
into Devonshire, sent to one of his friends to meet him at a town 
called Biddiford. When he had unbosomed himself to him and other 
pretended friends, they agreed that the safest plan would be to put 
his effects into the hands of some wealthy merchants, and no inquiry 
would be made how they came by them. One of these friends told him, he 
was acquainted with some who were very fit for the purpose, and if he 
would allow them a handsome commission, they would do the business 
faithfully. Avery liked the proposal, particularly as he could think 
of no other way of managing this matter, since he could not appear to 
act for himself. Accordingly the merchants paid Avery a visit at 
Biddiford, where, after strong protestations of honour and integrity, 
he delivered them his effects, consisting of diamonds, and some 
vessels of gold. After giving him a little money for his present 
subsistence, they departed.

He changed his name, and lived very quietly at Biddiford; therefore 
there was no notice taken of him. In a short time his money was all 
spent, yet he heard no word from his merchants; he wrote to them 
repeatedly; at last they sent him a small supply, but it was not 
sufficient to pay his debts. In short, the remittances they sent him 
were so trifling, that he could with difficulty exist. He therefore 
determined to go privately to Bristol, and have an interview with the 
merchants himself; where, instead of money, he met with a mortifying 
repulse; for, when he desired them to come to an account with him, 
they silenced him by threatening to disclose his character; the 
merchants thus proving themselves as good pirates at land as he was at 
sea.

Whether he was frightened by these menaces, or had seen some other 
persons who recognized him, is not known; however, he went immediately 
to Ireland, and from thence solicited his merchants very hard for a 
supply, but to no purpose; so that he was reduced to beggary. In this 
extremity he was determined to return, cast himself upon the mercy of 
these honest Bristol merchants, let the consequence be what it would. 
He went on board a trading vessel, and worked his passage over to 
Plymouth, from whence he travelled on foot to Biddiford. He had been 
there but a few days, when he fell sick and died; not being worth so 
much as could buy him a coffin.

We shall now turn back and give our readers some account of what 
became of the other two sloops. Flattering themselves that Avery had 
outsailed them during the night, they held on their course to the 
place of rendezvous; but, arrived there, to their sad disappointment 
no ship appeared. It was now necessary for them to consult what was 
most proper to do in their desperate circumstances.

Their provisions were nearly exhausted, and though both fish and fowl 
were to be found on shore, yet they were destitute of salt to cure 
them. As they could not subsist at sea without salt provisions, they 
resolved to form an establishment upon land. Accordingly, making tents 
of the sails, and using the other materials of the sloops for what 
purposes they could serve, they encamped upon the shore. It was also a 
fortunate circumstance, that they had plenty of ammunition and small 
arms. Here they met with some of their countrymen; and, as the 
digression is short, we will inform our readers how they came to 
inhabit this place.

Captain George Dew, and Thomas Tew, had received commission from the 
governor of Bermudas to sail for the river Gambia in Africa, that, 
with the assistance of the Royal African Company, they might seize the 
French factory situated upon that coast. Dew, in a violent storm, not 
only sprung a mast, but lost sight of his companion. Upon this he 
returned to refit. Instead of proceeding in his voyage. Tew made 
towards the Cape of Good Hope, doubled that cape, and sailed for the 
Straits of Babel-Mandel. There he met with a large ship richly laden 
coming from the Indies, and bound for Arabia. Though she had on board 
three hundred soldiers, besides seamen, yet Tew had the courage to 
attack her, and soon made her his prize. It is reported, that by this 
one prize every man shared near three thousand pounds. Informed by the 
prisoners that five other ships were to pass that way. Tew would have 
attacked them, but was prevented by the remonstrances of his quarter-
master and others. This difference of opinion terminated in a 
resolution to abandon the sea, and to settle on some convenient spot 
on shore; and the island of Madagascar was chosen. Tew, however, and a 
few others, in a short time went for Rhode Island, and obtained a 
pardon.

The natives of Madagascar are Negroes, but different from those of 
Guinea in the length of their hair, and in the blackness of their 
complexion. They are divided into small nations, each governed by its 
own prince, who carry on a continual war upon each other. The 
prisoners taken in war are either rendered slaves to the conquerors, 
sold, or slain, according to pleasure. When the pirates first settled 
among them, their alliance was much courted by these princes, and 
those whom they joined were always successful in their wars, the 
natives being ignorant of the use of fire-arms. Such terror did they 
carry along with them, that the very appearance of a few pirates in an 
army would have put the opposite army to flight.

By these means they in a little time became very formidable, and the 
prisoners which they took in war they employed in cultivating the 
ground, and the most beautiful of the women they married; nor were 
they contented with one, but married as many as they could 
conveniently maintain. The natural result was, that they separated, 
each choosing a convenient place for himself, where he lived in a 
princely style, surrounded by his wives, slaves, and dependants. Nor 
was it long before jarring interests excited them also to draw the 
sword against each other, and they appeared at the head of their 
respective forces in the field of battle. In these civil wars their 
number and strength were greatly lessened.

The servant, exalted to the condition of a master, generally becomes a 
tyrant. These pirates, unexpectedly elevated to the dignity of petty 
princes, used their power with the most wanton barbarity. The 
punishment of the very least offence, was to be tied to a tree, and 
instantly shot through the head. The Negroes, at length exasperated by 
continued oppression, formed the determination of extirpating them in 
one night; nor was it a difficult matter to accomplish this, since 
they were now so much divided both in affection and residence. 
Fortunately, however, for them, a Negro woman, who was partial to 
them, ran twenty miles in three hours, and, warning them of their 
danger, they were united and in arms to oppose the Negroes before the 
latter had assembled. This narrow escape made them more cautious, and 
induced them to adopt the following system of policy:

Convinced that fear was not a sufficient protection, and that the 
bravest man might be murdered by a coward in his bed, they laboured to 
foment wars among the Negro princes, while they themselves declined to 
aid either party. It naturally followed, that those who were 
vanquished fled to them for protection, and increased their strength.

When there was not war, they fomented private discords, and encouraged 
them to wreak their vengeance against each other; nay, even taught 
them how to surprise their opponents, and furnished them with fire-
arms, with which to dispatch them more effectually and more 
expeditiously. The consequences were, that the murderer was 
constrained to fly to them for protection, with his wives, children, 
and kindred. These, from interest, became true friends, as their own 
safety depended upon the lives of their protectors. By this time the 
pirates were so formidable, that none of the Negro princes durst 
attack them in open war. 

Pursuing this system of policy, in a short time each chief had his 
party greatly increased, and they divided like so many tribes, in 
order to find ground to cultivate, and proper places chosen to build 
places of residence and of defence. The fears that agitated them were 
also obvious in their general policy, for they vied with each other in 
constructing places for their defence, and using every precaution to 
prevent the possibility of sudden danger, either from the Negroes, or 
from one another.

A description of one of these dwellings, will both show the fears that 
agitated these tyrants, and prove entertaining to the reader. They 
selected a spot overgrown with wood, near a river; raised a rampart or 
ditch round it, so straight and steep that it was impossible to climb 
it, more particularly by those who had no scaling-ladders. Over that 
ditch there was one passage into the wood; the dwelling, which was a 
hut, was built in that part of the wood which the prince thought most 
secure, but so covered, that it could not be discovered until you came 
near it. But the greatest ingenuity was displayed in the construction 
of the passage that led to the hut, which was so narrow, that no more 
than one person could go abreast, and contrived in so intricate a 
manner, that it was a perfect labyrinththe way going round and round, 
with several small cross ways, so that a person unacquainted with it, 
might walk several hours without finding the hut. Along the sides of 
these paths, certain large thorns, which grew on a tree in that 
country, were stuck into the ground with their points outwards; and 
the path itself being serpentine, as before mentioned, if a man should 
attempt to approach the hut at night, he would certainly have struck 
upon these thorns.

Thus like tyrants they lived, dreading and dreaded by all, and in this 
state they were found by Captain Woods Rodgers, when he went to 
Madagascar in the Delicia, a ship of forty guns, with the design of 
purchasing slaves. He touched upon a part of the island where no ship 
had been seen for seven or eight years before, where he met with some 
pirates who had been upon the island above twenty-five years. There 
were only eleven of the original stock then alive, surrounded with a 
numerous offspring of children and grand-children.

They were struck with terror upon the sight of the vessel, supposing 
that it was a man-of-war sent out to apprehend them; they therefore 
retired to their secret habitations. But when they found some of the 
ship's crew on shore, without any signs of hostility, and proposing to 
treat with them for slaves, they ventured to come out of their 
dwellings attended like princes. Having been so long upon the island, 
their cloaks were so much worn, that their majesties were extremely 
out at elbows. It cannot be said that they were ragged, but they had 
nothing to cover them but the skins of beasts in their natural state, 
not even a shoe or stocking; so that they resembled the pictures of 
Hercules in the lion's skin; and being overgrown with beard, and hair 
upon their bodies, they appeared the most savage figures that the 
human imagination could well conceive.

The slaves that they had in their possession soon provided them with 
more suitable clothes, and all other necessaries, which they received 
in exchange. Meanwhile, they became very familiar, went frequently on 
board, and were very eager in examining the inside of the ship, 
talking very familiarly with the men, and inviting them on shore. 
Their design was to surprise the ship during the night. They had a 
sufficient number of men and boats to effect their purpose; but the 
captain suspecting them, kept so strong a watch upon deck, that they 
found it in vain to hazard an attempt. When some of the men went on 
shore, they entered into a plan to seize the ship, but the captain 
observing their familiarity, he prevented any one of his men from 
speaking to the pirates, and only permitted a confidential person to 
purchase their slaves. Thus he departed from the island, leaving these 
pirates to enjoy their savage royalty. One of them had been a waterman 
upon the Thames, and having committed a murder, fled to the West 
Indies. The rest had all been fore-mast men, nor was there one among 
them who could either read or write.



CAPTAIN MARTEL 
Pirate

WAR is not the harvest-time of pirates. Those who are naturally of a 
rambling turn of mind, then find employment in privateering. 
Provincial mobs are most frequent in times of peace; and those 
turbulent spirits which give energy to tumult, prove brave and useful 
soldiers when disciplined and introduced into the ranks. In the same 
manner, pirates, under the influence of royal clemency, would prove 
brave and hardy seamen.

The origin and first adventures of this man, upon whose history we are 
now to enter, are involved in obscurity. He was commander of a private 
sloop of eight guns and eighty men, upon the coast of Jamaica, where 
he took the Berkley galley. Captain Sanders, and plundered him of a 
thousand pounds; and afterwards he took some money and provisions from 
a sloop called King Solomon. He proceeded after this to the port of 
Cavena in the island of Cuba, and in his way captured two sloops, 
which he plundered and then dismissed. Near the port, he met a fine 
galley of twenty guns, commanded by Captain Wilson, which was attacked 
under the black flag, and forced to surrender. Some of the men were 
put on shore, and others were detained. Captain Martel then desired 
Captain Wilson to inform his owners, that his sloop would admirably 
answer his purpose, by removing one deck; and as for the cargo, which 
consisted chiefly of log-wood and sugar, he would take care it should 
be carried to a good market.

This ship being equipped, he mounted her with twenty-two guns and a 
hundred men, leaving twenty-five hands in the sloop, and went to 
cruise off the Leeward Islands. Here fortune was propitious to the 
pirates. After taking two small vessels, they gave chase to a stout 
ship, which, upon the sight of the black flag, suddenly struck. This 
was the Dolphin of twenty guns, bound for Newfoundland. The men were 
made prisoners, and the ship was taken along with our pirates. They 
seized another vessel in her voyage from Jamaica, put her provisions 
on board their own ship, and so let her depart. Thus she was obliged 
to return to Jamaica before she could prosecute her voyage. These 
fortunate pirates, not long after, captured a small ship and a sloop 
belonging to Barbados, and having taken out the provisions, and such 
of the men as chose to go along with them, allowed them to depart. 
Their next prize was the Greyhound galley of London, from Guinea to 
Jamaica. They speedily emptied her of her valuable cargo, and 
permitted her to prosecute her voyage.

It was necessary to repair to some harbour, both to refit, to obtain 
provisions, and to dispose of their cargo. Santa Cruz was deemed the 
most proper place for this purpose; which is ten miles long and two 
broad, lying south-east by Porto Rico, and belonging to the French 
settlements. Here they hoped to repose for a while, in order to 
prepare themselves for greater adventures. Nor did fortune yet forsake 
these daring adventurers; for on their voyage they captured another 
vessel, and speedily arrived at the place of their destination. They 
had now a ship of twenty guns, a sloop of eight, and three prizes. 
This little fleet they stationed in a small harbour, or road, upon the 
north-west of the island.

Their first employment, on their arrival, was to fortify themselves 
against any attack. They erected a battery of four guns upon the 
island, and another of two guns, upon the north point of the road. 
They also stationed one of the sloops, with eight guns, at the mouth 
of the channel, to prevent any vessel from entering. Having thus 
fortified themselves, they began to unrig their vessels, in order to 
clean them.

General Hamilton sent a sloop with an express to Captain Hume, to 
acquaint him that two pirate ships infested the coast. The 
Scarborough, of thirty guns and a hundred and forty men, commanded by 
Captain Hume, had then near forty sick, and had buried twenty, and 
was, therefore, in a bad condition for sea; but, having received this 
intelligence, Captain Hume left his sick men behind, sailed to the 
other islands for a supply of hands, and went in search of the 
pirates. After several disappointments, and when now about to return, 
despairing to meet with these marauders, he was informed by a boat 
which had come from Santa Cruz, that two pirate ships, with some 
others, were in that place. On Captain Hume's arrival there, the pilot 
refused to enter the harbour. They were welcomed by the pirates 
saluting them with red-hot balls from the shore. At length Captain 
Hume came to anchor alongside the reef, and cannonaded both the 
vessels and batteries during several hours.

The sloop which guarded the channel was at length sunk, and the man-
of-war then directed her fire against the large pirate ships. In the 
following night it calmed, and Captain Hume, fearing that he might 
fall upon the reef, weighed anchor, and hovered in the neighbourhood, 
for a few days, to block them up. One evening, the pirates observed 
the man-of-war set out for sea, and they took the opportunity to warp 
out, in order to evade the enemy. They soon run aground, and in this 
situation saw Captain Hume returning to pay them another visit, which 
threw them into such dreadful consternation, that they quitted their 
ship, leaving in it twenty Negroes, who all perished. Nineteen of the 
pirates escaped in a long-boat, while the captain and the rest of the 
crew fled into the woods, and there, in all probability, perished.



CAPTAIN TEACH 
alias BLACK BEARD, the Most Famous Pirate of all.

EDWARD TEACH was a native of Bristol, and, having gone to Jamaica, he 
frequently sailed from that port, as one of the crew of a privateer, 
during the French war. In that station, he gave frequent proofs of his 
boldness and personal courage; but he was not intrusted with any 
command, until Captain Benjamin Hornigold gave him the command of a 
prize which he had taken.

In the spring of 1717, Hornigold and Teach sailed from Providence, for 
the continent of America, and in their way captured a small vessel, 
with a hundred and twenty barrels of flour, which they put on board 
their own vessels. They also seized other two vessels; from one they 
took some gallons of wine, and from the other, plunder to a 
considerable value. After cleaning upon the coast of Virginia, they 
made a prize of a large French Guineaman, bound to Martinique, and 
Teach, obtaining the command of her, went upon a cruise. Hornigold, 
with the two vessels, returned to the island of Providence, and 
surrendered to the king's clemency.

Teach now began to act an independent part. He mounted his vessel with 
forty guns, and named her The Queen Anne's Revenge. Cruising near the 
island of St. Vincent, he took a large ship, called the Great Allan, 
and, after having plundered her of what he deemed proper, he set her 
on fire. A few days after, Teach encountered the Scarborough man-of- 
war, and engaged her for some hours; but, perceiving his strength and 
resolution, she retired, and left Teach to pursue his depredations. 
His next adventure was with a sloop of ten guns, commanded by Major 
Bonnet, whose actions we have already related; and these two having 
united their fortunes, they co-operated for some time; but Teach 
finding him unacquainted with naval affairs, gave the command of 
Bonnet's ship to Richards, one of his own crew, and entertained Bonnet 
on board of his own vessel. Watering at Turniff, they discovered a 
sail, and Richards, with the Revenge, slipped her cable, and ran out 
to meet her. Upon seeing the black flag hoisted, the vessel struck, 
and came to, under the stern of Teach, the commodore. This was the 
Adventure, from Jamaica. They took the captain and his men on board 
the great ship, and manned his sloop for their own service.

They weighed from Turniff, where they remained during a week, and, 
sailing to the bay, found there a ship and four sloops. Teach hoisted 
his flag, and began to fire at them, upon which the captain and his 
men left their ship, and fled to the shore. Teach burned two of these 
sloops, and let the other three depart.

They afterwards sailed to different places; and, having taken two 
small vessels, they anchored off the Bar of Charlestown for a few 
days. Here they captured a ship bound for England, as she was coming 
out of the harbour. They next seized a vessel coming out of 
Charlestown, and two pinks coming into the same harbour, together with 
a brigantine with fourteen Negroes. The audacity of these 
transactions, performed in sight of the town, struck the inhabitants 
with terror, as they had been lately visited by some other notorious 
pirates. Meanwhile there were eight sail in the harbour, none of which 
durst set to sea, for fear of falling into the hands of Blackbeard. 
The trade of this place was fatally interrupted, and the inhabitants 
were abandoned to despair. Their calamity was greatly augmented from 
this circumstance, that a long and desperate war with the natives had 
just been terminated, when they began to be infested by these robbers.

Teach having detained all the persons taken in these ships, as 
prisoners, they were soon in great want of medicines, and he had the 
audacity to demand a chest from the governor. This demand was made in 
a manner not less daring than insolent. Teach sent Richards, the 
captain of the Revenge, with Mr. Marks, one of the prisoners, and 
several others, to present their request. Richards informed the 
governor, that unless their demand was granted, and he and his 
companions returned in safety, every prisoner on board the captured 
ships would instantly be slain, and the vessels consumed to ashes.

During the time that Mr. Marks was negotiating with the governor, 
Richards and his associates walked the streets at pleasure, while 
indignation flamed from every eye against them, as the robbers of 
their property, and the terror of their country. Though the affront 
thus offered the government was great and most audacious, yet, to 
preserve the lives of so many men, they granted their request, and 
sent on board a chest valued at three or four hundred pounds.

Teach, as soon as he received the medicines and his fellow pirates, 
pillaged the ships of gold and provisions, and then dismissed the 
prisoners with their vessels. From the bar of Charlestown they sailed 
to North Carolina. Teach now began to reflect how he could best secure 
the spoil, along with some of the crew, who were his favourites. 
Accordingly, under pretence of cleaning, he run his vessel on shore, 
and grounded; then ordered the men in Hands' sloop to come to his 
assistance, which they endeavouring to do, also run aground, and so 
they were both lost. Then Teach went into the tender with forty hands; 
and, upon a sandy island, about a league from shore, where there was 
neither bird nor beast, nor herb for their subsistence, he left 
seventeen of his crew, who must have inevitably perished, had not 
Major Bonnet received intelligence of their miserable situation, and 
sent a long-boat for them. After this barbarous deed. Teach, with the 
remainder of his crew, went and surrendered to the governor of North 
Carolina, retaining all the property which had been acquired by his 
fleet.

This temporary suspension of the depredations of Blackbeard, (for so 
he was now called,) did not proceed from the conviction of his former 
errors, or a determination to reform, but to prepare for future and 
more extensive exploits. As governors are but men, and not, 
unfrequently, by no means possessed of the most virtuous principles, 
the gold of Blackboard rendered him comely in the governor's eyes, 
and, by his influence, he obtained a legal right to the great ship 
called The Queen Anne's Revenge. By order of the governor, a court of 
vice-admiralty was held at Bath-town, and that vessel was condemned as 
a lawful prize that he had taken from the Spaniards, though it was a 
well-known fact that she belonged to English merchants. Before he 
entered upon his new adventures, he married a young woman of about 
sixteen years of age, the governor himself performing the ceremony. It 
was reported that this was only his fourteenth wife, about twelve of 
whom were yet alive; and, though this woman was young and amiable, he 
behaved towards her in a manner so brutal, that was shocking to all 
decency and propriety, even among the abandoned race of pirates.

In his first voyage, Blackboard directed his course to the Bermudas, 
and, meeting with two or three English vessels, emptied them of their 
stores and other necessaries, and allowed them to proceed. He also met 
with two French vessels bound for Martinique, the one light, and the 
other loaded with sugar and cocoa; he put the men on board the latter 
into the former, and allowed her to depart. He brought the loaded 
vessel into North Carolina, where the governor and Blackboard shared 
the prizes. Nor did their audacity and villainy stop here. Teach and 
some of his abandoned crew waited upon his excellency, and swore that 
they had seized the French ship at sea, without a soul on board; 
therefore, a court was called, and she was condemned. The honourable 
governor received sixty hogsheads of sugar for his share, his 
secretary twenty, and the pirates the remainder. But, as guilt always 
inspires suspicion. Teach was afraid that someone might arrive in the 
harbour that might detect the roguery; therefore, upon pretence that 
she was leaky, might sink, and so stop up the entrance to the harbour, 
where she lay, they obtained the governor's liberty to drag her into 
the river, where she was set on fire, and when burnt down to the 
water, her bottom was sunk, that so she might never rise in judgment 
against the governor and his confederates.

Blackboard now being in the province of friendship, he passed several 
months in the river, giving and receiving visits from the planters; 
while he traded with the vessels which came to that river, sometimes 
in the way of lawful commerce, and sometimes in his own way. When he 
chose to appear the honest man, he made fair purchases on equal 
barter; but when this did not suit his necessities, or his humour, he 
would rob at pleasure, and leave them to seek their redress from the 
governor; and, the better to cover his intrigues with his excellency, 
he would sometimes outbrave him to his face, and administer to him a 
share of that contempt and insolence which he so liberally bestowed 
upon the rest of the inhabitants of the province.

But there are limits to human insolence and depravity. The captains of 
the vessels who frequented that river, and had been so often harassed 
and plundered by Blackboard, secretly consulted with some of the 
planters what measures to pursue, in order to banish such an infamous 
miscreant from their coasts, and to bring him to deserved punishment. 
Convinced, from long experience, that the governor himself, to whom it 
belonged, would give no redress, they represented the matter to the 
governor of Virginia, and entreated that an armed force might be sent 
from the men-of-war lying there, either to take or to destroy those 
pirates who infested their coast.

Upon this representation, the governor of Virginia consulted with the 
captains of the two men-of-war as to the best measures to be adopted. 
He was resolved that the governor should hire two small vessels, which 
could pursue Blackbeard into all his inlets and creeks; that they 
should be manned from the men-of-war, and the command given to 
Lieutenant Maynard, an experienced and resolute officer. When all was 
ready for his departure, the governor called an assembly, in which it 
was resolved to issue a proclamation, offering a great reward to any 
who, within a year, should take or destroy any pirate.

Upon the 17th of November, 1717, Maynard left James's river in quest 
of Blackbeard, and, on the evening of the 21st, came in sight of the 
pirate. This expedition was fitted out with all possible expedition 
and secrecy, no boat being permitted to pass that might convey any 
intelligence, while care was taken to discover where the pirates were 
lurking. His excellency the governor of Bermudas, and his secretary, 
however, having obtained information of the intended expedition, the 
latter wrote a letter to Blackbeard, intimating, "that he had sent him 
four of his men, who were all he could meet with in or about town, and 
so bidding him be upon his guard." These men were sent from Bath-town 
to the place where Blackbeard lay, about the distance of twenty 
leagues.

The hardened and infatuated pirate, having been often disconcerted 
with false intelligence, was the less attentive to this information; 
nor was he convinced of its accuracy, until he saw the sloops sent to 
apprehend him. Though he had then only twenty men on board, he 
prepared to give battle. Lieutenant Maynard arrived with his sloops in 
the evening, and anchored, as he could not venture, under cloud of 
night, to go into the place where Blackbeard lay. The latter spent the 
night in drinking with the master of a trading-vessel, with the same 
indifference as if no danger had been near. Nay, such was the 
desperate wickedness of this villain, that it is reported, that, 
during the carousals of that night, one of his men asked him, "that in 
case anything should happen to him during the engagement with the two 
sloops that were waiting to attack him in the morning, whether his 
wife knew where he had buried his money;" he impiously replied, "that 
nobody but himself and the devil knew where it was, and the longest 
liver should take all."

In the morning Maynard weighed, and sent his boat to sound, which 
coming near, the pirate received her fire. Maynard then hoisted royal 
colours, and made directly towards Blackbeard with every sail and oar. 
In a little time the pirate ran a-ground, and so also did the king's 
vessels. Maynard lightened his vessel of the ballast and water, and 
made towards Blackbeard. Upon this he hailed him in his own rude 
style, "D you, for villains, who are you, and from whence come you?" 
The lieutenant answered, "You may see from our colours we are no 
pirates." Blackbeard bid him send his boat on board, that he might see 
who he was. But Maynard replied, "I cannot spare my boat, but I will 
come on board of you as soon as I can, with my sloop." Upon this 
Blackbeard took a glass of liquor and drank to him, saying, "I'll give 
no quarters, nor take any from you." Maynard replied, "he expected no 
quarters from him, nor should he give him any."

During this dialogue, the pirate's ship floated, and the sloops were 
rowing with all expedition towards him. As she came near, the pirate 
fired a broadside, charged with all manner of small shot, which killed 
or wounded twenty men. Blackboard's ship in a little after fell 
broadside to the shore; one of the sloops called The Ranger also fell 
a-stern. But Maynard, finding that his own sloop had way, and would 
soon be on board of Teach, ordered all his men down, while himself and 
the man at the helm, whom he commanded to lie concealed, were the only 
persons who remained on deck. He, at the same time, desired them to 
take their pistols, cutlasses, and swords, and be ready for action 
upon his call; and, for the greater expedition, two ladders were 
placed in the hatchway. When the king's sloop boarded, the pirate's 
case-boxes, filled with powder, small-shot, slugs, and pieces of lead 
and iron, with a quick match in the mouth of them, were thrown into 
Maynard's sloop. Fortunately, however, the men being in the hold, they 
did small injury on the present occasion, though they are usually very 
destructive. Blackbeard seeing few or no hands upon deck, cried to his 
men, that they were all knocked on the head, except three or four; 
"and therefore," says he, "let's jump on board, and cut to pieces 
those that are alive."

Upon this, during the smoke occasioned by one of these case-boxes, 
Blackbeard, with fourteen of his men, entered, and were not perceived 
until the smoke was dispelled. The signal was given to Maynard's men, 
who rushed up in an instant. Blackbeard and the lieutenant exchanged 
shots, and the pirate was wounded; then they engaged sword in hand, 
until the sword of the latter broke; but fortunately, one of his men 
at that instant gave Blackbeard a terrible wound in the neck and 
throat. The most desperate and bloody conflict ensuedMaynard with 
twelve men, and Blackbeard with fourteen. The sea was dyed with blood 
all around the vessel, and uncommon bravery was displayed upon both 
sides. Though the pirate was wounded by the first shot from Maynard, 
yet he fought with desperate valour, though he had received twenty 
cuts, and five more shot; at length, when cocking his pistol, he fell 
down dead. By this time eight of his men had fallen, and the rest 
being wounded, cried out for quarter, which was granted, as the ring-
leader was slain. The other sloop also attacked the men who remained 
in the pirate-vessels, until they also cried out for quarter. And such 
was the desperation of Blackbeard, that, having small hope of 
escaping, he had placed a Negro with a match at the gunpowder-door, to 
blow up the ship the moment that he should have been boarded by the 
king's men, in order to involve the whole in general ruin. That 
destructive broadside, at the commencement of the action, which at 
first appeared so unlucky, was, however, the means of their 
preservation from the intended destruction.

Maynard severed the pirate's head from his body, suspended it upon his 
bowsprit-end, and sailed to Bath-town, to obtain medical aid for his 
wounded men. In the pirate sloop, several letters and papers were 
found, which Blackbeard would certainly have destroyed previous to the 
engagement, had he not determined to blow her up upon his being taken, 
which disclosed the whole villainy between the honourable governor of 
Bermudas and his honest secretary, and the notorious pirate, who had 
now suffered the just demerit of his crimes.

Scarcely was Maynard returned to Bath-town, when he boldly went and 
made free with the sixty hogsheads of sugar in the possession-of the 
governor, and the twenty in that of his secretary.

After his men were healed at Bath-town, the lieutenant proceeded to 
Virginia, with the head of Blackbeard still suspended on his bowsprit-
end, as a trophy of his victory, to the great joy of all the 
inhabitants. The prisoners were tried, condemned, and executed; and 
thus all the crew of that infernal miscreant Blackbeard, were 
destroyed except two. One of these was taken out of a trading-vessel, 
only the day before the engagement, in which he received no less than 
seventy wounds, of all which he was cured.

The other was Israel Hands, who was the master of the Queen Anne's 
Revenge; he was taken at Bath-town, being wounded in one of 
Blackboard's savage humours. One night Blackbeard, drinking in his 
cabin with Hands, the pilot, and another man, without any pretence 
took a small pair of pistols, and cocked them under the table; which 
being perceived by the man, he went on deck, leaving the captain, 
Hands, and the pilot together. When his pistols were prepared, he 
extinguished the candle, crossed his arms, and fired at his company. 
The one pistol did no execution, but the other wounded Hands in the 
knee. Interrogated concerning the meaning of this, he answered with an 
imprecation, "that if he did not now and then kill one of them, they 
would forget who he was." Hands was tried and condemned, but as he was 
about to be executed, a vessel arrived with a proclamation prolonging 
the time of his Majesty's pardon, which Hands pleading, he was saved 
from a violent and shameful death.

We shall close the narrative of this extraordinary man's life by an 
account of the cause why he was denominated Black Beard. He derived 
this name from his long black beard, which, like a frightful meteor, 
covered his whole face, and terrified all America more than any comet 
that had ever appeared. He was accustomed to twist it with ribbon, in 
small quantities, resembling those of some fashionable wigs, and 
turned them about his ears. In time of action he wore a sling over his 
shoulders with three brace of pistols. He stuck lighted matches under 
his hat, which appearing on both sides of his face and his eyes, 
naturally fierce and wild, made him such a figure that the human 
imagination cannot form a conception of even a fury more terrible and 
alarming; and if he had the appearance and look of a fury, his actions 
corresponded with that character.



CAPTAIN EDWARD ENGLAND 
Pirate

THIS adventurer was mate of a sloop that sailed from Jamaica, and was 
taken by Captain Winter, a pirate, just before the settlement of the 
pirates at Providence Island.

After the pirates had surrendered to his Majesty's pardon, and 
Providence Island was peopled by the English government, our captain 
sailed to Africa. There he took several vessels, particularly the 
Cadogan, from Bristol, commanded by one Skinner. When he struck to the 
pirate, he was ordered to come on board in his boat. The person upon 
whom he first cast his eye proved to be his old boatswain, who stared 
him in the face, and accosted him in the following manner: "Ah, 
Captain Skinner, is it you?the only person I wished to see: I am much 
in your debt, and I shall pay you all in your own coin." The poor man 
trembled every joint, and dreaded the event, as he well might.

It happened that Skinner and his old boatswain, with some of his men, 
had quarrelled, so that he thought fit to remove them on board a man-
of-war, while he refused to pay them their wages. Not long after, they 
found means to leave the man-of-war, and went on board a small ship in 
the West Indies. They were taken by a pirate, and brought to 
Providence; from thence they sailed as pirates along with Captain 
England. Thus accidentally meeting their old captain, they severely 
revenged the treatment which they had received.

After the rough salutation which has been related, the boatswain 
called to his comrades, laid hold of Skinner, tied him fast to the 
windlass, and pelted him with glass bottles, until they cut him in a 
shocking manner; then whipped him about the deck until they were quite 
fatigued, remaining deaf to all his prayers and entreaties; and at 
last, in an insulting tone, observed, that as he had been a good 
master to his men, he should have an easy death; and upon this, shot 
him through the head.

Having taken such things as they stood most in need of out of the 
snow, she was given to Captain Davis, in order to try his fortune, 
with a few hands.

Captain England, some time after, took a ship called the Pearl, for 
which he exchanged his own sloop, fitted her up for piratical service, 
and called her the Royal James. In that vessel he was very fortunate, 
and took several ships of different sizes and different nations. In 
the spring of 1719, the pirates returned to Africa, and, beginning at 
the River Gambia, they then sailed down the coast to Cape Corse, and 
captured several vessels. Some of them they pillaged, and allowed to 
proceed, some they fitted out for the pirate service, and others they 
burnt.

Leaving our pirate upon this coast, the Revenge and the Flying King 
sailed for the West Indies, where they took several prizes, then 
cleared and sailed for Brazil. There they captured some Portuguese 
vessels; but a large Portuguese man-of-war coming up to them, proved 
an unwelcome guest. The Revenge escaped, but was soon lost upon that 
coast. Flying King in despair run ashore. There were then seventy on 
board, twelve of whom were slain, and the remainder taken prisoners. 
The Portuguese hanged thirty-eight of them.

Captain England, whilst cruising upon that coast, took the 
Peterborough of Bristol, and the Victory. The former they detained, 
the latter they plundered and dismissed. In the course of his voyage, 
England met with two ships, but these taking shelter under Cape Corse 
Castle, he unsuccessfully attempted to set them on fire. He next 
sailed down to Whydah road, where Captain La Bouche had been before 
England, and left him no spoil. He now went into the harbour, cleaned 
his own ship, and fitted up the Peterborough, which he called the 
Victory. During several weeks the pirates remained in this quarter, 
indulging in every species of riot and debauchery, until the natives, 
exasperated with their conduct, came to an open rupture, when several 
of the Negroes were slain, and one of their towns set on fire by the 
pirates.

Leaving that port, the pirates, when at sea, determined, by vote, to 
sail for the East Indies, and arrived at Madagascar. After watering 
and taking in some provisions, they sailed for the coast of Malabar. 
This place is situated in the Mogul empire, and is one of its most 
beautiful and fertile districts. It extends from the coast of Canora 
to Cape Comorin. The original natives are Negroes; but a mingled race 
of Mahometans, who are generally merchants, have been introduced in 
modern times. Having sailed almost round the one half of the globe, 
literally seeking whom they might devour, our pirates arrived in this 
country. Not long after their settlement at Madagascar, they took a 
cruise, in which they captured two Indian vessels and a Dutchman. They 
exchanged the latter for one of their own, and directed their course 
again to Madagascar.

Several of their hands were sent on shore with tents and ammunition, 
to kill such beasts and venison as the island afforded. They also 
formed the resolution to go in search of Avery's crew, which they knew 
had settled upon the island; but, as their residence was upon the 
other side of the island, their loss of time and labour were all the 
fruits of their search.

They tarried here but a very short time, then steered their course to 
Juanna, and, coming out of that harbour, fell in with two English and 
an Ostend ship, all Indiamen, which, after a desperate action, they 
captured. The particulars of this extraordinary action are related in 
the following letter from Captain Mackra:

"Bombay, November 16, 1720. 
	"We arrived the 25th of July last, in company with the Greenwich, 
at Juanna, an island not far from Madagascar. Putting in there to 
refresh our men, we found fourteen pirates that came in their canoes 
from the Mayotta, where the pirate ship to which they belonged, viz. 
The Indian Queen, two hundred and fifty tons, twenty-eight guns, and 
ninety men, commanded by Captain Oliver de la Bouche, bound from the 
Guinea coast to the East Indies, had been bulged and lost. They said 
they left the captain and forty of their men building a new vessel, to 
proceed on their wicked designs. Captain Kirby and I, concluding that 
it might be of great service to the East India Company to destroy such 
a nest of rogues, were ready to sail for the purpose on the 17th of 
August, about eight o'clock in the morning, when we discovered two 
pirates standing into the bay of Juanna, one of thirty-four, and the 
other of thirty-six guns. I immediately went on board the Greenwich, 
where they seemed very diligent in preparations for an engagement, and 
I left Captain Kirby with mutual promises of standing by each other. I 
then unmoored, got under sail, and brought two boats a-head to row me 
close to the Greenwich; but he, being open to a valley and a breeze, 
made the best of his way from me; which an Ostender, in our company, of 
twenty-two guns, seeing, did the same, though the captain had promised 
heartily to engage with us, and I believe would have been as good as 
his word, if Captain Kirby had kept his. About half an hour after 
twelve, I called several times to the Greenwich to bear down to our 
assistance, and fired a shot at hiin, but to no purpose. For though we 
did not doubt but he would join us, because, when he got about a league 
from us, he brought his ship to, and looked on; yet both he and the 
Ostender basely deserted us, and left us engaged with barbarous and 
inhuman enemies, with their black and bloody flags hanging over us, 
without the least appearance of ever escaping, but to be cut to pieces. 
But God, in his good providence, determined otherwise; for, 
notwithstanding their superiority, we engaged them both about three 
hours; during which time the largest of them received some shot betwixt 
wind and water, which made her keep off a little to stop her leaks. The 
other endeavoured all she could to board us, by rowing with her oars, 
being within half a ship's length of us above an hour; but, by good 
fortune, we shot all her oars to pieces, which prevented them, and by 
consequence saved our lives.

"About four o'clock most of the officers and men posted on the quarter-
deck being killed and wounded, the largest ship making up to us with 
diligence, being still within a cable's length of us, often giving us a 
broadside; there being now no hopes of Captain Kirby coming to our 
assistance, we endeavoured to run ashore; and, though we drew four feet 
of water more than the pirate, it pleased God that he stuck fast on a 
higher ground than, happily, we fell in with; so was disappointed a 
second time from boarding us. Here we had a more violent engagement 
than before: all my officers and most of my men behaved with unexpected 
courage; and, as we had a considerable advantage by having a broadside 
to his bow, we did him great damage; so that, had Captain Kirby come in 
then, I believe we should have taken both the vessels, for we had one 
of them sure; but the other pirate (who was still firing at us) seeing 
the Greenwich did not offer to assist us, he supplied his consort with 
three boats full of fresh men. About five in the evening the Greenwich 
stood clear away to sea, leaving us struggling hard for life, in the 
very jaws of death; which the other pirate that was afloat, seeing, got 
a warp out, and was hauling under our stern. By this time many of my 
men being killed and wounded, and no hopes left us of escaping being 
all murdered by enraged, barbarous conquerors, I ordered all that could 
to get into the long-boat, under the cover of the smoke of our guns; so 
that, with what some did in boats and others by swimming, most of us 
that were able got ashore by seven o'clock.

"When the pirates came aboard, they cut three of our wounded men to 
pieces. I, with some of my people, made what haste I could to the 
King's-town, twenty-five miles from us, where I arrived next day, 
almost dead with the fatigue and loss of blood, having been sorely 
wounded in the head by a musket-ball.

"At this town I heard, that the pirates had offered ten thousand 
dollars to the country people to bring me in; which many of them would 
have accepted, only they knew the king and all his chief people were in 
my interest. Meantime, I caused a report to be spread, that I was dead 
of my wounds, which much abated their fury. About ten days after, being 
pretty well recovered, and hoping the malice of our enemies was nigh 
over, I began to consider the dismal condition we were reduced to; 
being in a place where we had no hopes of getting a passage home, all 
of us in a manner naked, not having had time to get off another shirt, 
or a pair of shoes, than what we had on.

"Having obtained leave to go on board the pirates, and gotten a promise 
of safety, several of the chief of them knew me, and some of them had 
sailed with me, which I found to be of great advantage; because, 
notwithstanding their promise, some of them would have cut me, and all 
that would not enter with them, to pieces, had it not been for the 
chief captain, Edward England, and some others whom I knew. They talked 
of burning one of their ships, which we had so entirely disabled as to 
be no farther useful to them, and to fit the Cassandra in her room; but 
in the end I managed the affair so well, that they made me a present of 
the said shattered ship, which was Dutch built, and called the Fancy; 
her burden was about three hundred tons. I procured also a hundred and 
twenty-nine bales of the Company's cloth, though they would not give me 
a rag of my own clothes.

"They sailed the 3d of September; and I, with jurymasts, and such old 
sails as they left me, made a shift to do the like on the 8th, together 
with forty-three of my ship's crew, including two passengers and twelve 
soldiers; having no more than five tons of water on board. After a 
passage of forty-eight days, I arrived here on the 26th of October, 
almost naked and starved; having been reduced to a pint of water a day, 
and almost in despair of ever seeing land, by reason of the calms we 
met with between the coast of Arabia and Malabar. We had in all 
thirteen men killed, and twenty-four wounded; and we were told, that we 
destroyed about ninety or a hundred of the pirates. When they left us, 
there were about 300 whites, and 80 blacks, in both ships. I am 
persuaded, had our consort the Greenwich done his duty, we had 
destroyed both of them, and got two hundred thousand pounds for our 
owners and selves; whereas, the loss of the Cassandra may justly be 
imputed to his deserting us. I have delivered all the bales that were 
given me into the Company's warehouse, for which the governor and 
council have ordered me a reward. Our governor, Mr. Boon, who is 
extremely kind and civil to me, had ordered me home with the packet; 
but Captain Harvey, who had a prior promise, being come in with the 
fleet, goes in my room. The governor hath promised me a country voyage 
to help to make up my losses, and would have me stay and accompany him 
to England next year."

Captain Mackra was certainly in imminent danger, in trusting himself 
and his men on board the pirate ship; and unquestionably nothing but 
the desperate circumstances in which he was placed, could have 
justified such a hazardous step. The honour and influence of Captain 
England, however, protected him and his men from the fury of the crew, 
who would willingly have wreaked their vengeance upon them.

It is pleasing to discover any instance of generosity or honour among 
such an abandoned race, who have bid defiance to all the laws of 
honour, and are regardless of all laws human and divine. Captain 
England was so steady to Captain Mackra, that he informed him, that it 
would be with no small difficulty and address that he would be able to 
preserve him and his men from the fury of the crew, who were greatly 
enraged at the resistance which had been made. He likewise acquainted 
him, that his influence and authority among them was giving place to 
that of Captain Taylor, chiefly because the dispositions of the latter 
were more savage and brutal. They therefore consulted between them 
what was the best method to secure the favour of Taylor, and to keep 
him in good humour. Mackra made the punch to flow in great abundance, 
and employed every artifice to soothe the mind of that ferocious 
villain. A singular incident was also very favourable to the 
unfortunate captain. It happened that a pirate with a prodigious pair 
of whiskers, a wooden leg, and stuck round with pistols, came 
blustering and swearing upon the quarterdeck, inquiring, where was 
Captain Mackra. He naturally supposed that this barbarous-looking 
fellow would be his executioner; but, as he approached him, he took 
the captain by the hand, swearing that he was an honest fellow, and 
that he had formerly sailed with him, and would stand by him; and let 
him see the man that would touch him. This terminated the dispute, and 
Captain Taylor's disposition was so ameliorated with punch, that he 
consented that the old pirate ship, and so many bales of cloth, should 
be given to Mackra; and then sunk into the arms of intoxication. 
England now pressed Mackra to hasten away, lest the ruffian, upon his 
becoming sober, should not only retract his word, but give liberty to 
the crew to cut him and his men in pieces.

But the gentle temper of Captain England, and his generosity towards 
the unfortunate Mackra, proved the origin of much calamity to himself. 
The crew, in general, deeming that kind of usage which Mackra had 
received, inconsistent with piratical policy, they circulated a report 
that he was coming against them with the Company's force. The result 
of these invidious reports was, to deprive England of his command, and 
to excite those cruel villains to put him on shore, with three others, 
upon the island of Mauritius. If England and his small company had not 
been destitute of every necessary, they might have made a comfortable 
subsistence here, as the island abounds with deer, hogs, and other 
animals. It is even said, that the shores are replete with coral and 
ambergris; but, had this been the fact, the Dutch would not have 
abandoned such a rich treasure. Dissatisfied with their solitary 
situation. Captain England and his three men exerted their industry 
and ingenuity, and formed a small boat, with which they sailed to 
Madagascar, where they subsisted upon the generosity of some more 
fortunate piratical companions.

Captain Taylor detained some of the officers and men belonging to 
Captain Mackra, and, having repaired their vessel, sailed for India. 
The day before they made land, they espied two ships to the eastward, 
and, supposing them to be English, Captain Taylor ordered one of the 
officers of Mackra's ship to communicate to him the private signals 
between the Company's ships, swearing, that if he did not do so 
immediately, he would cut him into pound pieces. But the poor man 
being unable to give the information demanded, he was under the 
necessity of enduring their threats. Arrived at the vessels, they 
found that they were two Moorish ships, laden with horses. The pirates 
brought the captains and merchants on board, and tortured them in a 
barbarous manner, to constrain them to tell where they had hid their 
treasure. They were, however, disappointed, and the next morning they 
discovered land, and at the same time a fleet on shore plying to 
windward. In this situation, they were at a considerable loss how to 
dispose of their prizes. To let them go, would lead to their 
discovery, and thus defeat the design of their voyage; and it was a 
distressing matter to sink the men and the horses, though many of them 
were for adopting that measure. They, however, brought them to anchor, 
threw all her sails overboard, and cut one of her masts half through. 

While they lay at anchor, and were employed in taking in water, one of 
the above-mentioned fleet moved towards them with English colours, and 
was answered by the pirate with a red ensign, but they did not hail 
each other. At night they left the Muscat ships, and sailed after the 
fleet. About four next morning, the pirates were in the midst of the 
fleet, but, seeing their vast superiority, they were greatly at a loss 
what method to adopt. The Victory was become leaky, and their hands 
were so few in number, that it only remained for them to deceive, if 
possible, the English squadron. They were unsuccessful in gaining 
anything out of that fleet, and only had the wretched satisfaction of 
burning a single galley. They, however, that day seized a galliot, 
loaded with cotton, and made inquiry of the men concerning the fleet. 
They protested that they had not seen a ship since they left Gogo, and 
earnestly implored their mercy; but, instead of treating thein with 
lenity, they racked their joints, in order to extort farther 
confession. The day following, a fresh easterly wind blew hard, and 
rent the galliot's sails; upon this the pirates put her company into a 
boat, with nothing but a try-sail, no provisions, and only four 
gallons of water; and, though they were out of sight of land, left 
them to shift for themselves.

It may be proper to inform our readers, that one Angria, an Indian 
prince, of considerable territory and strength, had proved a 
troublesome enemy to Europeans, and particularly to the English. 
Callaba is his principal fort, situated not many leagues from Bombay, 
and he possesses an island in sight of the port, from whence he 
molests the Company's ships. His art in bribing the ministers of the 
great Mogul, and the shallowness of the water, that prevents large 
ships of war from approaching, are the principal causes of his safety.

The Bombay fleet, consisting of four grabs, the London and the 
Candois, and two other ships with galliot, having an additional 
thousand men aboard for this enterprise, sailed to attack a fort 
belonging to Angria, upon the Malabar coast. Though their strength was 
great, yet they were totally unsuccessful in their enterprise. It was 
this fleet, returning home, that our pirates discovered upon the 
present occasion. Upon the sight of the pirates, the commodore of the 
fleet intimated to Mr. Brown, the general, that as they had no orders 
to fight, and had gone upon a different purpose, it would be improper 
for them to engage.

Informed of the loss of this favourable opportunity to destroy the 
robbers, the governor of Bombay was highly enraged, and, giving the 
command of the fleet to Captain Mackra, ordered him to pursue and 
engage them wherever they should be found.

The pirates having barbarously sent away the galliot with her men, 
they arrived southward, and between Goa and Carwar they heard several 
guns; so that they came to anchor, and sent their boat to reconnoitre, 
which returned next morning with the intelligence of two grabs lying 
at anchor in the road. They accordingly weighed, run towards the bay, 
and in the morning were discovered by the grabs, who had just time to 
run under India-Diva Castle for protection. This was the more 
vexatious to the pirates, as they were without water; some of them, 
therefore, were for making a descent upon the island, but that measure 
not being generally approved, they sailed towards the south, and took 
a small ship, which had only a Dutchman and two Portuguese on board. 
They sent one of these on shore to the captain, to inform him, that if 
he would give them some water and fresh provisions, he might have his 
vessel returned. He replied, that if they would give him possession 
over the bar, he would comply with their request. But, suspecting the 
integrity of his design, they sailed for Lacca Deva islands, uttering 
dreadful imprecations against the captain.

Disappointed in finding water at these islands, they sailed to Malinda 
island, and sent their boats on shore, to discover if there was any 
water, or if there were any inhabitants. They returned with the 
information that there was abundance of water; that the houses were 
only inhabited by women and children, the men having fled at the 
appearance of the ships. They accordingly hastened to supply 
themselves with water, used the defenceless women in a brutal manner, 
destroyed many of their fruit trees, and set some of their houses on 
fire.

While off this island, they lost several of their anchors by the 
rockiness of the ground; and, one day blowing more violently than 
usual, they were forced to take to sea, leaving several people and 
most of the water casks; but, when the gale was over, they returned to 
take in their men and water. Their provisions being nearly exhausted, 
they resolved to visit the Dutch at Cochin. After sailing three days, 
they arrived off Tellechery, and took a small vessel belonging to 
Governor Adams, and brought the master on board, very much 
intoxicated, who informed them of the expedition of Captain Mackra. 
This intelligence raised their utmost indignation. "A villain," said 
they, "to whom we have given a ship and presents, to come against us; 
he ought to be hanged! and, since we cannot show our resentment to 
him, let us hang the dogs his people, who wish him well, and would do 
the same, if they were clear." "If it be in my power," says the 
quarter-master, "both masters and officers of ships shall be carried 
with us for the future, only to plague them. Now, England, we may mark 
him for this."

They proceeded to Calicut, and, attempting to cut out a ship, were 
prevented by some guns placed on shore. One of Captain Mackra's 
officers was under deck at this time, and was commanded, both by the 
captain and quartermaster, to tend the braces on the booms, in hopes 
that a shot would take him before they got clear. He was about to have 
excused himself, but they threatened to shoot him; and, when he 
expostulated, and claimed their promise to put him on shore, he got an 
unmerciful beating from the quarter-master; Captain Taylor, to whom 
that duty belonged, being lame of his hands.

The day following they met a Dutch galliot, loaded with limestone, 
bound for Calicut, on board of which they put one Captain Fawks; and, 
some of the crew interceding for Mackra's officer, Taylor and his 
party replied, "If we let this dog go, who has overheard our designs 
and resolutions, we will overset all our well-advised resolutions, and 
particularly this supply we are seeking for at the hands of the 
Dutch."

When they arrived at Cochin, they sent a letter on shore by a fishing-
boat, entered the road, and anchored, each ship saluting the fort with 
eleven guns, and receiving the same number in return. This was the 
token of their welcome reception, and at night a large boat was sent, 
deeply laden with liquors and all kinds of provisions, and in it a 
servant of John Trumpet, one of their friends, to inform them that it 
would be necessary for them to run farther south, where they would be 
supplied both with provisions and naval stores.

They had scarcely anchored at the appointed place, when several 
canoes, with white and black inhabitants, came on board, and 
continued, without interruption, to perform all the good offices in 
their power, during their stay in that place. In particular, John 
Trumpet brought a large boat of arrack, and sixty bales of sugar, as a 
present from the governor and his daughter; the one receiving a table-
clock, and the other a gold watch, the spoil of Captain Mackra's 
vessel. When their provisions were all on board, Trumpet was rewarded 
with about six or seven thousand pounds, was saluted with three 
cheers, and eleven guns; and several handfuls of silver were thrown 
into the boat, for the men to gather at pleasure.

There being little wind that night, they remained at anchor, and in 
the morning were surprised with the return of Trumpet, bringing 
another boat equally well stored with provisions, with chests of 
piece-goods and ready-made clothes, and along with him the fiscal of 
the place. At noon they espied a sail towards the south, and 
immediately gave chase, but she out-sailed them, and sheltered under 
the fort of Cochin. Informed that they would not be molested in taking 
her from under the castle, they sailed towards her; but upon the fort 
firing two guns, they ran off for fear of more serious altercation, 
and, returning, anchored in their former station. They were too 
welcome visitants to be permitted to depart, as long as John Trumpet 
could contrive to detain them. With this view he informed them, that 
in a few days a rich vessel, commanded by the General of Bombay's 
brother, was to pass that way.

That government is certainly in a wretched state, which is under the 
necessity of trading with pirates, in order to enrich itself. Nor will 
such a government hesitate by what means an injury can be repaired, or 
a fortune gained. Neither can language describe the low and base 
principles of that government which can employ such miscreants as John 
Trumpet in its service. He was a tool in the hands of the government 
of Cochin; and, as the dog said in the fable, "What is done by the 
master's orders, is the master's action."

While under the direction of Trumpet, some proposed to proceed 
directly to Madagascar, but others were disposed to wait until they 
should be provided with a store-ship. The majority being of the latter 
opinion, they steered to the south, and, seeing a ship on shore, they 
were desirous to get near her; but the wind preventing, they 
separated, the one sailing northward and the other southward, in hopes 
of securing her when she should come out, whatever direction she might 
take. They were now, however, almost entrapped in the snare laid for 
them. In the morning, to their astonishment and consternation, instead 
of being called to give chase, five large ships were near, who made a 
signal for the pirates to bear down. The pirates were in the greatest 
dread lest it should be Captain Mackra, of whose activity and courage 
they had formerly sufficient proof. The pirate ships, however, joined 
and fled with all speed from the fleet. In three hours' chase, none of 
the fleet gained upon them, except one grab. The remainder of the day 
was calm, and, to their great consolation, the next day this fleet was 
entirely out of sight.

This alarm being over, they resolved to spend the Christmas in 
feasting and mirth, in order to drown care, and to banish 
thoughtfulness. Nor did one day suffice, but they continued their 
revelling for several days, and made so free with their fresh 
provisions, that in their next cruise they were put upon short 
allowance; and it was entirely owing to the sugar and other provisions 
that were in the leaky ship that they were preserved from perishing.

In this condition they reached the island of Mauritius, refitted the 
Victory, and left that place with the following inscription written 
upon one of the walls: "Left this place on the 5th of April, to go to 
Madagascar for Limos." This they did lest any visit should be paid to 
the place during their absence. They, however, did not sail directly 
for Madagascar, but to the island of Mascarius, where they fortunately 
fell in with a Portuguese of seventy guns, lying at anchor. The 
greater part of her guns were thrown over-board, her masts lost, and 
the whole vessel disabled by a storm; therefore she became an easy 
prey to the pirates. Conde de Ericeira, Viceroy of Goa, who went upon 
the fruitless expedition against Angria the Indian, and several 
passengers, were on board. Besides other valuable articles and specie, 
they found in her diamonds to the amount of four millions of dollars. 
Supposing that the ship was an Englishman, the viceroy came on board 
next morning, was made prisoner, and obliged to pay two thousand 
dollars as a ransom for himself and the other prisoners. After this he 
was set ashore, with the express engagement to leave a ship to convey 
him and his companions to another port.

Meanwhile they received the intelligence that a vessel was to the 
leeward of the island, which they pursued and captured. But, instead 
of performing their promise to the viceroy, which they could easily 
have done, they sent the Ostender along with some of their men to 
Madagascar, to inform their friends of their success, with 
instructions to prepare masts for the prize; and they soon followed, 
carrying two thousand Negroes in the Portuguese vessel.

Madagascar is an island larger than Great Britain, situated upon the 
eastern coast of Africa, abounding with all sorts of provisions, such 
as oxen, goats, sheep, poultry, fish, citrons, oranges, tamarinds, 
dates, cocoa-nuts, bananas, wax, honey, rice, cotton, indigo, and all 
the other fruits common in that quarter of the globe; ebony, of which 
lances are made, gums of several kinds, and many other valuable 
productions. The locusts on land, and the crocodiles in the river, 
form the principal inconvenience that the inhabitants experience. 
Here, in St. Augustine's bay, the ships sometimes stop to take in 
water, when they take the inner passage to India, and do not intend to 
stop at Johanna.

Though they are still few in number, compared to the natives, yet the 
Europeans, and particularly the pirates, have reared a mulatto race 
since the discovery of this island by the Portuguese in 1506. The 
natives are Negroes, with short curled hair, active, and formerly 
malicious and revengeful; but, on account of the presents they are 
accustomed to receive, they are become tractable and communicative. 
They live in terms of friendship with the Europeans who reside amongst 
them, and the latter can, on a minute's warning, muster two or three 
hundred. The natives find it their interest to cultivate their 
friendship, because they are divided into small governments, who carry 
on a continued war with each other; so that the pirates render the 
party with whom they join, always victorious. When the Portuguese ship 
arrived here, they received the intelligence that the Ostender had 
taken the advantage of an hour when the men were intoxicated, rose 
upon them, and carried the ship to Mozambique, from whence the 
governor ordered her to Goa.

The pirates now divided their plunder, receiving forty-two diamonds 
per man, or in smaller proportion according to their magnitude. A 
foolish jocular fellow, who had received a large diamond of the value 
of forty-two, was highly displeased, and so went and broke it in 
pieces, exclaiming, that he had many more shares than either of them. 
Some, contented with their treasure, and unwilling to run the risk of 
losing what they possessed, and perhaps their lives also, resolved to 
remain with their friends at Madagascar, under the stipulation, that 
the longest livers should enjoy all the booty. The number of 
adventurers being now lessened, they burnt the Victory, cleaned the 
Cassandra, and the remainder went on board her under the command of 
Taylor, whom we must leave for a little, to give an account of that 
squadron that arrived in India in 1721.

When the commodore arrived at the Cape, he received a letter that had 
been written by the governor of Pondicherry to the governor of Madras, 
informing him, that the pirates were strong in the Indian seas; that 
they had eleven sail, and fifteen hundred men; but adding, that many 
of them retired about that time to Brazil and Guinea, while others 
fortified themselves at Madagascar, Mauritius, Johanna, and Mohilla. 
And that a crew under the command of Condin, in a ship called the 
Dragon, had captured a vessel with thirteen lakhs of rupees on board, 
and, having divided their plunder, they had taken up their residence 
with their friends at Madagascar.

Upon receiving this intelligence, Commodore Matthews sailed for these 
islands, as the most probable place of success. He endeavoured 
ineffectually to prevail on England, at St. Mary's, to communicate to 
him what information he could give respecting the pirates. But the 
pirate declined, thinking that this would be almost to surrender at 
discretion. He then took up the guns of the Jubilee sloop that were on 
board, and the men-of-war made several cruises in search of the 
pirates, but to no purpose. The squadron was then sent down to Bombay, 
was saluted by the port, and, after these exploits, returned home.

The pirate, Captain Taylor, in the Cassandra, now fitted up the 
Portuguese man-of-war, and resolved upon another voyage to the Indies; 
but, informed that four men-of-war had been sent after the pirates in 
that quarter, he changed his determination, and sailed for Africa. 
Arrived there, they put in at a place near the river Spirito Sancto, 
on the coast of Monomotapa. As there was no correspondence by land, 
nor any trade carried on by sea to this place, they thought that it 
would afford a safe retreat. To their astonishment, however, when they 
approached the shore, it being in the dusk of the evening, they were 
accosted by several shot. They immediately anchored, and in the 
morning saw that the shot had come from a small fort of six guns, 
which they attacked and destroyed.

This small fort was erected by the Dutch East India Company a few 
weeks before, and committed to the care of an hundred and fifty men, 
the one half of whom had perished by sickness or other causes. Upon 
their petition, sixteen of these were admitted into the society of the 
pirates, and the rest would also have been received, had they not been 
Dutchmen, to whom they had a rooted aversion.

In this place they continued during four months, refitting their 
vessels, and amusing themselves with all manner of diversions, until 
the scarcity of their provisions awakened them to industry and 
exertion. They, however, left several parcels of goods to the starving 
Dutchmen, which Mynheer joyfully exchanged for provisions with the 
next vessel that touched at that fort.

Leaving that place, they were divided in opinion what course to steer: 
some went on board the Portuguese prize, and, sailing for Madagascar, 
abandoned the pirate life; and others, going on board the Cassandra, 
sailed for the Spanish West Indies. The Mermaid man-of-war, returning 
from a convoy, got near the pirates, and would have attacked them, but 
a consultation being held, it was deemed inexpedient and thus the 
pirates escaped. A sloop was, however, dispatched to Jamaica with the 
intelligence, and the Lancaster was sent after them, but they were 
some days too late, the pirates having, with all their riches, 
surrendered to the governor of Portobello.

Calming their consciences, that others would have acted a similar 
part, without the least remorse they took up their residence here, to 
spend the remainder of their days in living upon the spoil of nations. 
Nor can the reflection be restrained, that if they had known what was 
transacting in England by South-sea Directors, they would at least 
have had one proof to adduce, "that whatever robberies they had 
committed, they might be pretty sure that they were not the greatest 
villains then living in the world." It is difficult to compute the 
injury done by this crew during five years. Whether to gratify their 
humour, to prevent intelligence, or for the want of men to navigate, 
or from the brave resistance made, or from wanton folly and barbarity, 
the moment the resolution was formed, the vessels they captured were 
frequently sent to the bottom. After their surrender to the Spaniards, 
several of them left that place, and it is reported that Captain 
Taylor accepted of a commission in the Spanish service, and commanded 
the man-of-war that attacked the English logwood-cutters in the Bay of 
Honduras.



CAPTAIN CHARLES VANE. 
Pirate

CHARLES VANE was one of those who stole away the silver which the 
Spaniards had fished up from the wrecks of the galleons, in the Gulf 
of Florida, and was at Providence when Governor Rogers arrived there 
with two men-of-war, as the reader has been informed.

All the pirates who were then found at this colony of rogues, 
submitted, and received certificates of their pardon, except Captain 
Vane and his crew; who, as soon as they saw the men-of-war enter, 
slipped their cable, set fire to a prize they had in the harbour, 
sailed out with their piratical colours flying, and fired at one of 
the men-of-war, as they went off from the coast.

Two days after, they met with a sloop belonging to Barbados, which 
they took, and kept the vessel for their own use, putting aboard five 
and twenty hands, with one Yeats as commander. In a day or two they 
fell in with a small interloping trader, with a quantity of Spanish 
pieces of eight aboard, bound for Providence, which they also took 
along with them. With these two sloops Vane went to a small island and 
cleaned; where they shared their booty, and spent some time in a 
riotous manner.

About the latter end of May, 1718, they sailed, and, being in want of 
provisions, they beat up for the Windward Islands; in the way they met 
with a Spanish sloop, bound from Porto Rico to the Havanna, which they 
burnt, stowed the Spaniards into a boat, and left them to get to the 
island by the blaze of their vessel. Steering between St. 
Christopher's and Anguilla, they fell in with a brigantine and a 
sloop, freighted with such cargo as they wanted; from whom they got 
provisions for sea-store.

Sometime after this, standing to the northward, in the track the Old 
England ships take in their voyage to the American colonies, they took 
several ships and vessels, which they plundered of what they thought 
fit, and let them pass.

The latter end of August, Vane, with his consort Yeats, came off South 
Carolina, and took a ship belonging to Ipswich, laden with logwood. 
This was thought convenient enough for their own business, and 
therefore they ordered their prisoners to work, and throw all the 
lading over-board; but when they had more than half-cleared the ship, 
the whim changed, and they would not have her; so Coggershall had his 
ship again, and he was suffered to pursue his voyage home. In this 
voyage the pirates took several ships and vessels, particularly a 
sloop from Barbados, a small ship from Antigua, a sloop belonging 
Curaçao, and a large brigantine from Guinea, with upwards of ninety 
Negroes aboard. The pirates plundered them all and let them go, 
putting the Negroes out of the brigantine aboard of Yeats' vessel.

Captain Vane always treated his consort with very little respect, and 
assumed a superiority over him and his crew, regarding the vessel but 
as a tender to his own. This gave them a disgust; for they thought 
themselves as good pirates, and as great rogues as the best of them; 
so they caballed together, and resolved, at the first opportunity, to 
leave the company, and accept of his Majesty's pardon, or set up for 
themselves; either of which they thought more honourable than to be 
servants to Vane. The putting aboard so many Negroes, where there were 
so few hands to take care of them, still aggravated the matter; though 
they thought fit to conceal or stifle their resentments at that time.

In a day or two, the pirates lying off at anchor, Yeats in the evening 
slipped his cable, and put his vessel under sail, standing into the 
shore; which when Vane saw, he was highly provoked, and got his sloop 
under sail to chase his consort. Vane's brigantine sailing best, he 
gained ground of Yeats, and would certainly have come up with him, had 
he had a little longer run; but just as he got over the bar, when Vane 
came within gunshot of him, he fired a broadside at his old friend, 
and so took his leave.

Yeats came into North Edisto river, about ten leagues to the southward 
of Charlestown, and sent an express to the governor, to know if he and 
his comrades might have the benefit of his Majesty's pardon; promising 
that, if they might, they would surrender themselves to his mercy, 
with the sloops and Negroes. Their request being granted, they all 
came up, and received certificates; and Captain Thomson, from whom the 
Negroes were taken, had them all restored to him, for the use of his 
owners.

Vane cruised some time off the bar, in hopes to catch Yeats at his 
coming out again, but therein he was disappointed; however, he there 
took two ships from Charlestown, which were bound home to England. It 
happened just at this time, that two sloops, well manned and armed, 
were equipped to go after a pirate, which the governor of South 
Carolina was informed lay then in Cape Fear River, cleaning. But 
Colonel Rhet, who commanded the sloops, meeting with one of the ships 
that Vane had plundered, going back over the bar for such necessaries 
as had been taken from her, and she giving the colonel an account of 
being taken by the pirate Vane, and also, that some of her men, while 
they were prisoners on board of him, had heard the pirates say they 
should clean in one of the rivers to the southward, he altered his 
first design, and, instead of standing to the northward, in pursuit of 
the pirate in Cape Fear River, he turned to the southward after Vane, 
who had ordered such reports to be given out, on purpose to send any 
force that should come after him upon a wrong scent; for he stood away 
to the northward, so that the pursuit proved to be of no effect.

Colonel Rhet's speaking with this ship was the most unlucky thing that 
could have happened, because it turned him out of the road which, in 
all probability, would have brought him into the company of Vane, as 
well as of the pirate he went after, and so they might have been both 
destroyed; whereas, by the colonel's going a different way, he not 
only lost the opportunity of meeting with one, but if the other had 
not been infatuated to lie six weeks together at Cape Fear, he would 
have missed him likewise; however, the colonel having searched the 
rivers and inlets, as directed, for several days, without success, he 
at length sailed in prosecution of his first design, and met with the 
pirate accordingly, whom he fought and took, as has been before 
related in the life of Major Bonnet.

Captain Vane went into an inlet to the northward, where he met with 
Captain Teach, otherwise Blackbeard, whom he saluted (when he found 
who he was) with his great guns loaded with shot; it being the custom 
among pirates when they meet to do so, though they are wide of one 
another, or up into the air: Blackbeard answered the salute in the 
same manner, and mutual civilities passed between them some days; 
when, about the beginning of October, Vane took leave, and sailed 
further to the northward.

On the 23d of October, off Long Island, he took a small brigantine 
bound from Jamaica to Salem in New England, besides a little sloop: 
they rifled the brigantine, and sent her away. From hence they 
resolved on a cruise between Cape Meise and Cape Nicholas, where they 
spent some time, without seeing or speaking with any vessel, till the 
latter end of November; they then fell in with a ship, which, it was 
expected, would have struck as soon as their black colours were 
hoisted; but, instead of that, she discharged a broadside upon the 
pirate, and hoisted French colours, which showed her to be a French 
man-of-war.

Vane desired to have nothing further to say to her; but trimmed his 
sails, and stood away from the Frenchman; however, Monsieur having a 
mind to be better informed who he was, set all his sails and crowded 
after him. During this chase, the pirates were divided in their 
resolutions what to do: Vane, the captain, was for making off as fast 
as he could, alleging the man-of-war was too strong for them to cope 
with; but one John Rackam, their quartermaster, and who was a kind of 
check upon the captain, rose up in defence of a contrary opinion, 
saying, "that though she had more guns, and a greater weight of metal, 
they might board her, and then the best boys would carry the day." 
Rackam was well seconded, and the majority was for boarding: but Vane 
urged, "that it was too rash and desperate an enterprise, the man-of-
war appearing to be twice that force, and that their brigantine might 
be sunk by her, before they could reach to board her." The mate, one 
Robert Deal, was of Vane's opinion, as were about fifteen more, and 
all the rest joined with Rackam, the quarter-master. At length, the 
captain made use of his power to determine this dispute, which, in 
these cases, is absolute and uncontrollable, by their own laws, viz. 
fighting, chasing, or being chased: in all other matters whatsoever, 
he is governed by a majority: so, the brigantine having the heels, as 
they term it, of the Frenchman, she came clear off.

But, the next day, the captain's behaviour was obliged to stand the 
test of a vote, and a resolution passed against his honour and 
dignity, which branded him with the name of coward, deposed him from 
the command, and turned him out of the company, with marks of infamy; 
and with him went all those who did not vote for boarding the French 
man-of-war. They had with them a small sloop, that had been taken by 
them some time before, which they gave to Vane and the discarded 
members; and, that they might be in a condition to provide for 
themselves by their own honest endeavours, they let them have a 
sufficient quantity of provisions and ammunition.

John Rackam was voted captain of the brigantine in Vane's room, and he 
proceeded towards the Caribee Islands; where we must leave him, till 
we have finished our story of Charles Vane.

The sloop sailed for the Bay of Honduras, and Vane and his crew put 
her in as good a condition as they could by the way, that they might 
follow their old trade. They cruised two or three days off the north-
west part of Jamaica, and took a sloop and two pettiaguas, all the men 
of which entered with them: the sloop they kept, and Robert Deal was 
appointed captain.

On the 16th of December the two sloops came into the bay, where they 
found only one vessel at anchor. She was called the Pearl of Jamaica, 
which got under sail at the sight of them; but the pirate sloops 
coming near Rowland, and showing no colours, he gave them a gun or 
two, whereupon they hoisted the black flag, and fired three guns each 
at the Pearl. She struck, and the pirates took possession, and carried 
her away to a small island called Barnacho, where they cleaned. By the 
way, they met with a sloop from Jamaica, as she was going down to the 
bay, which they also took.

In February, Vane sailed from Barnacho, in order for a cruise; but, 
some days after he was out, a violent tornado overtook him, which 
separated him from his consort, and, after two days' distress, threw 
his sloop upon a small uninhabited island, near the Bay of Honduras, 
where she was staved to pieces, and most of her men were drowned: Vane 
himself was saved, but reduced to great straits for want of 
necessaries, having no opportunity to get anything from the wreck. He 
lived here some weeks, and was supported chiefly by fishermen, who 
frequented the island with small craft from the main, to catch turtles 
and other fish.

While Vane was upon this island, a ship put in there from Jamaica, for 
water, the captain of which, one Holford, an old buccaneer, happened 
to be Vane's acquaintance; he thought this a good opportunity to get 
off, and accordingly he applied to his old friend; but Holford 
absolutely refused him, saying to him, "Charles, I shan't trust you 
aboard my ship, unless I carry you as a prisoner; for I shall have you 
caballing with my men, knock me on the head, and run away with my ship 
a-pirating." Vane made all the protestations of honour in the world to 
him; but it seems Captain Holford was too intimately acquainted with 
him, to repose any confidence at all in his words or oaths.

He told him, "He might easily find a way to get off, if he had a mind 
to it: I am now going down the bay," says he, "and shall return hither 
in about a month; and if I find you upon the island when I come back, 
I'll carry you to Jamaica, and there hang you." "Which way can I get 
away?" answers Vane. "Are there not fishermen's dories upon the beach? 
Can't you take one of them?" replies Holford. "What!" says Vane, 
"would you have me steal a dory, then?" "Do you make it a matter of 
conscience," said Holford, "to steal a dory, when you have been a 
common robber and pirate, stealing ships and cargoes, and plundering 
all mankind that fell in your way? Stay there, if you are so 
squeamish:" and he left him to consider of the matter.

After Captain Holford's departure, another ship put into the same 
island, in her way home, for water; none of the company knowing Vane, 
he easily passed for another man, and so was shipped for the voyage. 
One would be apt to think that Vane was now pretty safe, and likely to 
escape the fate which his crimes had merited; but here a cross 
accident happened that ruined all: Holford, returning from the bay, 
was met with by this ship; and the captains being very well acquainted 
together, Holford was invited to dine aboard of him, which he did. As 
he passed along to the cabin, he chanced to cast his eye down into the 
hold, and there saw Charles Vane at work. He immediately spoke to the 
captain, saying, "Do you know who you have got aboard there?" "Why," 
says he, "I have shipped a man at such an island, who was there cast 
away in a trading-sloop, and he seems to be a brisk hand." "I tell 
you," says Captain Holford, "it is Vane, the notorious pirate." "If it 
be him," replies the other, "I wont keep him." "Why, then," says 
Holford, "I'll send, and take him aboard, and surrender him at 
Jamaica." This being agreed to, Captain Holford, as soon as he 
returned to his ship, sent his boat with his mate, armed, who, coming 
to Vane, showed him a pistol, and told him, he was his prisoner. No 
man opposing, he was brought aboard, and put into irons; and when 
Captain Holford arrived at Jamaica, he delivered his old acquaintance 
into the hands of justice, at which place he was tried, convicted, and 
executed, as was, some time before, Vane's consort, Robert Deal, who 
was brought thither by one of the men-of-war. Thus we may see how 
little ancient friendship will avail a great villain, when he is 
deprived of the power that had before supported him, and made him 
formidable.



CAPTAIN JOHN RACKAM. 
Pirate

THIS John Rackam, as has been reported in the foregoing pages, was 
quarter-master to Vane's company, till the crew were divided, and Vane 
turned out of it, for refusing to board the French man-of-war; in his 
room Rackam was voted captain of the division that remained in the 
brigantine. The 24th of November, 1718, was the first day of his 
command; his first cruise was among the Caribbee Islands, where he 
took and plundered several vessels.

We have already taken notice, that when Captain Woods Rogers went to 
the Island of Providence, with the king's pardon to such of the 
pirates as should surrender, this brigantine, which Rackam now 
commanded, made its escape through another passage, bidding defiance 
to the mercy that was offered.

To the windward of Jamaica, a Madeira-man fell into the pirates' way, 
which they detained two or three days, till they had their market out 
of her, and then they gave her back to the master, and permitted one 
Hosea Tidsel, a tavern-keeper at Jamaica, who had been picked up in 
one of their prizes, to depart in her, she being bound for that 
island.

After this cruise, they went into a small island, and cleaned, and 
spent their Christmas ashore, drinking and carousing as long as they 
had any liquor left, and then they went to sea again for more: they 
succeeded but too well, though they took no extraordinary prize for 
above two months, except a ship laden with convicts from Newgate, 
bound for the plantations, which in a few days was retaken, with all 
her cargo, by an English man-of-war that was stationed in those seas.

Rackam stood towards the island of Bermudas, and took a ship bound to 
England from Carolina, and a small pink from New England, both which 
he brought to the Bahama islands, where, with the pitch, tar, and 
stores, they cleaned again, and refitted their own vessel; but, 
staying too long in that neighbourhood. Captain Rogers, who was 
governor of Providence, hearing of these ships being taken, sent out a 
sloop well manned and armed, which retook both the prizes, though in 
the meanwhile the pirate had the good fortune to escape.

From hence they sailed to the Back of Cuba, where Rackam kept a little 
kind of a family; at which place they staid a considerable time, 
living ashore with their Delilahs, till their money and provisions 
were expended, and they concluded it time to look out for more. They 
repaired their vessel, and were making ready to put to sea, when a 
guarda de costa came in with a small English sloop, which she had 
taken as an interloper on the coast. The Spanish guard-ship attacked 
the pirate, but Rackam being close in behind a little island, she 
could do but little execution where she lay; therefore, the Dons 
warped into the channel that evening, in order to make sure of her the 
next morning. Rackam, finding his case desperate, and that there was 
hardly any possibility of escaping, resolved to attempt the following 
enterprise. The Spanish prize lying, for better security, close into 
the land, between the little island and the Main, our desperado takes 
his crew into the boat, with their cutlasses, rounds the little 
island, and falls aboard their prize silently, in the dead of the 
night, without being discovered; telling the Spaniards that were 
aboard her, that, if they spoke a word, or made the least noise, they 
were all dead men: and so they became masters of her.

When this was done he slipped her cable, and drove out to sea. The 
Spanish man-of-war was so intent upon their expected prize, that they 
minded nothing else, and, as soon as day broke, they made a furious 
fire upon the empty sloop; but it was not long before they were 
apprised of the matter, when they cursed themselves sufficiently, for 
a company of fools, to be bit out of a good rich prize, as she proved 
to be, and to have nothing but an old crazy hull in the room of her.

Rackam and his crew had no reason to be displeased at the exchange, as 
it enabled them to continue some time longer in a way of life that 
suited their depraved tempers.

In August 1720, we find him at sea again, scouring the harbours and 
inlets of the north and west parts of Jamaica, where he took several 
small craft, which proved no great booty to the rovers; but they had 
but few men, and, therefore, they were obliged to run at low game, 
till they could increase their company and their strength.

In the beginning of September, they took seven or eight fishing-boats 
in Harbour Island, stole their nets and other tackle, and then went 
off to the French part of Hispaniola, where they landed, and took the 
cattle away, with two or three Frenchmen they found near the 
waterside, hunting of wild hogs in the evening. The Frenchmen came on 
board, whether by consent or compulsion, I cannot say. They afterwards 
plundered two sloops, and returned to Jamaica, on the north coast of 
which island, near Porto Maria Bay, they took a schooner, Thomas 
Spenlow, master; it being then the 19th of October. The next day, 
Rackam seeing a sloop in Dry Harbour Bay, he stood in and fired a gun; 
the men all run ashore, and he took the sloop and lading; but when 
those ashore found that they were pirates, they hailed the sloop, and 
let them know they were all willing to come aboard of them.

Rackam's coasting the island in this manner proved fatal to him; for 
intelligence came to the governor of his expedition, by a canoe, which 
he had surprised ashore in Ocho Bay. Upon this a sloop was immediately 
fitted out, and sent round the island in quest of him, commanded by 
Captain Barnet, and manned with a good number of hands.

Rackam, rounding the island, and drawing round the westernmost point, 
called Point Negril, he saw a small pettiagua, which, at sight of the 
sloop, ran ashore and landed her men; when one of them hailed her. 
Answer made was, they were Englishmen, and begged the pettiagua's men 
to come on board, and drink a bowl of punch; which they prevailed upon 
them to do. Accordingly the company, in an evil hour, came all aboard 
of the pirate, consisting of nine persons; they were armed with 
muskets and cutlasses, but what was their real design by so doing, we 
shall not take upon us to say. They had no sooner laid down their arms 
and taken up their pipes, than Barnet's sloop, which was in pursuit of 
Rackam's, came in sight.

The pirates, finding she stood directly towards them, feared the 
event, and weighed their anchor, which they had but lately let go, and 
stood off. Captain Barnet gave them chase; and, having the advantage 
of little breezes of wind, which blew off the land, came up with her, 
and brought her into Port Royal, in Jamaica.

About a fortnight after, the prisoners were brought ashore, viz. 
November 16, 1720, and Captain Rackam and eight of his men condemned 
and executed. Captain Rackam and two others were hung in chains.

But what was very surprising, was the conviction of the nine men that 
came aboard the sloop on the same day she was taken. They were tried 
at an adjournment of the court, on the 24th of January, the magistracy 
waiting all that time, it is supposed for evidence, to prove the 
piratical intention of going aboard the sloop; for it seems there was 
no act of piracy committed by them, as appeared by the witnesses 
against them, who were two Frenchmen taken by Rackam, off the island 
of Hispaniola, who merely deposed that the prisoners came on board the 
pirate without compulsion. The court considered the prisoners' cases, 
and the majority of the commissioners being of opinion that they were 
all guilty of the piracy and felony they were charged with, which was, 
"the going over with a piratical and felonious intent to John Rackam, 
&c., then notorious pirates, and by them known to be so," they all 
received sentence of death, and were executed on the 17th February, at 
Gallows Point at Port Royal.



MARY READ. 
Who Passed as a Man, and became a Soldier, Sailor, 
and Pirate.

THE attention of our readers is now to be directed to the history of 
two female piratesa history which is chiefly remarkable from the 
extraordinary circumstance of the softer sex assuming a character 
peculiarly distinguished for every vice that can disgrace humanity
and, at the same time, for the exertion of the most daring though 
brutal courage.

Mary Read was a native of England, but at what place she was born is 
not recorded. Her mother married a sailor when she was very young, 
who, soon after their marriage, went to sea and never returned. The 
fruit of that marriage was a sprightly boy. The husband not returning, 
she again found herself with child, and, to cover her shame, took 
leave of her husband's relations, and went to live in the country, 
taking her boy along with her. Her son in a short time died, and she 
was relieved from the burden of his maintenance and education. The 
mother had not resided long in the country before Mary Read, the 
subject of the present narrative, was born.

After the birth of Mary, her mother resided in the country for three 
or four years, until her money was all spent; and her ingenuity was 
set at work to contrive how to obtain a supply. She knew that her 
husband's mother was in good circumstances, and could easily support 
her child, provided she could make her pass for a boy, and her son's 
child.

But it seemed impossible to impose upon an old experienced mother. 
She, however, presented Mary in the character of her grandson. The old 
woman proposed to take the boy to live with her, but the mother would 
not on any account part with her boy; therefore, the grandmother 
allowed a crown per week for his support.

The ingenuity of the mother being successful, she reared her daughter 
as a boy. But as she grew up, her mother informed her of the secret of 
her birth, in order that she might conceal her sex. The grandmother, 
however, dying, the support from that quarter failed, and she was 
obliged to hire him out as a foot-boy to a French lady. The strength 
and manly disposition of this boy increased with his years; and, 
leaving that servile employment, he engaged on board a man-of-war.

The volatile disposition of this supposed youth did not permit him to 
remain long in this station, and he next went into Flanders, and 
joined a regiment of foot as a cadet. Though in every action she 
conducted herself with the greatest bravery, yet she could not obtain 
a commission, as they were in general bought and sold. She accordingly 
quitted that service, and enlisted into a regiment of horse; there she 
behaved herself so valiantly, that she gained the esteem of all her 
officers. It however happened that her comrade was a handsome young 
Fleming, and she fell violently in love with him. The violence of her 
feelings rendered her negligent of her duty, and effected such a 
change in her behaviour as attracted the attention of all. Both her 
comrade and the rest of the regiment deemed her mad. Love, however, is 
inventive; and, as they slept in the same tent, she found means to 
discover her sex without any seeming design. He was both surprised and 
pleased, supposing that he would have a mistress to himself; but he 
was greatly mistaken, and he found that it was necessary to court her 
for his wife. A mutual attachment took place; and, as soon as 
convenient, women's clothes were provided for her, and they were 
publicly married.

The singularity of two troopers marrying produced a general 
conversation, and many of the officers honoured the ceremony with 
their presence, and resolved to make presents to the bride, to provide 
her with necessaries. After marriage they were desirous to quit the 
service; and his discharge being easily obtained, they set up an 
ordinary, with the sign of the "Three Shoes," and soon acquired a 
considerable run of business.

But her felicity was of short duration; the husband died, and, peace 
being concluded, her business diminished. In these circumstances she 
again resumed her man's dress, and, going into Holland, enlisted into 
a regiment of foot quartered in one of the frontier towns. But there 
being no view of preferment in time of peace, she left that service, 
and went on board a vessel bound for the West Indies.

During the voyage, the ship was captured by English pirates; and, as 
Mary was the only English person on board, they detained her, and, 
having plundered the vessel of what they chose, they allowed it to 
depart. Mary continued in that unlawful commerce for some time; but 
the royal pardon being tendered to all those in the West Indies who 
should, before a specified day, surrender, the crew to which she was 
attached availed themselves of this, and lived quietly on shore with 
the fruits of their adventures. But, from the want of their usual 
supplies, their money became exhausted; and, being informed that 
Captain Rogers, in the Island of Providence, was fitting out some 
vessels for privateering, Mary, with some others, repaired to that 
island to serve on board his privateers.

We have already heard, that scarcely had the ships sailed, when some 
of their crews mutinied, and run off with the ships, to pursue their 
former mode of life. Among these was Mary Read. She indeed frequently 
declared, that the life of a pirate was what she detested, and that 
she was constrained to it both on the former and present occasion.

It was, however, sufficiently ascertained, that both Mary Read and 
Anne Bouncy were among the bravest and most resolute fighters of the 
whole crew; that when the vessel was taken, these two heroines, along 
with another of the pirates, were the last three upon deck; and that 
Mary, having in vain endeavoured to rouse the courage of the crew, who 
had fled below, discharged a pistol among them, killed one, and 
wounded another.

Nor was Mary less modest than brave; for though she had remained many 
years in the character of a sailor, yet no one had ever discovered her 
sex, until she was under the necessity of doing so to Anne Bonney. The 
reason of this was, that Anne, supposing her to be a handsome fellow, 
became greatly enamoured of her, and discovered her sex and her wishes 
to Mary, who was thus constrained to reveal her secret to Anne. Rackam 
being the paramour of Bonney, and observing her partiality towards 
Mary, threatened to shoot her lover; so that, to prevent any mischief, 
Anne also informed the captain of the sex of her companion.

Rackam was enjoined secrecy; and here he behaved honourably: but love 
again assailed and conquered Mary. It was usual with the pirates to 
retain all the artists who were captured in the trading-vessels: among 
these there was a handsome young man, of very engaging manners, who 
vanquished the heart of Mary. In a short time her love became so 
violent, that she took every opportunity of enjoying his company and 
conversation; and, after she had gained his friendship, discovered her 
sex. Esteem and friendship were speedily converted into the most 
ardent affection, and a mutual flame burned in the hearts of these two 
lovers. An occurrence soon happened that put the attachment of Mary to 
a severe trial. Her lover having quarrelled with one of the crew, they 
agreed to fight a duel on shore. Mary was all anxiety for the fate of 
her lover; and she manifested a greater concern for the preservation 
of his life, than that of her own; but she could not entertain the 
idea that he should refuse to fight, and so be esteemed a coward. 
Accordingly she quarrelled with the man who had challenged her lover, 
and called him to the field two hours before his appointment with her 
lover, engaged him with sword and pistol, and laid him dead at her 
feet.

Though no esteem or love had formerly existed, this action was 
sufficient to have kindled the most violent flame. But this was not 
necessary, for the lover's attachment was equal, if not stronger; they 
pledged their faith, which they esteemed as binding as if the ceremony 
had been performed by a clergyman. Captain Rackam, one day, before he 
knew that she was a woman, asked her why she followed a line of life 
that exposed her to so much danger, and at last to the certainty 
almost of being hanged. She replied, that, as to hanging, she thought 
it no great hardship, for were it not for that, every cowardly fellow 
would turn pirate, and so infest the seas, and men of courage would 
starve; that, if it was put to her choice, she would not have the 
punishment less than death, the fear of which kept some dastardly 
rogues honest; that many of those who are now cheating the widows and 
orphans, and oppressing their poor neighbours who have no money to 
obtain justice, would then rob at sea, and the ocean would be as 
crowded with rogues as the land; so that no merchants would venture 
out, and the trade in a little time would not be worth following.

Being with child at the time of her trial, her execution was delayed, 
and it is probable that she would have found favour; but in the 
meantime she fell sick and died.

Mary Read was of a strong and robust constitution, capable of enduring 
much exertion and fatigue. She was vain and bold in her disposition, 
but susceptible of the tenderest emotions, and of the most melting 
affections. Her conduct was directed by virtuous principleswhile at 
same time she was violent in her attachments. Though she was 
inadvertently drawn into that dishonourable mode of life which has 
stained her character, and given her a place among the criminal actors 
in the drama of this work, yet she possessed a rectitude of principle 
and of conduct, far superior to many who have not been exposed to so 
great temptations to swerve from the path of female virtue and honour.



ANNE BONNEY 
The Famous Woman Pirate

THIS female pirate was a native of Cork in Ireland. Her father was an 
attorney, and, by his activity in business, rose to considerable 
respectability in that place. Anne was the fruit of an unlawful 
connexion with his own servant-maid, with whom he afterwards eloped to 
America, leaving his own affectionate and lawful wife. He settled at 
Carolina, and for some time followed his own profession; but soon 
commenced merchant, and was so successful as to purchase a 
considerable plantation. There he lived with his servant in the 
character of his wife; but she dying, Anne his daughter superintended 
the domestic affairs of her father.

During her residence with her father, she was supposed to have a 
considerable fortune, and was accordingly addressed by young men of 
respectable situations in life. It happened with Anne, however, as 
with many others of her youth and sex, that her feelings, and not her 
interest, determined her choice of a husband. She married a young 
sailor without a single shilling. The avaricious father was so 
enraged, that, deaf to the feelings of a parent, he turned his own 
child out of doors. Upon this cruel usage of her father, and the 
disappointment of her fortune, Anne and her husband sailed for the 
Island of Providence, in the hope of gaining employment.

Acting a part very different from that of Mary Read, Anne's affections 
were soon estranged from her husband by Captain Rackam, and, eloping 
with him, went to sea in men's clothes. Proving with child, the 
captain put her on shore, and intrusted her to the care of some 
friends, until her recovery, when she again accompanied him in his 
expeditions. Upon the king's proclamation, offering a pardon to all 
pirates, he surrendered, and went into the privateering business, as 
was related in the former life. He, however, soon embraced an 
opportunity to return to his favourite employment. In all his 
piratical exploits, Anne accompanied him, and, as we have already 
related, displayed such courage and intrepidity, that she, along with 
Mary Read and another seaman, were the last three who remained on 
board when the vessel was taken.

Anne was known to many of the planters in Jamaica, who remembered to 
have seen her in her father's house, and they were disposed to 
intercede in her behalf. Her unprincipled conduct, in leaving her own 
husband, and forming an illicit connexion with Rackam, tended, 
however, to render them less active. By a special favour, Rackam was 
permitted to visit her the day before he was executed; but, instead of 
condoling him on account of his sad fate, she only observed, that she 
was sorry to see him there, but if he had fought like a man, he needed 
not have been hanged like a dog. Being with child, she remained in 
prison until her recoverywas reprieved from time to time; and, though 
we cannot communicate to our readers any particulars of her future 
life, or the manner of her death, yet we are certain that she was not 
executed.



CAPTAIN DAVIS 
Pirate

DAVIS was born in Monmouthshire, and, from a boy, trained to the sea. 
His last voyage from England was in the sloop Cadogan, from Bristol, 
in the character of chief mate. This vessel was captured by the pirate 
England, upon the Guinea coast, whose companions plundered the crew, 
and murdered the captain, as already related in England's life.

Upon the death of Captain Skinner, Davis pretended that he was urged 
by England to become pirate, but that he resolutely refused. He added, 
that England, pleased with his conduct, had made him captain in room 
of Skinner, giving him a sealed paper, which he was not to open until 
he was in a certain latitude, and then expressly to follow the given 
directions. When he arrived in the appointed place, he collected the 
whole crew, and solemnly read his sealed instructions, which contained 
a generous grant of the ship and all her stores, to Davis and his 
crew, requesting them to go to Brazil, and dispose of the cargo to the 
best advantage, and make an equal division of the money.

Davis then commanded the crew to signify whether they were inclined to 
follow that mode of life, when, to his astonishment and chagrin, the 
majority positively refused. Then, in a transport of rage, he desired 
them to go where they would.

Knowing that part of the cargo was consigned to merchants in Barbados, 
they directed their course to that place. When arrived there, they 
informed the merchants of the unfortunate death of Skinner, and of the 
proposal which had been made to them. Davis was accordingly seized, 
and committed to prison, but he having never been in the pirate 
service, nothing could be proved to condemn him, and he was discharged 
without a trial. Convinced that he could never hope for employment in 
that quarter, after this detection, he went to the island of 
Providence, which he knew to be a rendezvous for pirates. Upon his 
arrival there, he was grievously disappointed, because the pirates who 
frequented that place, had just accepted of his Majesty's pardon, and 
had surrendered.

Captain Rogers having equipped two sloops for trade, Davis obtained 
employment in one of these, called the Buck. They were laden with 
European goods to a considerable value, that they were to sell or 
exchange with the French and the Spaniards. They first touched at the 
island of Martinique, belonging to the French, and Davis knowing that 
many of the men were formerly in the pirate service, enticed them to 
seize the master, and to run off with the sloop. When they had 
effected their purpose, they hailed the other ship, in which they knew 
that there were many hands ripe for rebellion, and, coming to, the 
greater part joined Davis. Those who did not choose to adhere to them, 
were allowed to remain in the other sloop, and continue their course, 
after Davis had pillaged her of what things he pleased.

In full possession of the vessel, and stores, and goods, a large bowl 
of punch was made; under its exhilarating influence, it was proposed 
to choose a commander, and to form their future mode of policy. The 
election was soon over; and as a large majority of legal votes were in 
favour of Davis, and no scrutiny being demanded, Davis was declared 
duly elected. He then drew up a code of laws, to which he himself 
swore, and required the same bond of alliance from all the rest of the 
crew. He then addressed them in a short and appropriate speech, the 
substance of which was, a proclamation of war with the whole world.

They next consulted, what part would be most convenient to clean the 
vessel, and it was resolved to repair to Coxon's Hole, at the east end 
of the island of Cuba, where they could remain in perfect security, as 
the entrance was so narrow, that one ship could keep out an hundred.

They, however, had no small difficulty in cleaning their vessel, as 
there was no carpenter among them. They performed that laborious task 
in the best manner they could, and then made to the north side of 
Hispaniola. The first sail they met with was a French ship of twelve 
guns, which they captured; and, while they were plundering her, they 
discovered a sail in view. Inquiring at the Frenchman, they learned 
that she was a ship of twenty-four guns and sixty men. Davis proposed 
to his crew to attack her, assuring them that she would prove a rich 
prize. This appeared to the crew such an hazardous enterprise, that 
they were rather adverse to the measure. But he acquainted them, that 
he had conceived a stratagem that he was confident would succeed; they 
might, therefore, safely leave the matter to his management. He then 
commenced chase, and ordered his prize to do the same. Being a better 
sailer, he soon came up with the enemy, and showed his black colours. 
With no small surprise at his insolence in coming so near them, they 
commanded him to strike. He replied, that he was disposed to give them 
employment until his companion came up, who was able to contend with 
them. Meanwhile, assuring them, that if they did not strike to him, it 
would most certainly fare the worse with them. Then, giving them a 
broadside, he received the same in return.

When the other pirate ship drew near, they, according to the 
directions of Davis, appeared upon deck in white shirts, which making 
an appearance of numbers, the Frenchman was intimidated, and struck. 
Davis ordered the captain, with twenty of his men, to come on board, 
and they were all put in irons except the captain. Then he dispatched 
four of his men to the other ship, and, calling aloud to them, desired 
that his compliments should be given to the captain, and request him 
to send a sufficient number of hands on board their new prize, to see 
what they had got in her; at the same time, giving them a written 
paper with their proper instructions, even to nail up all the small 
guns, and to take out all the arms and powder, and to go every man on 
board the new prize. When his men were on board her, he ordered the 
greater part of the prisoners to be removed into the empty vessels; 
and, by this means, he secured himself from any attack to recover 
their ship.

During three days, those three vessels sailed in company; but, finding 
that his late prize was a heavy sailer, he emptied her of everything 
that he stood in need of, and then restored her to the captain, with 
all his men. The French captain was so enraged at being thus miserably 
deceived, that, upon the discovery of the stratagem, he would have 
thrown himself overboard, had not his men prevented him.

Captain Davis then formed the resolution of parting with the other 
prize ship also, and afterwards steered his course northward, and took 
a Spanish sloop. He next steered his course towards the western 
islands, and from Cape Verde islands cast anchor at St. Nicholas, and 
hoisted English colours. The Portuguese supposed that he was a 
privateer; and Davis going on shore, he was hospitably received, and 
they traded with him for such articles as they found most 
advantageous. He remained here five weeks, and he and the half of his 
crew visited the principal town of the island. Davis, from his 
appearing in the dress of a gentleman, was greatly caressed by the 
Portuguese, and nothing was spared to entertain and render him and his 
men happy. Having amused themselves during a week, they returned to 
the ship, and allowed the other half of the crew to visit the capital, 
and enjoy themselves in like manner. Upon their return, they cleaned 
their ship and put to sea; but four of the men were so captivated with 
the ladies and the luxuries of the place, that they remained in the 
island, and one of them married and settled there.

Davis now sailed for Bonavista; and, perceiving nothing in that 
harbour, they steered for the Isle of May. Arrived there, they found 
several vessels in the harbour, and plundered them of whatever they 
found necessary. They also received a considerable reinforcement of 
men, the greater part of whom entered willingly into the piratical 
service. They likewise made free with one of the ships, equipped her 
for their own purpose, and called her the King James. They next 
proceeded to St. Jago, to take in water. Davis with some others going 
on shore to seek water, the governor came to inquire who they were, 
and expressed his suspicion of their being pirates. Upon this Davis 
seemed highly affronted, and expressed his displeasure in the most 
polite but determinate manner. He however hastened on board, informed 
his men, and suggested the possibility of surprising the fort during 
the night. Accordingly, all his men being well armed, advanced to the 
assault; and, from the carelessness of the guards, they were in the 
garrison before the inhabitants were alarmed. Upon the discovery of 
their danger, they took shelter in the governor's house, and fortified 
it against the pirates; but the latter throwing in some granado-
shells, ruined the furniture, and killed several people.

The alarm was circulated in the morning, and the country assembled to 
attack them; but, unwilling to stand a siege, the pirates dismounted 
the guns, pillaged the fort, and fled to their ships.

When at sea, they mustered their hands, and found that they were about 
seventy strong. They then consulted among themselves what course they 
should steer, and they were divided in opinion; but, by a majority, it 
was carried to sail for Gambia on the coast of Guinea: of this opinion 
was the captain, who, having been employed in that trade, was 
acquainted with the coast, and informed his companions, that there was 
always a large quantity of money deposited in that castle, and he was 
confident, that if the matter was intrusted to him, he would 
successfully storm that fort. From their experience of his former 
prudence and courage, they cheerfully submitted to his direction, in 
the assurance of success.

Arrived at Gambia, he ordered all his men below, except as many as 
were necessary to work the vessel, that those from the fort, seeing so 
few hands, might have no suspicion that she was any other than a 
trading-vessel He then run under the fort and cast anchor; and, having 
ordered out the boat, manned with six men indifferently dressed, while 
he, with the master and doctor, dressed themselves like gentlemen, in 
order that the one party might look like common sailors, and the other 
like merchants. In rowing ashore, he instructed his men what to say if 
any questions were put to them by the garrison.

When he came to land, he was conducted by a file of musketeers into 
the fort, and kindly received by the governor, who inquired what they 
were, and whence they came? They replied, that they were from 
Liverpool, and bound for the river Senegal, to trade for gum and 
elephants' teeth; but that they were chased on that coast by two 
French men-of-war, and narrowly escaped being taken.

"We are now disposed," continued Davis, "to make the best of our 
voyage, and would willingly trade here for slaves." The governor then 
inquired what were the principal articles of their cargo. They 
replied, that they were iron and plate, which were necessary articles 
in that place. The governor then said, that he would give them slaves 
for all their cargo; and asked if they had any European liquor on 
board. They answered, a little for their own use, but that he should 
have a hamper of it. He then treated them with the greatest civility, 
and desired them all to dine with him. Davis answered, that as he was 
commander of the vessel, it would be necessary for him to go down to 
see if she was properly moored, and to give some other directions; but 
that these gentlemen might stay, and he would return before dinner, 
and bring the hamper with him.

While in the fort, his eyes were keenly employed to discover the 
position of the arms, and how the fort might most successfully be 
surprised. He discovered that there was a sentry standing near a 
guard-house, in which there was a quantity of arms heaped up in a 
corner, and that a considerable quantity of small arms were in the 
governor's hall. When he went on board, he ordered some hands on board 
a sloop lying at anchor, lest, hearing any bustle, they should come to 
the aid of the castle; then, desiring his men to avoid too much 
liquor, and to be ready when he should hoist the flag from the castle, 
to come, twenty of them, to their assistance, he procured the castle.

Having taken these precautions, and formed these arrangements, he 
ordered every man who was to accompany him to arm himself with two 
pair of pistols, which he himself also did, concealed under their 
clothes. He then directed them to go into the guard-room, and fall 
into conversation, and immediately upon his firing a pistol out of the 
governor's widow, to shut the men up, and secure the arms in the 
guard-room.

When Davis arrived, dinner not being ready, the governor proposed that 
they should pass the time in making a bowl of punch. Davis's boatswain 
attending him, had an opportunity of visiting all parts of the house, 
and observing their strength. He whispered his intelligence to his 
master, who, being surrounded by his own friends, and seeing the 
governor unattended by any of his retinue, presented a pistol to the 
breast of the latter, informing him that he was a dead man, unless he 
should surrender the fort and all its riches. The governor, thus taken 
by surprise, was submissive; for Davis took down all the pistols that 
hung in the hall, and loaded them. He then fired his pistol out of the 
window. His men flew like lions, presented their pistols to the 
soldiers, and while some carried out the arms, the rest secured the 
military, and shut them all up in the guard-house, placing a guard on 
the door. Then one of them struck the union flag on the top of the 
castle, which the men from the vessel perceiving, rushed to the 
combat, and in an instant were in possession of the castle, without 
tumult or bloodshed.

Davis then harangued the soldiers, and many of them enlisted with him, 
and those who declined, he put on board the small ships; and, to 
prevent the necessity of a guard, or the possibility of escape, 
carried off the sails, rigging, and cables.

That day being spent in feasting and rejoicing, the castle saluting 
the ship, and the ship the castle, on the day following they proceeded 
to examine the contents of their prize. They, however, were greatly 
disappointed in their expectations, a large sum of money having been 
sent off a few days before. But they found money to the amount of 
about two thousand pounds in gold, and many valuable articles of 
different kinds. They carried on board their vessel whatever they 
deemed useful, gave several articles to the captain and crew of the 
small vessel, and allowed them to depart, while they dismounted the 
guns, and demolished the fortifications.

After doing all the mischief that their vicious minds could possibly 
devise, they weighed anchor; but, in the meantime, perceiving a sail 
bearing towards them with all possible speed, they hastened to prepare 
for her reception, and made towards her. Upon her near approach they 
discovered that she was a French pirate of fourteen guns and sixty-
four men, the one half French and the other half Negroes. The 
Frenchman was in high expectations of a rich prize, but when he came 
nearer, he suspected, from the number of her guns and men, that she 
was a small English man-of-war; but he determined, notwithstanding, 
upon the bold attempt of boarding her, and immediately fired a gun, 
and hoisted his black colours: Davis immediately returned the 
compliment. The Frenchman was highly gratified at this discovery; both 
hoisted out their boats, and congratulated each other. Mutual 
civilities and good offices passed, and the French captain proposed to 
Davis to sail down the coast with him, in order to look out for a 
better ship; assuring him, that the very first that could be captured 
should be his, as he was always willing to encourage an industrious 
brother.

They first touched at Sierra Leone, where they spied a large vessel, 
and Davis being the swiftest sailer, came first up to her. He was not 
a little surprised that she did not endeavour to make off, and began 
to suspect her strength.

When he came along side of her, she fired a whole broadside, and 
hoisted black colours. Davis did the same, and fired a gun to leeward. 
The satisfaction of these brothers in iniquity was mutual, by having 
thus acquired so much additional strength and ability to undertake 
more formidable adventures. Two days were devoted to mirth and song, 
and, upon the third, Davis and Cochlyn, the captain of the new 
confederate, agreed to go in the French pirate ship to attack the 
fort. When they approached, the men in the fort, apprehensive of their 
character and intentions, fired all the guns upon them at once. The 
ship returned the fire, and afforded employment until the other two 
ships arrived, when the men in the fort seeing such a number on board, 
lost courage, and abandoned the fort to the mercy of the robbers.

They took possession, remained there seven weeks, and cleaned their 
vessels. They then called a council of war, to deliberate concerning 
future undertakings, when it was resolved to sail down the coast in 
company; and, for the greater regularity and grandeur, Davis was 
chosen Commodore. That dangerous enemy, strong drink, had well-nigh, 
however, sown the seeds of discord among these affectionate brethren. 
But Davis, alike prepared for council or for war, addressed them to 
the following purport: "Hear ye, you Cochlyn and La Boise, (which was 
the name of the French captain) I find, by strengthening you, I have 
put a rod into your hands to whip myself; but I am still able to deal 
with you both; however, since we met in love, let us part in love; for 
I find that three of a trade can never agree long together." Upon 
this, the other two went on board of their respective ships, and 
steered different courses.

Davis held down the coast, and, reaching Cape Appolonia, he captured 
two English and one Scottish ship, plundered them, and allowed them to 
proceed. In five days after, he met with a Dutchman, of thirty guns 
and ninety men. She gave Davis a broadside, and killed nine of his 
men; a desperate engagement ensued, which continued from one o'clock 
at noon until nine next morning, when the Dutchman struck.

Davis equipped her for the pirate service, and called her the Rover. 
With his two ships he sailed for the bay of Anamaboe, which he entered 
about noon, and took several vessels which were there waiting to take 
in Negroes, gold, and elephants' teeth. Davis made a present of one of 
these vessels to the Dutch captain and his crew, and allowed them to 
go in quest of their fortune. When the fort had intelligence that they 
were pirates, they fired at them, but without any effect: Davis fired 
also, and hoisted the black colours, but deemed it prudent to depart. 
Before proceeding farther in the life of Davis, it may afford variety 
and instruction, to insert a description given by an ingenious 
gentleman, of the Portuguese settlements on this coast.

A DESCRIPTION OF THE ISLANDS OF ST. THOME, DEL PRINCIPE, AND ANNOBONO.

The Portuguese were the great improvers of navigation, and the first 
Europeans who settled on the coasts of Africa, even round to India, 
and made those discoveries, so much to the advantage of other nations.

The attractive power of the loadstone was universally known to the 
ancients; but its directive, or polar virtue, has only been known 
within these 350 years, and is said to be found out by John Goia, of 
Malphi, in the kingdom of Naples; though others assure us, that it was 
transported by Paulus Venetus, from China to Italy, like the two other 
famous arts of printing and the use of guns.

The other properties or improvements of the magnet, its variation, or 
deflection from an exact N. or S. line, variation of that variation, 
and its inclination, were the inventions of Sebastian Cabot, Mr. 
Gellibrand, and Mr. Norman; the inclination of the needle, or that 
property whereby it keeps an elevation above the horizon, in all 
places but under the equator, where it is parallel, is as surprising a 
phenomenon as any, and was the discovery of our countrymen; and, could 
it be found regular, I imagine it would very much help towards the 
discovery of the longitude; at least it would point out better methods 
than are hitherto known, when ships draw nigh land; which would answer 
as useful an end almost as the other.

Before the verticity and use of the compass, the Portuguese 
navigations had extended no farther than Cape Non; which was their ne 
plus ultra, and therefore so called. Distress of weather, indeed, had 
drove some coasters to Porto Santo and Madeira, before any certain 
method of steering was invented; but after the needle was seen, thus 
inspired, navigation every year improved, under the great 
encouragement of Henry, Alphonsus, and John II. , kings of Portugal.

King Alphonsus was not so much at leisure as his predecessors, to 
pursue these discoveries; but, having seen the advantages that accrued 
to Portugal by them, and that the Pope had confirmed the perpetual 
donation of all they should discover between Cape Bajadore and India, 
inclusively, he resolved not to neglect the proper assistance, and so 
farmed the profits that did or might ensue, to one Bernard Gomez, a 
citizen of Lisbon, who was, every voyage, obliged to discover 100 
leagues still farther on. About the year 1470, he made these islands.
the only place of all the considerable and large colonies they had in 
Africa, that do now remain to that crown.

St. Thome is the principal of the three, whose governor is styled 
captain-general of the islands, and from whom the other at Prince's 
receives his commission, though nominated by the court of Portugal. It 
is a bishopric, with a great many secular clergy, who appear to have 
neither learning nor devotion, as many of them are Negroes. One of the 
chief of them invited us to hear mass, as a diversion to pass time 
away; when he and his inferior brethren acted such affected gestures 
and strains of voice, as showed, to their dishonour, that they had no 
other aim than that of pleasing us; and, what I think was still worse, 
it was not without a view of interest; for, as these clergy are the 
chief traders, they stoop to pitiful and scandalous methods for 
ingratiating themselves. They and the government, on this trading 
account, maintain no great harmony, being ever jealous of each other, 
and practising little deceitful arts, to monopolize what strangers 
have to offer for sale, whether toys or clothes, which, of all sorts, 
are ever profitable commodities with the Portuguese, in all parts of 
the world: an ordinary suit of black will sell for seven or eight 
pounds a middle-row wig of four shillings, for a moidore; a watch of 
forty shillings, for six pounds.

The town is of mean building, but large and populous; it is the 
residence of the greater part of the natives, who, throughout the 
whole island, are computed at 10,000, the militia at 3000, and are, in 
general, a rascally, thievish generation, as an old grave friend of 
mine can witness; for he, having carried a bag of second-hand clothes 
on shore, to truck for provisions, seated himself on the sand for this 
purpose, and presently gathered a crowd round him to view them; one of 
these desired to know the price of a black suit, that unluckily lay 
uppermost, and was the best of them: agreeing to the demand, with 
little hesitation, provided it would but fit him, he put them on 
immediately, in as much hurry as possible, without any co-licentia 
seignor; and when my friend was about to commend the goodness of the 
suit, and exactness they sat with, not dreaming of the impudence of 
his running away from a crowd, the rascal took to his heels; my friend 
followed and bawled very much, and though there were 500 people about 
the place, it served to no other end but making him a clear stage, 
that the best pair of heels might carry it; so he lost the suit of 
clothes, and, before he could return to his bag, others of them had 
beat off his servant, and shared the rest.

Most of the ships from Guinea, of their own nation, and frequently 
those of ours, call at one or other of these islands, to recruit with 
fresh provisions, and take in water; which on the coast are not so 
good, nor so conveniently come by: their own ships likewise, when they 
touch here, are obliged to leave the king his custom for their slaves, 
which is always in gold, at so much a head, without any deduction for 
the mortality that may happen afterwards; this, by being a constant 
bank, to pay off the civil and military charges of the government, 
prevent the inconveniency of remittances, and keeps both St. Thome and 
Prince's Isle rich enough to pay ready money for everything they want 
of the Europeans.

The beefs are small and lean, few of them exceeding two hundred 
weight, none of them much more; but the goats, hogs, and fowls, are 
very good; their sugar is coarse and dirty, and their rum is very 
ordinary; as these refreshments lay most with people who are in want 
of other necessaries, they come to us, in a way of bartering, very 
cheap: a good hog, for an old cutlass; a fat fowl, for a span of 
Brazil tobacco (no other sort being valued,) and so in proportion to 
the rest. But, in money, you give eight dollars per head for cattle, 
three dollars for a goat, six dollars for a grown hog, a testune and a 
half for a fowl, a dollar per gallon for rum, two dollars a roove for 
sugar, and half a dollar for a dozen of paroquets: here are likewise 
plenty of corn and farine, limes, citrons, and yams.

The island is reckoned to be almost square, each side being 18 leagues 
long; it is hilly, and under the equinoctiala wooden bridge, just 
without the town, being said not to deviate the least part of a 
minute, either to the southward or northward; and, notwithstanding 
this warm situation, and the continual vertical suns, the islanders 
are very healthy; which is imputed, in a great measure, to the want of 
even so much as one surgeon or physician!

The isle Del Principe, the next in magnitude, is a pleasant and 
delightful spot to the grave and thoughtful disposition of the 
Portuguese; it is an improvement of country retirement, in that this 
may be a happy and uninterrupted retreat from the whole world.

The southern coast of Africa runs in a western line of latitude, the 
northern on an eastern line, but both straight, with the fewest 
inlets, gulfs, or bays, of either of the four continents; the only 
large and remarkable one is that of Benin and Calabar, towards which 
the currents of each coast tend, and which is strongest from the 
southward, because more open to a large sea, whose rising is (though 
little and scarcely discernible at any distance from the land,) that 
gives rise to these currents close in shore; which are nothing but 
tides, altered and disturbed by the make and shape of lands.

In proof of this I shall lay down the following observations; viz. 
that in the rivers of Gambia and Sierra Leone, in the straits and 
channels of Benin, and in general along the whole coast, the flowings 
are regular on the shores, with this difference, that, in the above-
mentioned rivers, and in the channels of Benin, where the shores 
contract the waters into a narrow compass, the tides are strong and 
high as well as regular; but, on the dead coast, where it makes an 
equal reverbation, weak and low, increasing as you advance towards 
Benin; and this is farther evident, in that at Cape Corso, Succonda, 
and Commenda, and where the land rounds and gives any stop, the tides 
flow regularly on, four feet and upwards; when on an evener coast, 
they shall not exceed two or three feet; and ten leagues out at sea, 
they become scarcely, if at all, perceptible.

What I would adduce from this, besides a confirmation of that 
ingenious theory of the tides, by Captain Halley, is first, that the 
ships bound to Angola, Cabenda, and other places on the southern coast 
of Africa, should cross the equinoctial from Cape Balnias, and run 
into a southern latitude, without keeping too far to the westward; and 
the reason seems plain, for, if you endeavour to cross it about the 
islands, you meet calms, southerly winds, and opposite currents; and, 
if too far to the westward, the trade-winds are strong and 
unfavourable; for it obliges you to stand into eight degrees or thirty 
degrees southern latitude, till they are variable.

On the north side of Guinea, if ships are bound from the Gold Coast to 
Sierra Leone, Gambia, or elsewhere to windward, considering the 
weakness of these currents, and the favourableness of land breezes, 
and the southerly rains, tornadoes, and even the trade-wind, when 
abreast of Cape Palmas, it is more expeditious to pursue the passage 
this way, than by a long perambulatory course of 400 or 500 leagues to 
the westward, and as many more to the northward, which must be before 
a wind can be obtained that could recover the coast.

Lastly, it is, in a great measure, owing to this want of inlets, and 
the rivers being small and unnavigable, that the seas rebound with so 
dangerous a surf through the whole continent.

Hound the shores of this island, and in July, August, and September
the mouths we were therethere is a great resort of whale-fish, tame, 
and sporting very nigh the ships as they sail in; they are always in 
pairs, the female being much the smaller, and are often seen to turn 
on their backs for dalliancethe prologue to engendering. This fish 
has an enemy called the thresher, a large fish too, that has its 
haunts here at this season, and encounters the whale, raising himself 
out of the water a considerable height, and falling again with great 
weight and force. It is commonly said also, that there is a sword-fish 
in these battles, who pricks the whale up to the surface again; but 
without this, I believe, he would suffocate when put to quick motions, 
unless frequently approaching the air, to ventilate and remove the 
impediments to a swifter circulation. Nor do I think he is battled for 
prey, but to remove him from what is, perhaps, the food of both. The 
number of whales here, has put me sometimes on thinking that an 
advantageous fishery might be made of it; but I presume these, no more 
than those of Brazil, are the sort which yield the profitable part, 
called whalebone. All, therefore, that the islanders do, is now and 
then to go out with two or three canoes, and set on one for their 
diversion.

The rocks and outer lines of the island are the haunts of a variety of 
sea-birds, especially boobies and noddies; the former are of the 
bigness of a gull, and of a dark colour; named so from their 
simplicity, because they often sit still and let the sailors take them 
up in their hands; but I fancy this succeeds more frequently from 
their weariness, and the largeness of their wings, which, when they 
once have rested, cannot have the scope necessary to raise and float 
them on the air again. The noddies are smaller, and flat-footed also.

What I would remark more of them, is, the admirable instinct in these 
birds, with respect to the proper seasons, and the proper places for 
support. In the aforementioned months, when the large fish are here, 
numerous flocks of fowl attend for the spawn and superfluity of their 
nourishment; and in January few of either. For the same reason, there 
are scarce any sea-fowl seen on the African coast; rocks and islands 
being generally their best security and subsistence.

The harbour of Princes is at the E. S. E. point of the island; the 
north side has gradual soundings, but here is deep water, having no 
ground at a mile offshore, with one hundred and forty fathom of line. 
The port, when entered, is a smooth, narrow bay, safe from winds, 
unless a little swell when southerly, and draughted into other smaller 
and sandy ones, convenient for raising of tents, watering, and hauling 
the seam; the whole protected by a fort, or rather battery, of a dozen 
guns on the larboard side. At the head of the bay stands the town, 
about a mile from the anchoring place, and consists of two or three 
regular streets of wooden-built houses, where the governor and chief 
men of the island reside. Here the water grows shallow for a 
considerable distance, and the natives at every ebb, (having before 
encompassed every convenient angle with a rise of stones, sometimes 
like the weirs in England,) resort for catching of fish, which, with 
them, is a daily diversion as well as subsistence; five thousand 
attending with sticks and wicker baskets; and, if they cannot dip them 
with one hand, they knock them down with the other. The tides rise 
regularly six feet in the harbour, and yet not half that height 
without the capes that make the bay.

Here are constantly two missionaries, who are sent for six years, to 
inculcate the Christian principles, and more especially attend to the 
conversion of the Negroes. The present are Venetians, ingenious men, 
who seem to despise the loose morals and behaviour of the seculars, 
and complain of them as of the slaves. They have a neat conventual-
house, and a garden appropriated, which, by their own industry and 
labour, not only thrives with the several natives of the soil, but 
many exotics and curiosities;a fruit, in particular, larger than a 
chestnut, yellow, containing two stones, with a pulp or clammy 
substance about them, which, when sucked, exceeds in sweetness sugar 
or honey, and has this property beyond them, of giving a sweet taste 
to every liquid you swallow for the whole evening after. The only 
plague infesting the garden, is a vermin called land-crabs, which are 
in vast numbers: they are of a bright red colour, but in other 
respects like the sea ones. They burrow in these sandy soils like 
rabbits, and are altogether as shy.

The island is a pleasant intermixture of hill and valley; the hills 
are spread with palms, cocoa-nuts, and cotton-trees, with numbers of 
monkeys and parrots among them; the valleys with fruitful plantations 
of yams, kulalu, papas, variety of salads, ananas or pineapples, 
guavas, plantains, bananas, maniocs, and Indian corn; with fowls, 
Guinea-hens, Muscovy ducks, goats, hogs, turkeys, and wild beeves; 
with each a little village of Negroes, who, under the direction of 
their several masters, manage the cultivation, and exchange or sell 
the product for money, much after the same rates with the people of 
St. Thome.

The palm-trees are numerous on the shores of Africa, and may be 
reckoned the first of their natural curiosities, in that they afford 
them meat, drink, and clothing; they grow very straight to forty and 
fifty feet high, and, at the top only, have three or four circles of 
branches, that spread and make a capacious umbrella. The trunk is very 
rough with knobs, either excrescences, or the healings of those 
branches that were lopped off to forward the growth of the tree, and 
make it answer better in its fruit. The branches are strongly tied 
together with a cortex, which may be unravelled to a considerable 
length and breadth; the inward lamella of this cortex are woven like a 
cloth at Benin, and afterwards dyed and worn. Under the branches, and 
close to the body of the tree, hang the nuts, thirty bunches, perhaps, 
on a tree, and each of thirty pounds weight; with prickly films from 
between them, not unlike hedgehogs. Of these nuts comes a liquid and 
pleasant-scented oil, used as food and sauce all over the coast, but 
chiefly in the windward parts of Africa, where they stamp, boil, and 
skim it off in great quantities; underneath, where the branches 
fasten, they tap them for wine, called cokra, in this manner: the 
Negroes, who are mostly limber, active fellows, encompass themselves 
and the trees with a hoop of strong with, and run up with a great deal 
of agility, at the bottom of a branch of nuts; he that ascends makes 
an excavation of an inch and a half over, and, tying fast his 
calabash, leaves it to distil, which it does to two or three quarts in 
a night's time; when done, he plugs it up, and chooses another; for, 
if suffered to run too much, or in the day time, the sap is unwarily 
exhausted, and the tree spoiled; the liquor thus drawn is of a wheyish 
colour, very intoxicating; it sours in twenty-four hours, but, when 
new drawn, is pleasant to thirst and hunger both. It is from these 
wines they draw their arrack in India. On the very top of the palm 
grows a cabbage; called so, we believe, from some resemblance its 
taste is thought to have with ours, being used like it; the covering 
has a down that makes the best of tinder, and the weavings of other 
parts are drawn out into strong threads.

Cocoa-nut trees are branched like, but not so tall as palm-trees, the 
nut, like them, growing under the branches, and close to the trunk; 
the milky liquor they contain, to the quantity of half a pint, or 
more, is often drank to quench thirst, but is apt to surfeit; and this 
may be observed in their way of nourishment, that when the quantity of 
milk is large, the shell and meat are very thin, and they harden and 
thicken in proportion as that loses.

Cotton-trees, also, are the growth of all parts of Africa, as well as 
the islands; they are of vast bigness, yet not so apt to increase as 
the shrubs or bushes of five or six feet high; these bear a fruit (if 
it may be so called) about the bigness of pigeons' eggs, which, as the 
sun swells and ripens it, bursts forth and discovers three cells 
loaded with cotton, and seeds in the middle of them: this, in most 
parts, the Negroes know how to spin, and here, at Nicongo, and the 
island of St. Jago, how to weave into cloths.

Yams are a common root, sweeter, but not unlike potatoes: kubalu is an 
herb like spinach; papa, a fruit less than the smallest pumpkins; they 
are all three for boiling, and to be eat with meat; the latter are 
improved, by the English, into a turnip or an apple taste, with a due 
mixture of butter or limes.

Guavas are a fruit as large as a pippin, with seeds and stones in it, 
of an uncouth astringent taste, though never so much be said in 
commendation of it. In the West Indies, it is common for the 
Creolians, (who have tasted both,) to give it a preference to peach or 
nectarine; no amazing thing for men whose tastes are so degenerated, 
as to prefer a toad in a shell (as Ward calls turtle) to venison, and 
Negroes to fine English ladies.

Plantains and bananas are fruit of oblong figure, that I think differ 
only secundum majus et minus; if any, the latter are preferable, and, 
by being less, are more juicy; they are usually, when stripped of 
their coat, eat at meals instead of bread. The leaf of this plantain 
is an admirable detergent, and, externally applied, has been known to 
cure the most obstinate scorbutic ulcers.

Manioc is a root that shoots in branches, about the height of a 
currant bush; from this root the islanders make a farine of flour, 
which they sell at three rials a roove, and drive a considerable trade 
for it, with the ships that call in. The manner of making it is first 
to press the juice from it, (which is poisonous) by the help of 
engines, and then the Negro women, upon a rough stone, rub it into a 
granulated flour, which they reserve in their houses, either to still, 
as we do our wheat, when it makes a hearty food tor the slaves; or to 
make it into bread, fine, white, and well-tasted, for themselves. One 
thing worth taking notice about manioc in this island, is, that the 
woods abound with a wild, poisonous, and more mortiferous sort, which 
sometimes men, unskilled in the preparation of it, feed on to their 
destruction: this, the missionaries assured me, they often 
experimented in their hogs, and believed we did, in the mortality of 
our sailors.

Indian corn is likewise, as well as the farine de manioc and rice, the 
common victualling of our slave-ships, and is afforded here at one 
thousand heads for two dollars. This corn grows eight or nine feet 
high, on a hard reed or stick, shooting forth, at every six inches 
height, some long leaves; it has always an ear, or rather head, at the 
top of it, perhaps containing four hundred fold increase; and often 
two, three, or more, about midway.

Here are some tamarind trees; another tree called cola, whose fruit, 
or nut (about twice the bigness of a chestnut, and bitter) is chewed 
by the Portuguese, to give a sweet gust to their water which they 
drink; but, above all, the bark of one is gravely affirmed, by the 
inhabitants, to have a peculiar property of enlarging the virile 
member; those who are not fond of such conceits, nor believe it in the 
power of any vegetables, have acknowledged they have seen sights of 
this kind, among the Negroes, very extraordinary; yet, that there may 
be no wishes among the ladies for the importation of this bark, I must 
acquaint them, that they are found to grow less merry, as they 
increase in bulk. I had like to have forgot their cinnamon trees; 
there is only one walk of them, which is the entrance of the 
governor's villa; they thrive extremely well, and the bark is not 
inferior to our cinnamon from India. The reason why they and other 
spices, in a soil so proper, receive no farther cultivation is, 
probably, their suspicion that so rich a produce might make some 
potent neighbour take a fancy to the island.

They have two winters, or rather springs, and two summers: their 
winters, which are the rainy seasons, come in September and February, 
or March, and continue two months, returning that fatness and 
generative power to the earth, that makes it yield a double crop every 
year, with little sweat or labour.

Their first coming is with tornadoes, i.e. sudden and hard gusts of 
wind, with thunder, lightning, and heavy showers; but the continuance 
of these tempests is very short; and the next new or full moon, at 
those times of the year, infallibly introduces the rains, which, once 
begun, fall with little intermission, and are observed to be coldest 
in February. Similar to these are rainy seasons, also, over all the 
coast of Africa: if there may be allowed any general way of 
calculating their time, they happen from the course of the sun, as it 
respects the equinoctial only; for if these equinoxes prove rainy 
seasons all over the world, (as we are apt to think they do,) whatever 
secret cause operates with that station of the sun to produce them, 
will more effectually do it in these vicine latitudes; and, therefore, 
as the sun advances, the rains are brought on the Whydah and Gold 
coast by April, and on the windwardmost part of Guinea, by May; the 
other season of the sun's returning to the southward, makes them more 
uncertain and irregular in North Africa; but then to the southward 
again, they proceed in like manner, and are at Cape Lopez in October, 
at Angola in November, and so in proportion at the other parts.

The manner of living among the Portuguese here, is with the utmost 
frugality and temperance, even to penury and starving: a familiar 
instance of this appears in the voracity of their dogs, who, finding 
such clean cupboards at home, are wild, in a manner, with hunger, and 
tear up the graves of the dead for food, as has been often seen. They 
themselves are lean with covetousness, and that Christian virtue, 
which is often the result of it, self-denial; they would even train up 
their cattle in the same way, could they fetch as much money, or had 
they not their provisions more immediately of Providence. The best of 
them (excepting the governor, now and then) neither pay nor receive 
any visits of escapade or recreation; they meet and sit down at each 
other's doors, in the streets, every evening; and, as few of them, in 
so small an island, can have their plantations at any greater distance 
than that they may see them every day if they will, so the subject of 
their tale is mostly how affairs went there, with their Negroes or 
their ground; and then they part, one with another, innocently, but as 
empty as when they came together.

The Negroes have yet no hard duty with them; they are rather happy in 
slavery: for, as their food is chiefly vegetables, that could no way 
else be expended, there are no murmurs bred on that account; and as 
their business is domestic, either in the services of the house, or in 
gardening, sowing, or planting, they have no more than what every man 
would prefer for his health and pleasure; the hardest of their work is 
the carriage of their masters or their wives, to and from the 
plantations: this they do in hammocks, (called at Whydah, 
serpentines,) flung across a pole, with a cloth overhead, to screen 
the person so carried from sun and weather; and the slaves are at each 
end: and yet even this, methinks, is better than the specious liberty 
a man has, for himself and his heirs, to work in a coal mine.

The Negroes are, most of them, through the care of their patrons, 
Christians, at least nominal; but, excepting a very few, they adhere 
still to many silly Pagan customs, in their mournings and rejoicings; 
and, in some measure, a powerful majority of these people has 
introduced their manners among the vulgar of the Mulatto and 
Portuguese race.

When a person of that colour dies, his relations and friends meet at 
the house, where the corpse is laid out decently on the ground, and 
covered, all except the face, with a sheet; they sit round it, crying 
and howling dreadfully, not unlike what the natives are said to do in 
Ireland. This mourning lasts eight days and nights, but not equally 
intense; for as the friends, who compose the chorus, go out and in, 
they grow weary, and are unequally affected; so that the tone lessens 
daily, and the intervals of grief are longer.

In rejoicings and festivals they are equally ridiculous; these are 
commonly made on some friend's escape from shipwreck, or other danger. 
They meet in a large room of the house, with a strum, strum, to which 
one of the company, perhaps, sings woefully; the rest, standing round 
the room close to the partitions, take it in their turns, one or two 
at a time, to step round, in a manner which they call dancing, the 
whole clapping their hands continually, and whooping out, every 
minute, "Abeo," which signifies no more than. How do you do? And this 
foolish mirth will continue three or four days together at a house, 
and, perhaps, twelve or sixteen hours at a time.

The Portuguese, though eminently abstemious and temperate in all other 
things, are unbounded in their lusts; and, perhaps, they substitute 
the former in the room of a surgeon, as a counterpoison to the 
mischiefs of a promiscuous salacity. They have most of them venereal 
taints, and with age become meagre and hectic. I saw two instances 
here of venereal ulcers that had cancerated in the bowelsspectacles 
enough to have effectually persuaded men how salutary the restriction 
of laws are.

Annobono is the last, and of the least consequence of the three 
islands: there are plenty of fruits and provisions, which they 
exchange for old clothes and trifles of any sort; they have a governor 
nominated from St. Thome, and two or three priests, neither of which 
are minded, every one living at discretion, filled with ignorance and 
lust.

But to return to Captain Davis.The next day after he left Anamabona, 
the man at the mast-head discovered a sail. It may be proper to inform 
our readers, that, according to the laws of pirates, the man who first 
discovers a ship, is entitled to the best pair of pistols in the ship; 
and such is the honour attached to these, that a pair of them has been 
known to sell for thirty pounds.

Davis pursued that vessel, which being between him and the shore, 
laboured hard to run aground. Davis, perceiving this, got between her 
and land, then fired a broadside at her, when she immediately struck. 
She proved to be a very rich prize, having on board the governor of 
Accra, with all his substance, going to Holland. There was, in money, 
to the amount of fifteen thousand pounds, besides a large quantity of 
merchant goods, and other valuable articles.

Before they reached the isle of Princes, the St. James sprung a leak; 
so that the men and the valuable articles were removed into Davis's 
own ship. When he came in sight of the fort, he hoisted English 
colours. The Portuguese, seeing a large ship sailing towards the 
shore, sent a sloop to discover her character and destination. Davis 
informed them, that he was an English man-of-war, sent out in search 
of some pirates which they had heard were in this quarter. Upon this, 
he was piloted into the port, and anchored below the guns at the fort. 
The governor was happy to have Englishmen in his harbour; and, to do 
honour to Davis, sent down a file of musketeers to escort him into the 
fort; while Davis, the more to cover his design, ordered nine men, 
according to the custom of the English, to row him on shore.

During the time that Davis remained here, a French vessel came into 
the harbour, which Davis plundered, alleging to the governor, that it 
was only some goods that were in her that he knew belonged to pirates.

Davis also took the opportunity of cleaning and preparing all things 
for renewing his operations. He, however, could not contentedly leave 
the fort, without receiving some of the riches of the island. He 
formed a scheme to accomplish his purpose, and communicated the same 
to his men. His design was to make the governor a present of a few 
Negroes in return for his kindness; then to invite him, with a few of 
the principal men and friars belonging to the island, to dine on board 
his ship, and secure them all in irons, until each of them should give 
a large ransom. They were accordingly invited, and very readily 
consented to go: deeming themselves honoured by his attention, all 
that were invited, would certainly have gone on board. Fortunately, 
however, for them, a Negro, who was privy to the horrible plan of 
Davis, swam on shore during the night, and gave information of the 
danger to the governor.

In present circumstances, the governor also thought it proper to 
dissemble his indignation, and to wait the event. The day arrived, and 
Davis, the better to secure his prey, and to delude his intended 
guests on board, along with his fellow nobles, (a title which Davis 
and his principal officers had assumed,) went on shore to bring the 
governor and the rest on board to dinner; and they were desired to 
walk up to the fort to take a little refreshment. An ambush was laid 
for them, and a whole volley being fired at them, every man fell 
except one, who ran back and gained the boat. Davis was wounded in the 
bowels, and, in his dying agony, fired his pistols at his pursuers.



CAPTAIN ROBERTS 
Pirate

Bartholomew Roberts was trained to a seafaring life. Among other 
voyages which he made during the time that he lawfully procured his 
maintenance, he sailed for the Guinea coast, where he was taken by the 
pirate Davis. He was at first very averse to that mode of life, and 
would certainly have deserted, had an opportunity occurred. It 
happened to him, however, as to many upon another element, that 
preferment calmed his conscience, and reconciled him to that which he 
formerly hated.

Davis having fallen in the manner related, those who had assumed the 
title of Lords, assembled to deliberate concerning the choice of a new 
commander. There were several candidates, who, by their services, had 
risen to eminence among their brethren, and each of them thought 
himself qualified to bear rule. One addressed the assembled Lords, 
saying, "that the good of the whole and the maintaining of order, 
demanded a head, but that the proper authority was deposited in the 
community at large; so that, if one should be elected who did not act 
and govern for the general good, he could be deposed, and another one 
substituted in his place."

"We are the original," said he, "of this claim; and, should a captain 
be so saucy as to exceed prescription at any time, why, down with him! 
It will be a caution, after he is dead, to his successors, of what 
fatal consequence any kind of assuming may be. However, it is my 
advice, while we are sober, to pitch upon a man of courage, and 
skilled in navigationone who, by his prudence and bravery, seems best 
able to defend this commonwealth, and ward us from the dangers and 
tempests of an unstable element, and the fatal consequences of 
anarchy; and such a one I take Roberts to bea fellow in all respects 
worthy of your esteem and favour."

This speech was applauded by all but Lord Simson, who had himself 
strong expectations of obtaining the highest command. He at last, in a 
surly tone, said he did not regard whom they chose as a commander, 
provided he was not a Papist; for he had conceived a mortal hatred to 
them, because his father had been a sufferer in Monmouth's rebellion.

Thus, though Roberts had only been a few weeks among them, yet his 
election was confirmed by the Lords and Commons. He, with the best 
face he could, accepted of the dignity, saying, "that since he had 
dipped his hands in muddy water, and must be a pirate, it was better 
being a commander than a private man." The government being settled, 
and other officers chosen in the room of those who had fallen with 
Davis, it was resolved not to leave this place without revenging his 
death. Accordingly, thirty men, under the command of one Kennedy, a 
bold and profligate fellow, landed, and, under cover of the fire of 
the ship, ascended the hill upon which the fort stood. They were no 
sooner discovered by the Portuguese, than they abandoned the fort, and 
took shelter in the town. The pirates then entered without opposition, 
set fire to the fort, and tumbled the guns into the sea.

Not satisfied with this injury, some proposed to land and set the town 
in flames. Roberts, however, reminded them of the great danger to 
which this would inevitably expose them;that there was a thick wood 
at the back of the town, where the inhabitants could hide themselves; 
and that, when their all was at stake, they would certainly make a 
bolder resistance; and that the burning or destroying a few houses 
would be a small return for their labour, and the loss that they might 
sustain. This prudent advice had the desired effect, and they 
contented themselves with lightening the French vessel, and battering 
down several houses of the town, to show their high displeasure.

Roberts sailed southward, captured a Dutch Guineaman, and, having 
emptied her of everything they thought proper, they returned her to 
the commander. Two days after, they captured an English ship, and, as 
the men joined in pirating, they emptied and burnt the ship, then 
sailed for St. Thomas. Meeting with no prize, they sailed for 
Anamaboe, and there watered and repaired. Having again put to sea, a 
vote was taken, whether they should sail for the East Indies or for 
Brazil. The latter place was voted, and they arrived there in twenty-
eight days. To show what a beneficial commerce might be carried on 
here by the West India merchants, a description of Brazil and the 
adjacent coast, written by an intelligent gentleman, may be given to 
our readers.

A DESCRIPTION OF BRAZIL, &C.

Brazil, which signifies the holy cross, was discovered for the King of 
Portugal, by Alvarez Cabral, A. D. 1501; it extends almost from the 
equinoctial to twenty-eight degrees south. The air is temperate and 
cool, in comparison to the West Indies, from stronger breezes and an 
opener country, which gives less interruption to the winds.

The northernmost part of it, stretching about one hundred and eighty 
leagues, is a fine, fertile country, and was taken from the Portuguese 
by the Dutch West India Company; but the conquerors, as is natural 
where there is little or no religion subsisting, made such heavy 
exactions on the Portuguese, and extended such cruelty to the natives, 
that prepared them both to unite in a voluntary revolt, facilitated by 
the Dutch mismanagement.

There are only three principal towns of trade on the Brazil coastSt. 
Salvadore, St. Sebastian, and Pernambuco. St. Salvadore, in the Bahia 
los todos Santos, is an archbishopric and seat of the viceroy, the 
chief port of trade for importation, whore most of the gold from the 
mines is lodged, and whence the fleets for Europe generally depart.

The seas about it abound with whale-fish, which, in the season, they 
catch in great numbers; the flesh is salted up, generally to be the 
victualling of their slave-ships, and the train reserved for 
exportation, at thirty and thirty-five millrays a pipe.

Rio Janeiro, or the town of St. Sebastian, is the southernmost of the 
Portuguese ports, and the worst provided with necessaries; but 
commodious for a settlement, because nigh the mine, and convenient to 
supervise the slaves, who, as we have been told, do usually allow 
their master a dollar per diem, and have the overplus of their work to 
themselves. The gold from hence is esteemed the best, it being of a 
copperish colour; and they have a mint to run it into coin, both here 
and at Bahiathe moidores of either having the initial letters of each 
place upon them.

Pernambuco, though mentioned last, is the second in dignitya large 
and populous town, and has its rise from the ruins of Olinda, or the 
Handsome, a city of a far more pleasant situation, six miles up the 
river, but not so commodious for traffic and commerce. Just above the 
town the river divides itself into two branches, not running directly 
into the sea, but to the southward; and, in the nook of the island 
made by that division, stands the governor's house, a square, plain 
building of Count Maurice's, with two towers, on which is only this 
date inscribed, Anno 1641. The avenues to it are very pleasant, 
through vistas of tall cocoa-nut trees.

Over each branch of the river is a bridge; that leading to the country 
is all of timber, but the other to the town, consisting of twenty-six 
or twenty-eight arches, is half of stone, and made by the Dutch, who, 
in their time, had little shops and gaming-houses on each side, for 
recreation.

The pavements, also, of the town are in some places of broad tiles, 
the remaining fragments of their conquest. The town has the outer 
branch of the river behind it, and the harbour before it; jutting into 
which latter are close quays, for the weighing and receiving of 
customage on merchandise, and for the meeting and conferring of 
merchants and traders. The houses are strong built, but homely 
latticed, like those of Lisbon, for the admission of air, without 
closets, and, what is worse, without hearths, which makes their 
cookery consist all in frying and stewing upon stoves; and that they 
do till the flesh becomes tender enough to shake it to pieces, when 
one knife is thought sufficient to serve a table of half a score.

The greatest inconvenience of Pernambuco is, that there is not one 
public-house in it; so that strangers are obliged to hire any ordinary 
one they can get, at a guinea a month; and others, who come to 
transact affairs of importance, must come recommended, if it were only 
for the sake of privacy.

The market is well stocked, beef being at five farthings per pound, a 
sheep or a goat at nine shillings, a turkey at four shillings, and 
very large fowls at two shillings a-piece. These may be procured much 
cheaper, by hiring a man to fetch them out of the country. The dearest 
in its kind is water, which, being fetched in vessels from Olinda, 
will not be put on board in the road under two crusados a pipe.

There are three monasteries, and about six churches, none of them rich 
or magnificent, unless one dedicated to St Antonio, the patron of 
their kingdom, which shines all over with exquisite pieces of paint 
and gold.

The export of Brazil, besides gold, is chiefly sugars and tobacco; the 
latter are sent off in rolls of a quintal weight, kept continually 
moistened with molasses, which, with the soil it springs from, imparts 
a strong and peculiar scent, more sensible than the snuff made from 
it, which, though under prohibition of importing to Lisbon, sells here 
at two shillings per pound, as the tobacco does at about six millrays 
a roll. The finest of their sugar sells at eight shillings per roove, 
and a small ill-tasted rum, drawn from the dregs and molasses, at two 
testunes a gallon.

Besides these, they send off great quantities of Brazil wood, and 
whale oil, with some gums and parrots; the latter are different from 
the African in colour and size; for, as they are blue and larger, 
these are green and smaller; and the females of them ever retain the 
wild note, and cannot be brought to talk.

In lieu of this produce, the Portuguese, once every year, by their 
fleet from Lisbon, import all manner of European commodities; and 
whoever is unable to lay in store, or neglect supplying himself at 
that season, buys at a very advanced rate before the return of 
another.

To transport passengers, slaves, or merchandise, from one settlement 
to another, or in fishing, they make use of bark logs, by the 
Brazilians called Jingadahs. They are made of four pieces of timber, 
the two outermost being the longest, pinned and fastened together, and 
sharpened at the ends: towards each extremity a stool is fixed, to sit 
on for paddling, or to hold by, when the agitation is more than 
ordinary; with these odd sort of engines, continually washed over by 
the water, do these people, with a little triangular sail, spritted 
about the middle of it, venture out of sight of land, and along the 
coasts for many leagues, in any sort of weather; and, if they overset 
with a squall, which is not uncommon, they swim, and presently turn it 
upright again.

The natives are of the darkest copper colour, with thin hair, of a 
square make, and muscular; but not so well-looking as the woolly 
generation. They acquiesce patiently to the Portuguese government, who 
use them much more humanely and Christian-like than the Dutch did, 
and, by that means, have extended quietness and peace, as well as 
their possessions, three or four hundred miles into the countrya 
country abounding with fine pastures and numerous herds of cattle, and 
which yields a vast increase from everything that is sown. Hence they 
bring down to us parrots, small monkeys, armadillos, and sanguins; and 
we have been assured they have, in the inland parts, a serpent of a 
vast magnitude, called siboyaable, they say, to swallow a whole 
sheep; several have seen the skin of another species full six yards 
long; and therefore we think the story not improbable.

The harbour of Pernambuco is perhaps singular: it is made of a ledge 
of rocks, half a cable's length from the main, and but little above 
the surface of the water, running at that equal distance and height 
several leagues towards Cape Augustine; a harbour running between 
them, capable of receiving ships of the greatest burden. The 
northernmost end of this wall of rock is higher than any part of the 
contiguous line; on this a little fort is built, commanding the 
passage either of boat or ship, as they come over the bar into the 
harbour. On the starboard side, or the side towards the main, after 
you have entered a little way, stands another fort, which is a 
pentagon, that would prove of small account, I imagine, against a few 
disciplined men; and yet, in these consist all their strength and 
security, either in the harbour or town. They have begun, indeed, a 
wall, since their removing from Olindo, designed to surround the 
latter; but the slow progress they make in raising it, leaves room to 
suspect it will be a long time in finishing.

The road without is used by the Portuguese, when they are nigh sailing 
for Europe, and wait for the convoy, or are bound to Bahia; and by 
strangers, only when necessity compels them: the best of it is ten 
fathom water, near three miles W. N. W. from the town; nigher in it is 
foul, from the many anchors lost there by the Portuguese ships; and 
farther out, in about fourteen fathoms, it is corally and rocky. July 
is the worst and winter season of this coast, the trade-winds being 
then very strong and dead, bringing in a prodigious and unsafe swell 
into the road, intermixed every day with squalls, rain, and a hazy 
horizon, but at other times serener skies and sunshine.

In these southern latitudes is a constellation, which, from , some 
resemblance to a Jerusalem cross, bears the name of Crosiersthe 
brightest of the hemisphere; and observations are taken by it as by 
the northern latitudes. What we mention this for, is to introduce the 
admirable phenomenon in these seas, of the Magellanic clouds, whose 
risings and settings are so regular, that, we have been assured, the 
same nocturnal observations are made by them as by the stars. These 
are two clouds, small and whitish, no larger in appearance than a 
man's hat, and are seen here in July, in 88 S. lat. about four in the 
morning: if their appearance should be said to be the reflection of 
light from some stellary bodies above them, yet the difficulty is not 
easily answered, how these, beyond others, become so durable and 
regular in their motions.

Upon this coast our rovers cruised for about nine weeks, keeping 
generally out of sight of land, but without seeing a sail; which 
discouraged them so, that they determined to leave the station, and 
steer for the West Indies; and, in order thereto, they stood in to 
make the land for the taking of their departure; by which means they 
fell in, unexpectedly, with a fleet of forty-two sail of Portuguese 
ships, off the bay of los Todos Santos, with all their lading in for 
Lisbon; several of them of good force, who lay there waiting for two 
men-of-war of seventy guns each for their convoy, however, Roberts 
thought it should go hard with him but he would make up his market 
among them; and thereupon he mixed with the fleet, and kept his men 
hid till proper resolutions could be formed: that done, they came 
close up to one of the deepest, and ordered her to send the master on 
board quietly, threatening to give them no quarter, if any resistance 
or signal of distress was made. The Portuguese, being surprised at 
these threats, and the sudden flourish of cutlasses from the pirates, 
submitted without a word, and the captain came on board. Roberts 
saluted him after a friendly manner, telling him that they were 
gentlemen of fortune, and that their business with him was only to be 
informed which was the richest ship in that fleet; and, if he directed 
them right, he should be restored to his ship without molestation, 
otherwise, he must expect instant death.

He then pointed to one of forty guns, and a hundred and fifty men; 
and, though her strength was greatly superior to Roberts, yet he made 
towards her, taking the master of the captured vessel along with him. 
Coming along side of her, Roberts ordered the prisoner to ask, "How 
Seignior Captain did?" and to invite him on board, as he had a matter 
of importance to impart to him. He was answered, "that he would wait 
upon him presently." Roberts, however, observing more than ordinary 
bustle on board, at once concluded that they were discovered, and, 
pouring a broadside into her, they immediately boarded, grappled, and 
took her. She was a very rich prize, laden with sugar, skins, and 
tobacco, with four thousand moidores of gold, besides other valuable 
articles.

In possession of so much riches, they were now solicitous to find a 
safe retreat to spend their time in mirth and wantonness. They 
determined upon a place called the Devil's Islands, upon the river 
Surinam, where they arrived in safety, and met with a kind reception 
from the governor and the inhabitants.

In this river they seized a sloop, which informed them that she had 
sailed in company with a brigantine loaded with provisions. This was 
welcome intelligence, as their provisions were nearly exhausted. 
Deeming this too important business to trust to foreign hands, 
Roberts, with forty men in the sloop, gave chase to that sail. In the 
keenness of the moment, and trusting to his usual good fortune, 
Roberts supposed that he had only to take a short sail, in order to 
bring in the vessel with her cargo; but, to his sad disappointment, he 
pursued her during eight days; and, instead of gaining, was losing 
way. In these circumstances, he came to anchor, and sent off the boat 
to give intelligence of their distress to their companions.

In their extremity of want, they took up part of the floor of the 
cabin, and patched up a sort of tray with rope-yarns, to puddle on 
shore to get a little water to preserve their lives. After their 
patience was almost exhausted, the boat returned; but, instead of 
bringing provisions, they brought the unpleasing information, that the 
lieutenant, one Kennedy, had run off with both the ships.

The misfortune and misery of Roberts were greatly aggravated from 
reflecting upon his own imprudence and want of foresight, as well as 
from the baseness of Kennedy and his crew. Impelled by the necessity 
of his situation, he now began to reflect upon what means to employ 
for future support. Under the foolish supposition, that any laws, 
oaths, or regulations, could bind those who had bid open defiance to 
all divine and human laws, he proceeded to form a code of regulations, 
to maintain order and unity in his little commonwealth.

But present necessity compelled them to action, and they, with their 
small sloop, sailed for the West Indies. They were not long before 
they captured two sloops, which supplied them with provisions, and a 
few days after a brigantine; and then proceeded to Barbados. When off 
that island they met a vessel of ten guns, richly laden, from Bristol; 
after plundering, and detaining her three days, they allowed her to 
prosecute her voyage. This vessel, however, informed the governor of 
what had befallen them, who sent a vessel of twenty guns and eighty 
men, in quest of the pirates.

That vessel was commanded by one Rogers, who the second day of his 
cruise discovered Roberts. Ignorant of any vessel being sent after 
them, they made towards each other. Roberts gave him a gun; but 
instead of striking, the other returned a broadside, with three 
huzzas. A severe engagement ensued, and Roberts, being hard put to it, 
lightened his vessel and run off.

Roberts then sailed for the island of Dominica, where he watered, and 
was supplied by the inhabitants with provisions, for which he gave 
them goods in return. Here he met with fifteen Englishmen, that had 
been left upon the island by a Frenchman, who had made a prize of 
their vessel; and they, entering into his service, proved a seasonable 
addition to his strength.

Though they did not think this a proper place for cleaning, yet as 
this was absolutely necessary, they directed their course to the 
Granada islands for that purpose. This, however, had well-nigh proved 
fatal to them; for the governor of Martinique fitted out two sloops to 
go in quest of the pirates. They sailed to the above-mentioned place, 
cleaned with unusual dispatch, and just left that place the night 
before the sloops which were in pursuit of them arrived.

They next sailed for Newfoundland, and entered the harbour of 
Trepassi, with their black colours flying, drums beating, and trumpets 
sounding. In that harbour there were no less than twenty-two ships, 
which the men abandoned upon the sight of the pirates. It is 
impossible to describe the injury which they did at this place, by 
burning or sinking the ships, destroying the plantations, and 
pillaging the houses. Power, in the hands of mean and ignorant men, 
renders them wanton, insolent, and cruel. They are literally like 
madmen, who cast firebrands, arrows, and death, and say, "Are not we 
in sport?"

Roberts saved a Bristol galley from his depredations in the harbour, 
which he fitted and manned for his own service. Upon the banks he met 
ten sail of French ships, and destroyed them all, except one of 
twenty-six guns, which he seized and carried off, and called her the 
Fortune. Then giving the Bristol galley to the Frenchman, they sailed 
in quest of new adventures, and soon took several prizes, and from 
them increased the number of their own hands. The Samuel, one of 
these, was a very rich vessel, having some respectable passengers on 
board, who were roughly used, and threatened with death, if they did 
not deliver up their money and their goods. They stripped the vessel 
of every article, either necessary for their vessel or themselves, to 
the amount of eight or nine thousand pounds. They then deliberated 
whether to sink or burn the Samuel; but in the mean time they 
discovered a sail; so they left the empty Samuel, and gave the other 
chase. At midnight they overtook her, and she proved to be the Snow 
from Bristol; and, because of his country, they used the master in a 
cruel and barbarous manner. Two days after, they took the Little York 
of Virginia, the Love of Liverpool, both of which they plundered and 
sent off. In three days they captured other three vessels, removing 
the goods out of them, sinking one, and sending off the other two.

They next sailed for the West Indies, but provisions growing short, 
they sailed to St. Christopher's, when, being denied provisions by the 
governor, they fired on the town, and burnt two ships in the roads. 
They then repaired to the island of St. Bartholomew, where the 
governor supplied them with every necessary, and caressed them in the 
kindest manner. Fatigued with indulgence, and having taken in a large 
stock of everything necessary, they unanimously voted to hasten to the 
coast of Guinea. In their way they took a Frenchman; and, as she was 
fitter for the pirate service than their own, they informed the 
captain, that, as "a fair exchange was no robbery," they would 
exchange sloops with him; accordingly, having shifted their men, they 
set sail. They, however, by a mistake, going out of the track of the 
trade-winds, were under the necessity of returning to the West Indies.

They now directed their course to Surinam, but they had not sufficient 
water for the voyage. They were soon reduced to a mouthful of water in 
the day; their numbers daily diminished by thirst and famine, and the 
few who survived were reduced to the greatest weakness. They at last 
had not one drop of water or any other liquid, when, to their 
inexpressible joy, they anchored in seven fathoms of water. This 
tended to revive decayed nature, and to inspire them with new vigour, 
though as yet they had received no relief. In the morning they 
discovered land, but at such a distance that their hopes were greatly 
damped. The boat was, however, sent off, and at night returned with 
plenty of that salubrious and necessary element. But this remarkable 
deliverance produced no reformation in the manners of those unfeeling 
and obdurate men.

They steered their course from that place to Barbados, and in their 
way met with a vessel which supplied them with all necessaries. Not 
long after, they captured a brigantine, the mate of which joined their 
association. Having from these two obtained a large supply, they 
changed their course and watered at Tobago. Informed that there were 
two vessels sent in pursuit of them, they went to return their 
compliments to the governor of Martinique for this kindness.

It is the custom of the Dutch interlopers, when they approach this 
island to trade with the inhabitants, to hoist their jacks. Roberts 
knew the signal, and did so likewise. They, supposing that a good 
market was near, strove who could first reached Roberts. Determined to 
do them all possible mischief, he destroyed them one by one, as they 
came into his power. He only reserved one ship to send the men on 
shore, and burnt the remainder, to the number of twenty.

Roberts and his crew were so fortunate as to capture several vessels, 
and to render their liquor so plenty, that it was esteemed a crime not 
to be continually drunk. One man, remarkable, for his sobriety, along 
with other two, took an opportunity to set off, without taking a 
formal leave of their friends. But a dispatch being sent after them, 
they were brought back, and in a formal manner tried and sentenced; 
but one of them was saved by the humorous interference of one of the 
judges, whose speech was truly worthy of a pirate; while the other two 
suffered the punishment of death.

When necessity again compelled them, they renewed their cruising; and, 
dissatisfied with capturing vessels which only afforded them a 
temporary supply, they directed their course to the Guinea coast, to 
forage for gold. Intoxication rendered them unruly, and the brigantine 
at last embraced the cover of night to abandon the commodore. 
Unconcerned at the loss of his companion, Roberts pursued his voyage. 
He fell in with two French ships, the one of ten guns and sixty-five 
men, and the other of sixteen guns and seventy-five men. These 
dastards no sooner beheld the black flag than they surrendered. With 
these they went into Sierra Leone, constituting one of them a consort, 
by the name of the Ranger, and the other a store-ship. That port being 
frequented by the greater part of the traders to that quarter, they 
remained here six weeks, enjoying themselves in all the splendour and 
luxury of a piratical life.

After this they renewed their voyage; and, having captured a vessel, 
the greater part of the men united their fortunes with the pirates. On 
board of one of the ships was a clergyman, whom some of them proposed 
taking along with them, for no other reason than that they had not a 
chaplain on board. They endeavoured to gain his consent, and assured 
him that he should want for nothing, and his only work would be, to 
make punch, and say prayers. But, depraved as these men were, they did 
not choose to constrain him to go. They displayed their civility 
farther, by permitting him to carry along with him whatever he called 
his own. After several cruises, they now went into a convenient 
harbour at Old Calabar, where they cleaned, refitted, divided their 
booty, and for a considerable time caroused, to banish care and sober 
reflection.

According to their usual custom, the time of festivity and mirth was 
prolonged until the want of means recalled them to reason and 
exertion. Leaving this port, they cruised from place to place with 
varied success; but in all their captures, either burning, sinking, or 
devoting their prizes to their own use, according to the whim of the 
moment. The Swallow and another man-of-war being sent out expressly to 
pursue and take Roberts and his fleet, he had frequent and certain 
intelligence of their destination; but having so often escaped their 
vigilance, he became rather too secure and fearless. It happened, 
however, that while he lay off Cape Lopez, the Swallow had information 
of his being in that place, and made towards them. Upon the appearance 
of a sail, one of Roberts' ships was sent to chase and take her. The 
pilot of the Swallow seeing her coming, manoeuvred his vessel so well, 
that though he fled at her approach, in order to draw her out of the 
reach of her associates, yet he at his own time allowed her to 
overtake the man-of-war.

Upon her coming up to the Swallow, the pirate hoisted the black flag, 
and fired upon her; but-how greatly were her crew astonished, when 
they saw that they had to contend with a man-of-war; and, seeing that 
all resistance was vain, they cried out for quarter, which was 
granted, and they were made prisoners.

Convinced that Roberts would tarry in his station, in the hope of his 
ship returning with the prize after which she had been sent, they made 
towards him. As she approached, it was discovered who was about to pay 
them an unwelcome visit. Roberts inquired at one of his men, who had 
once sailed on board of her, how she sailed, in order to ascertain the 
best way of flying from her, should it be necessary. He then dressed 
himself in the most elegant manner, with his pistols suspended over 
his shoulders, and a gold chain about his neck. The Swallow attacked 
him with determined bravery; and he resisting with equal courage, a 
desperate and bloody engagement ensued. Roberts at last fell, and, by 
his own directions, he was immediately thrown over-board. The officers 
and men being deprived of their commander, lost courage, and in a 
short time cried for quarter.

This extraordinary man, and daring pirate, was tall, of a dark 
complexion, about forty years of age, and born in Pembrokeshire. His 
parents were honest and respectable, and his natural activity, 
courage, and invention, were superior to his education. At a very 
early period, he, in drinking, would imprecate vengeance upon "the 
head of him who ever lived to wear an halter." He went willingly into 
the pirate service, and served three years as a second man. It was not 
for want of employment, but from a roving, wild, and boisterous turn 
of mind. It was his usual declaration, that, "In an honest service, 
there is commonly low wages and hard labour; in this plenty, satiety, 
pleasure, and ease, liberty and power; and who would not balance 
creditor on this side, when all the hazard that is run for it at 
worst, is only a sour look or two at choking? Noa merry life and a 
short one, shall be my motto!" But it was one favourable trait in his 
character, that he never forced any man into the pirate service.

The prisoners were strictly guarded while on board, and, being 
conveyed to Cape Corso Castle, they underwent a long and solemn trial. 
The generality of them remained daring and impenitent for some time; 
but when they found themselves confined within a castle, and their 
fate drawing near, they changed their course, and became serious, 
penitent, and fervent in their devotions. Though the judges found no 
small difficulty in explaining the law, and different acts of 
parliament, yet the facts were so numerous and flagrant, that were 
proved against them, that there was no difficulty of bringing in a 
verdict of guilty.



CAPTAIN KENNEDY. 
Pirate

IT was mentioned in the life of Captain Roberts, that, embracing the 
opportunity of his absence, the crew of the brigantine run off and 
made one Kennedy their captain. This originated from the following 
cause. Captain Roberts was insulted by one of his crew when drunk, 
and, in the violence of passion, he killed the insulter upon the spot. 
Many in the ship were displeased, but particularly one Jones, the 
comrade of the man who was slain. When this accident happened, Jones 
was on land for water, and, upon his return, being informed of what 
had been done, he being a bold active fellow, cursed Roberts, saying, 
that he ought to have been so served himself. Roberts being present, 
attacked Jones with his sword, and wounded him. Irritated beyond 
measure by the former and the present injury, Jones, though wounded, 
seized the captain, threw him over a gun, and gave him a severe 
drubbing. The whole ship was in an instant thrown into violent 
commotion, some taking part with the captain, and some applauding the 
spirit and bravery of Jones. "If the one had received a dry 
chastisement, the other had some of his blood shed. Nor was the 
provocation upon the one side equal to that upon the other. And, with 
regard to the captain's rank, if he acted inconsistently with his 
dignity and power, he was not to be exempted from punishment" Such 
were the sentiments that were agitated among the crew during the 
tumult. The quarter-master, employing his authority and influence, 
calmed the tumult, and the majority were of opinion, that the majesty 
of the vessel was insulted in the person of their captain, and that no 
private member was at liberty to resent any injury received from him, 
in the manner which Jones had done. The majority, therefore, sentenced 
Jones to receive two lashes from every man in the ship, as soon as his 
wound should be healed.

The severity of this sentence did not convince Jones of its equity, 
and a deep-rooted enmity and a resolution of revenge ensued. To 
accomplish his design, Jones, with a few who were of his sentiments, 
confederated with Captain Anstis, of the brigantine, whom they knew to 
be also disaffected to Roberts, from the haughty manner in which he 
behaved. Nor was it merely by his domineering conduct that he 
irritated Anstis; he was likewise accustomed to leave him nothing but 
the refuse of the plunder, when any prize was taken, though his 
activity and bravery had, perhaps, gained the booty. In short, the 
disaffection became so general, that Lieutenant Kennedy headed the 
party, and eloped with the privateer and the prize, in the absence of 
Roberts. Kennedy was chosen captain, and a division of sentiments 
obtained, whether they should retire from that mode of life, or pursue 
their depredations. But, as there was no pardon then issued for 
pirates, they were constrained to retain their present character.

The first act of the new government was to grant liberty to the 
Portuguese prize. The master was, in their language, a very honest 
fellow, who, upon his being taken, accosted them, saying, that they 
were welcome to his ship and cargo, and expressed his wish that the 
vessel had been larger, and the lading richer, for their sakes. In 
addition to these good wishes, he had given them intelligence of the 
brigantine, after which Roberts had now gone; and though she should 
never become a prize, yet it had given them an opportunity to move 
away, without being saluted by the well-known voice of Captain 
Roberts. In return for all these favours, he received his ship and 
men, with the vessel half laden; and, having expressed his gratitude 
in the most obliging terms, he departed.

In the Rover Captain Kennedy sailed to Barbados, and near that island 
met with a very peaceable prize, commanded by Captain Knot, a Quaker. 
There was neither sword, pistol, nor cutlass on board. After taking 
what he found most necessary, he allowed the placid Quaker to meditate 
his way home. Meanwhile eight of the pirates embraced this opportunity 
to leave the Rover, and were by him carried to Virginia. During their 
voyage, they made him handsome presents, and also several presents to 
the sailors, and lived in a merry and jovial manner all the way, Knot 
not daring to interrupt them, lest they should run off with him and 
his vessel.

When they arrived off the island, four of the pirates went up the bay 
towards Maryland, and lived among the planters undiscovered. Captain 
Knot, though he could not, according to his principles, fight, yet he 
could deceive and inform. Accordingly, leaving four of the pirates on 
board, he went to the governor, and informed him of what passengers he 
had on board. They were instantly seized, and, search being made after 
the other four, they also were found carousing and rambling about in 
the country. Two Portuguese Jews, whom they had captured upon the 
coast of Brazil, and had brought along with them, were the principal 
evidences against them. The honest Quaker, at the same time, 
surrendered to them everything which belonged to them, and gave them 
presents, in place of what they had given him and his men.

Not long after, Kennedy, cruising upon the coast of Jamaica, met with 
a sloop bound from Boston, with bread and flour. Upon this occasion, 
all those who were disposed to disperse the company, went on board, 
and, among the rest. Captain Kennedy, who, having been educated as a 
pick-pocket and a house-breaker, before he entered into the pirate 
service, his companions now began to entertain such a mean conception 
of him, that they were about to throw him overboard, saying, that he 
would inform upon them all, the moment he arrived in England. By 
solemn oaths and protestations, he, however, assuaged their rage, and 
they allowed him to accompany them.

It was their misfortune to have only one man on board who knew 
anything of navigation, and even he proved to be a novice. Kennedy was 
chosen captain on account of his courage and bravery, but he was so 
ignorant, that he could neither read nor write. The pilot was desired 
to steer towards Ireland, but, instead of this, he run to the north 
coast of Scotland; and, having been tossed about for several days, 
they thrust the ship into a creek, and all went on shore, leaving her 
a prize to any who chose to take her.

They passed themselves for shipwrecked mariners, and refreshed 
themselves at the first village; and they might have passed without 
detection, had it not been for their unruly and riotous manner of 
living. Kennedy and another man left them, and shipped for Ireland, 
where they arrived in safety. A few more separated, and went to 
London.

But the body of the gang continued together, and, by drinking, 
rioting, and debauchery, alarmed the country wherever they came. In 
some places, they treated the whole village, throwing away their money 
like stones or sand. Continuing their extravagant course, about 
eighteen of them were apprehended in the vicinity of Edinburgh, and, 
upon suspicion, thrown into prison. Two became king's evidence, and 
the rest were tried, condemned, and executed.

Kennedy having wasted all his money, left Ireland, and kept an 
infamous house at Deptford-road. It was also supposed that he, 
occasionally, exacted contributions upon the highway. He was exposed 
to the same misfortune with all those who associate with persons of 
abandoned lives and dishonourable principles. One of the females in 
his house informed upon him as a robber; nor was she disposed to do 
her work partially, but, finding a man whom Kennedy had robbed, when a 
pirate, she took him to visit the latter in Bridewell, where he had 
been thrown for the robbery. He identified Kennedy, who was committed 
to Marshalsea prison.

Kennedy, in order to save his life, turned king's evidence; but, 
though he informed upon eight or ten of his companions, only one could 
be found, who was a sober man, and forced into the service, and 
therefore pardoned. Kennedy was not so fortunate; but inasmuch as he 
had been an old and a notorious offender, he was condemned and 
executed.

Those who remained in the Rover soon abandoned her upon the coast of 
the West Indies, and she was found strolling at sea, by a sloop near 
St. Christopher's island. The greater part of the crew met the fate 
they deserved.



STEPHEN BUNCE 
A Most Brazen and Ingenious Thief

IN the plain but strong phrase, this man was born a thief.

Scarcely could his hand carry away the property of others, when he 
engaged in this nefarious trade. When a child, he was frequently 
amusing himself with the children of a charcoal-man, who lived in the 
neighbourhood, and would even then fill his pockets with the charcoal, 
and sell them to a woman that kept an apple-stall, for codlings. One 
day he wished to try his ingenuity upon the good woman, and requested 
to have some codlings beforehand, promising to pay them with his next 
charcoal. But, though she could purchase from him that which she knew 
he had stolen, yet she was not disposed to give him any credit.

Stephen was highly enraged that his fidelity should be called in 
question by the old woman, and he determined upon revenge. So, 
stealing a larger quantity of charcoal than usual, he filled the empty 
parts with powder, and sealed them with black wax. The old woman 
kindled a fire with them, and, being a very cold, frosty night, she 
sat down before the fire, in the usual manner, to warm her starving 
body. But, scarcely had the heat began to operate, when the powder 
catching fire, off flies the kettle from the grate, the codlings and 
the water flew about the woman's ears, and, in the midst of fire and 
smoke, she cried out in the most piteous manner, which brought a great 
mob about her, to assist her in the hour of misfortune and distress. 
Fortunately, however, the chief injury that the old woman received, 
was a hole burnt in her smock, a scalding to her skin, and the trouble 
of picking up her codlings.

But Stephen was not long to remain in correspondence with apple-wives 
and such low gentry. Arrived at the years of a stripling, he went into 
a coffee-house, and called for a dish of tea. Meanwhile, rustling 
among the newspapers, he picked up the lid of a silver box, and, 
paying his tea, went and instantly got his own initials engraven upon 
it. Then, with the greatest assurance, came back, saying, "Gentlemen, 
have not I left the bottom of my tobacco-box." So, rummaging among the 
papers, he found it, exclaiming, as he put the lid on, "Oh, here it 
is!" Upon this, the owner claimed his property, but Stephen, 
impudently showing his cipher upon it, claimed and retained it as his 
property. This filled the company with no small consternation and 
astonishment, at what must have become of the gentleman's box.

At one time Bunce was benighted at Branyard, in Hertfordshire, and, 
being destitute of money, he was at a considerable loss. But a fertile 
invention is a necessary qualification in a deceiver, and Stephen's 
was acquiring considerable strength. He called at the parson's door, 
and requested the maid to tell her master that a stranger wished to 
have the honour of speaking with him. When the clergyman made his 
appearance, Stephen, in an eloquent and affecting tone, informed him, 
that he was a poor student from Oxford, going home to his friends, 
and, as he was benighted, he entreated that he would afford him the 
friendly aid of his roof for one night. The generous-hearted parson, 
being pleased with his appearance, and pitying his distress, kindly 
received him, and entertained him according to his ability.

When Stephen was taking his leave for the night, he, with no small 
degree of modesty and respect, requested that he might be permitted to 
give the parson a sermon in the morning, the next day being Sunday. 
As, in general, no clergyman has any great objections to a day of 
rest, the parson willingly accepted of his offered services. The 
morning came, and, the hour of divine service arrived, the young 
student was equipped in the parson's gown and cassock; and, as it was 
about a mile to the church, he was mounted on the parson's horse, 
while the latter, with his wife and family, went a nearer path through 
the fields. When his reverence came to the church, everyone was 
scraping and bowing, and inquiring why he was without his canonical 
robes on the day of sacred duty. He soon relieved their anxiety, by 
informing them that a young gentleman of the University of Oxford 
would be there presently, and would preach for him that day. They 
waited for some time, then commenced divine service; the prayers were 
now ended, and the last psalm sung, but no preacher appeared. In 
short, not to detain our readers with a long narrative, they waited 
until noon; the congregation went home without a sermon, and the 
parson without his robes and his horse, while Bunce was by this time 
far advanced on his journey, employing the horse to carry a thief 
instead of a parson.

Upon another day, as Stephen was going about seeking whom he might 
render lighter on their journey, he saw a gentleman, well mounted upon 
a gelding, and, going into the road along where he was to ride, he 
laid himself all along the ground, with his ear to it. When the 
gentleman came up to him, he asked the reason of such unusual conduct. 
Stephen held up his hand to him, signifying his desire that he should 
be silent; but the gentleman being of a hasty temper, cried, "What a 
pox are you listening to?" Upon this Stephen sat up, saying, "Oh! dear 
sir, I have often heard great talk of the fairies, but I could never 
have the faith to believe that there was ever any such thing in 
nature, till now, in this very place, I hear such a ravishing and 
melodious harmony of all kinds of music, that it is enough to charm me 
to sit here, if possible, to all eternity." Curiosity, that active 
principle in the human mind, inclined the gentleman to alight from his 
horse to hear the enchanting music. Having reached the ground, he gave 
his gelding to Stephen, to hold during his interview with the fairies. 
Then, applying his ear to the ground, he said, "I can hear nothing." 
Bunco desired him to turn the other ear. This being done, and his face 
turned away from him, Bunce leaped into his saddle, and rode off with 
his gelding at full speed, until he came to Rumford. Supposing that 
the owner would have some particular inn where he put up his horse, 
and, therefore, that the horse would know that place, he went after 
the horse at a small distance.

He no sooner appeared, than the hostler, who was standing at the door, 
exclaimed, "Master! master! here's Mr. Bartlet's horse come without 
him." Thus Stephen having discovered the name of the owner of the 
gelding, said to the innkeeper, "Mr. Bartlet being engaged with some 
gentlemen at play, in Ingerstone, he requests you to send him fifteen 
guineas, and to keep his horse in pledge, in the meantime, until he 
comes himself, in the evening." "Ay, ay," replied the innkeeper, "an 
hundred guineas if he stood in need of them." So Bunce, having 
received the fifteen guineas, prosecuted his journey to London. In a 
few hours, Mr. Bartlet came puffing and blowing, and covered with 
sweat and dust. The innkeeper accosted him, saying, "Oh, dear sir, 
what need you have sent your gelding, and so put yourself to the 
trouble of coming, in this sultry weather, on foot, for the small 
matter of fifteen guineas, when you might have commanded ten times as 
much without a pledge." Quoth the gentleman, "Hath the fellow, then, 
brought my gelding hither? A villain! he was pretty honest in that, 
but I find the rogue has made me pay fifteen guineas for hearing one 
tune of the fairies."

Bunce was an industrious man, and frequented the billiard-tables, the 
cock-pits, and every place where he thought that a penny would come in 
his way. Though his funds often afforded him the means of reformation, 
he naturally hated virtue and honesty; therefore, with redoubled 
keenness, pursued his depredations. Once, upon foot, he met with a 
butcher, between Paddington and London, who, being a strong lusty 
fellow, was not disposed to give his contribution to Bunce, without 
some blows. The cudgelling commenced, and though the butcher acted his 
part well, yet Bunce was victorious. The conqueror, then, on searching 
for his spoil, found the immense sum of fourpence in his pockets. "Is 
this all you have got?" "And too much to lose," said the butcher. 
Bunce then exclaimed, "You villain I if you'd fight at this rate but 
for a groat, what a plague would you have done if you'd had more 
money?"

This was rather an unfortunate adventure, to have lost so much time, 
and given so many blows for so little; but, when returning home, he 
observed a goldsmith, who was a far richer prize than a butcher, 
telling a large sum of money in his shop. His eyes instantly sparkled, 
and his invention awoke. He went into an old shop in the vicinity, and 
purchased one farthing's worth of salt; then, hastening into the 
goldsmith's shop, threw the whole in his eyes; so that while he was 
rubbing his peepers, and stamping with rage, Bunce went off with about 
fifty poundsvery good interest for a farthing's worth of salt.

It is an old proverb, "light won, light wared." The same evening 
having gone to recreate himself with certain females, he was robbed of 
twenty pounds, when, in the most furious manner, though to no purpose, 
he vented his imprecations against all the sexasserting, "that every 
woman was a crocodile at ten, a prostitute at fifteen, a fury at 
thirty, and a witch at fourscore."

Under the influence of vexatious disappointment, Bunce soon spent the 
remainder of his fifty pounds, and stern necessity again impelled him 
to action. Along with one of his trusty companions, he went into a 
woollen-draper's shop, just as the good man was about to shut up; and, 
while he was cheapening a remnant of cloth, his companion stole the 
key of the shop from its usual place of residence. They both went off 
without making a purchase. Favoured by the darkness of the night, they 
returned, and, without interruption or difficulty, abstracted from the 
shop, cloth to the amount of eighty pounds.

Bunce having been afterwards, by an order of the court, sent a soldier 
into Spain, while there, he and his comrade were one day in great want 
of victuals; and, having loitered all day about the market-place of 
Barcelona, without finding anything to remove their hunger, they 
discovered in the evening a countryman returning home on an ass. They 
followed him, and, having to ascend a steep hill, he alighted, and led 
the ass. Bunce, with his companion, slipped quietly forward, and, 
dexterously removing the bridle from the ass's head to his own, his 
comrade went off with the ass, and Bunce trudged after the man upon 
all fours. Arrived at the top of the hill he looked around, and, to 
his great consternation and amazement, he saw his ass transformed into 
a man.

Stephen, observing his surprise, said, "Dear master, don't be troubled 
at this strange alteration that you see in your beast; for, indeed, I 
was no ass, as you supposed me, but a man, real flesh and blood as you 
yourself are; but, you must know, that it being my misfortune to 
commit a sin against the Virgin Mary, she resented it so heinously, 
that she transformed me into the likeness of an ass, for seven years; 
and now, the time being expired, I resume my proper shape again, and I 
am at my own disposal. However, sir, I return you many thanks for your 
goodness towards me; for, since I have been in your custody, you put 
me to no more labour than what I, you, or any other ass, might be able 
to bear."

The countryman was greatly surprised at the relation, but was so far 
satisfied on receiving the grateful thanks of his former ass, for the 
kind treatment he had given him during the period of his degradation. 
Stephen returned to his comrade, who had made the ass undergo another 
transmigration into money, so that these two hungry sharks hastened to 
set their teeth at work, lest they should lose the power of action by 
long disuse. Meanwhile, the countryman returned to town to purchase 
another ass to carry him home. But, to his astonishment, the first 
thing he met with was his own individual ass. Stepping up to the 
animal, he said, "Oh, I see that you have committed another sin 
against the Virgin Mary! but I shall take care how I buy you again."

Bunce was married to a victualler's daughter in Plymouth, and, for 
some time, lived with her with tolerable regularity, making the table 
roar, and the bowl to foam, and entertaining all the merry beaux in 
the town, until one of the tars offended Bunce with his politeness. 
Upon this he left his young wife, and plunged into all those scenes of 
debauchery which are the usual attendants of the acquisition of money 
by unlawful means. In the progress of time, his manners became so 
abandonedly profligate, and his conversation so lascivious, that he 
was the abhorrence of all decent persons, and a disgrace to human 
nature. He was at last detected in his wickedness, and suffered at 
Tyburn along with Dick Low and Jack Hall.



NICHOLAS WELLS 
Burglar, Highwayman and Hired Assassin

THIS man was a native of Kent, and, in the character of a travelling 
merchant, assisted his grandmother in supporting two sisters after his 
parents were dead. Leaving that employment, he learned the trade of a 
butcher. It was also his good fortune to marry a woman with an hundred 
and twenty pounds of portion. This might have proved a competent stock 
for a butcher, and he might have made a respectable figure among his 
honest neighbours. But Wells knew not how to husband so much money. 
His wife and he were pretty comfortable until the money was totally 
spent, which was not indeed long. Then he showed, by his conduct, that 
he had courted her for money, and not for love. He abandoned her 
company for no honourable exchange.

Unable to pursue his own business, when all his stock was exhausted, 
he was constrained to drive a cart to a woodmonger. In this character, 
one day he went to deliver a cart of faggots to a gentleman, and, 
finding means to get into his parlour, he stole a gold watch, several 
diamonds, and two hundred and fifty guineas. With this sum in his 
possession, he forgot to return to his master.

His next adventure was with the handsome Fielding, riding over Putney 
Heath. Wells knocked him off his gelding, tied his hands and his feet, 
and, robbing him of twenty guineas, burst forth into the following 
exclamation: "O gold almighty, thou art good for the heart-sick at 
night, sore eyes in the morning, and for wind in the stomach at noon; 
indeed, thou art a never-failing remedy for any distemper, at any 
time, in all cases, and for all constitutions."

Meanwhile, Fielding recovering his senses, quoth he, "Sirrah, dost 
thou know on whom thou hast committed this insolence?" "Not I, nor do 
I care, for it is better you cry than I starve!" "I'm General 
Fielding, who'll make you dearly suffer for this, if ever you come 
into my clutches." "Art thou beau Fielding? I've heard thy fame and 
shame long ago: I think thou art one of those amorous coxcombs who 
never go without verses in praise of a mistress, and write elegies 
upon the mighty misfortune of losing your buttons. Thou art one of 
those whining puppies that waste day and night with her that you 
admire, taking up her gloves, and robbing her of a handkerchief, which 
you'll pretend to keep for her sake. In fine, let me tell you, thou 
art translated out of man into a whimsy." Thus, leaving beau Fielding, 
he went home to his landlord and landlady, who were overjoyed at 
seeing his booty. Nor was any member of this fraternity of villainy 
without a part of the spoils of Wells.

Though our adventurer often risked his neck, yet it is said he was 
destitute of real courage. He would often boast that he was ready to 
enter the lists with those who were noted for their cowardice, when he 
was certain that they would not fight any man. Like every other 
coward, he was blood-thirsty.

One time a woman, of the name of Elizabeth Herman, was condemned for 
picking the pocket of Samuel Wigfield; and such was her implacable 
malice, that she said she could not die satisfied unless she had the 
blood of her prosecutor before her death. Communicating her desire of 
revenge to Wells, he agreed with her to murder him for three guineas. 
He accordingly went to his shop, under pretence of purchasing a lock, 
and, watching his opportunity, when Mr. Wigfield was going home about 
twelve, he stabbed him through the heart, and the unfortunate man 
instantly fell.

He was at last apprehended for robbing a butcher of thirty guineas, a 
watch, and some money. After his sentence, he confessed the fore-
mentioned murder. He was executed along with one Noble, an attorney, 
for barbarously murdering one John Sayer, Esq.



WILLIAM HALLOWAY 
Highwayman

THIS man was born at Newcastle-upon-Tyne, and bred up to husbandry. He 
was, however, soon wearied of that laborious employment, and went to 
London to gather gold upon the streets and highways.

He commenced with caution, and ventured only upon petty depredations. 
In the character of a scourer, with an apron on, he went up stairs 
into a gentleman's house, and, seeing three or four footmen's 
liveries, he brought them off under his arm. As he was going out, the 
coachman, standing at the door with his coach, asked, "Whither he was 
going with these clothes and waistcoats?" Quoth Halloway, "The 
parliament being to sit within this week, and your master being willng 
his men's liveries should look somewhat fresh and decent, the steward 
has ordered me to scour them against then." "Here, here, then," said 
he, "take my cloak too, and scour it well." Halloway had no objection 
to take his cloak also, but he neglected to return either with it or 
the other clothes. The coachman suffered for his simplictity, the very 
boys crying after him wherever he went, "Here, here, take my cloak, 
too!"

Upon another day, when there was a great throng of coaches in the 
street, William went up to the coach of a gentleman, pretending that 
he had something very particular to say to him, and, while the 
gentleman was leaning over the door, one of his comrades stole one of 
the couch seats at the other door. When the gentleman had done 
conversing with William, and, missing his couch, he looked out at the 
other door after the thief, and, in the meantime, William made sure of 
the other couch, and went off undiscovered. The gentleman, then, in a 
great surprise, called to his coachman, "Tom, hast thou got the horses 
there?" "Yes, sir," quoth Tom. "Ay, but are you sure you have them?" 
"Why, yes, sir, I am sure I have them, for their reins are now in mine 
hand." "Well, be sure and keep them there, for I have lost the seats 
out of the coach, and, if you have not a special care, you will lose 
my horses too."

Not long after this adventure, whilst a Mr. Innes, who kept a punch-
house, was taking an airing in his calash, William perceived that the 
driver was fast asleep, and, stepping forward, robbed him of his watch 
and two guineas. Not satisfied with this, he tied his legs together, 
and, pulling the pins out of the axle-trees, he waited behind a hedge 
until he saw what would come to pass. In a short time off go the 
wheels, and calash and driver embraced the street.

Becoming more hardened in villainy, William resolved to commence 
highwayman in form. Accordingly, he purchased a horse, and, meeting 
with a farmer, asked him the time of the day. "About twelve," said the 
farmer. "Why, then, it may be high time to ask one favour of you." 
"What's that?" "Why, truly, understanding that you received ten pounds 
at the inn from whence you now came, necessity obliges me to borrow 
this of you; and, if you are not willing to lend it me by fair means, 
I'll take it by foul means." The farmer immediately drew his hanger, 
but this proved no defence against pistols; therefore, he was 
constrained to surrender.

At another time he overtook a gentleman upon the road, who informed 
him that he was well-nigh robbed in coming along, and advised William, 
if he had any money about him, to be very careful where he lodged it. 
He replied, that he had but little, but, to take care of it, he would 
put it in his mouth. The gentleman never suspecting into what company 
he had been involved, replied, "that he had been getting his rent from 
his tenants, and that he had a considerable sum, which he had secured 
in the folds of his stockings." When they came to a convenient place, 
Halloway desired him to "stand and deliver!" Unable to resist such a 
demand, the gentleman gave him a purse with eighty guineas.

Halloway, continuing his depredations, was at length apprehended, 
tried, and condemned, but he obtained a reprieve during his Majesty's 
pleasure. Meanwhile, he broke the prison, and, being one day 
intoxicated, he had the impudence to go to the session of the Old 
Bailey, when the judges were sitting, and some of the turnkeys, 
offering to apprehend him for breaking the jail, he shot one of them 
dead upon the spot. He was seized, along with a woman who was found 
accessory to the murder. They were both executed, and Halloway was 
hung in chains.

He, in the most solemn manner, declared that he never had any enmity 
towards the person he murdered, and that it was merely in consequence 
of his being intoxicated: thus adding one to the many fatal effects of 
giving way to the ruinous habit of drinking, and thus inflaming the 
passions to the commission of the most disgraceful crimes, from which 
the mind would shrink in the moment of sobriety and reflection.



 AVERY. 
Bricklayer and Highwayman

THIS man was a native of Oxfordshire, and by his parents bound an 
apprentice to a bricklayer in London. He served his time both actively 
and faithfully, and even carried on business for several years. Nor 
was any one suspicious that he occasionally took a walk or a ride upon 
the highway.

One day, being out riding in search of booty, he, after being pretty 
successful, went by several bye-ways, until he came to a gate where 
several men were standing. It occurred to him, that, if he was to ride 
back in haste it would create suspicion; therefore, he went forward 
and requested leave to pass. One who had the key said, that, if he 
would go and fetch a colt that was feeding in the park, he would 
permit him to pass. He did so, and the gate was opened.

When walking on the road together, he said to the man who owned the 
colt, "What must I have for catching the colt for you?" "Have! O dear, 
sir, what can you expect for such a matter? Why, I think that was a 
kindness to let you through the gate, or else you must have rode a 
great way about." Avery swore, in a most terrible manner, that he 
would have something for his trouble. The countryman, seeing him in a 
rage, promised him a pot of ale. This would not satisfy, and, pulling 
out his pistols, swore that he would not undergo all that trouble for 
nothing, and that, if they did not all presently deliver up their 
money, he would instantly shoot every one of them. The plain, unarmed 
men pulled out their purses, and gave him all they had in their 
possession, and he rode off in triumph, exulting that he himself had 
robbed half-a-dozen of men. Among his companions he frequently boasted 
of this action; so that one of them, when he was going up Holborn in 
the cart, said, "So ho! friend Avery, what! are you going to fetch 
another colt?" Avery was then too much engaged to make him any reply.

Upon another day, riding up and down, like the ravens in quest of 
food, he met an honest tradesman. They rode together for some time, 
when Avery asked him what trade he followed. The man replied, that he 
was a fishmonger; and retorted, by saying, "And what occupation are 
you?" "Why, I am a limb of St. Peter, too." "What! are you a 
fishmonger?" "Ay, I am something towards it, for every finger I have 
an hook." "Indeed, I don't understand your meaning, sir." Avery, 
pulling out his pistols, coolly observed, "My meaning may soon be 
comprehended, for there's not a finger upon my hand but will catch 
gold or silver without any bait at all." So, robbing the unsuspecting 
man, and cutting the girth and bridle of his horse, he rode off for 
London.

The return of want made him return to his former employment. Meeting 
an exciseman whom he knew, but to whom Avery was unknown, because he 
was masked, at a convenient place he commanded him to deliver, or he 
was a dead man! "Here, take what I have, for if there is a devil, 
certainly thou art one." "It may be so," replied Avery, "but yet, as 
much a devil as I am, I see an exciseman is not such a good bait as 
people say, to catch him." "No, he is not," replied the other; "the 
hangman is the only bait to catch such devils as you."

In a short time he was apprehended, along with the Waterman, who, 
through interest, was reprieved. Encouraged by his companion's 
success, he also made every effort, by frequent petitions, but to no 
effect.



WILLIAM GETTINGS 
Highwayman, executed 25th September 1713.

WILLIAM'S father was a grazier, in Herefordshire, and he lived with 
him until he was sixteen years old, and then came up to London. 
Sometimes in the capacity of a footman, and sometimes in that of a 
butler, he spent five years in a very irreproachable manner. 
Unfortunately, however, he became acquainted with evil company, and 
soon became corrupted both in principles and in practice.

He began his course under the name of William Smith, and traded in the 
smaller matter of pilfering. In the dress of a porter, he, one 
evening, went into the house of a doctor of medicine, took down a rich 
bed, and packed it up.

In carrying it off, he fell down stairs, and had almost broke his 
neck. The noise alarming the old doctor and his son, they came running 
to see what was the matter; whereupon Gettings, puffing and blowing, 
as if he was quite out of breath, perceiving them nearer than they 
should be, said to the doctor, "Is not your name so and so?" "Yes," 
replied the doctor, "and what then?" "Why, then, sir," said William 
Gettings, "there's one Mr. Hugh Hen and Penhenribus has ordered me to 
bring these goods hither, which have almost broke my back, and fetch 
them away to a new lodging, which he has taken some way hereabouts." 
"Mr. Hugh Hen and Penhenribus," replied the doctor again, pray who's 
he? for, to the best of my knowledge, I don't know any such 
gentleman." "I can't tell for that," said Gettings, "but, indeed, the 
gentleman knows you, and ordered me to leave the goods here." "I don't 
care," said the doctor, "how well he knows me: I tell you I'll not 
take the people's goods, unless they were here themselves; therefore, 
I say, carry them away!" "Nay, pray, sir," said Gettings, "let me 
leave the goods here, for I am quite weary already, in bringing them 
hither." "I tell you," replied the doctor, "there shall none be left 
here; therefore, take them away, or I'll throw them into the street!" 
""Well, well," said Gettings, "I'll take the goods away, then; but, 
I'm sure the gentleman will be very angry, because he ordered me to 
leave them here." "I don't care," replied the doctor, "for his anger, 
nor yours neither! I tell you I'll take no charge of other people's 
goods, unless they were here themselves to put them into my custody." 
"Very well, sir," said Gettings, "since I must carry them away, I beg 
the favour of you and the gentleman there to lift them on my back." 
"Ay, ay, with all my heart," replied the doctor; "come, son, and lend 
a hand to hit them on the fellow's back."

Scarcely was William gone, when the doctor's wife, coming home from 
the market, and going into the room, saw the bed taken down, and came 
running, in a great passion, to her husband, exclaiming, "Why, truly, 
this is a most strange business, that I can never stir out of doors 
but you must be making some whimsical alteration or other in the 
house!" "What's the matter," replied the doctor, "with the woman? Are 
you beside yourself?" "No," said the wife, "but truly you are, in thus 
altering things as you do, almost every moment!" "Certainly, my dear," 
replied the doctor, "you must have been spending your market-penny, or 
else you would not talk at this rate, as you do, of alterations, when 
not the smallest have been made since you have gone out." Quoth the 
wife, "I am not blind, I think, for I am sure the bed is taken out of 
the room, two pair of stairs backward; and pray, husband, where do you 
design to put it now?" The doctor and his son then went upstairs, and 
not only found that the bed was stolen, but that they had assisted the 
thief to carry it off.

Our hero next resolved to try his fortune upon the highway, and, 
meeting with a sharper on the road, he commanded him to "stand and 
deliver!" He robbed him of two-pence-halfpenny, when the sharper 
remarked, that "the world was come, indeed, to a very sad pass, when 
one rogue must prey upon another."

He next robbed a man of twelve shillings and a pair of silver buckles. 
From hence, he proceeded to rob the stagecoach, and recovered some 
money and a silver watch. Not long after, he robbed Squire Dashwood 
and his lady, of a gold watch and some money.

These, however, were only smaller exhibitions of his dexterity. One 
evening, well mounted, he passed by Tooling in Richmond, and, 
perceiving Sir James B walking in his gardens, he inquired of the 
gardener, if he might be permitted to view the gardens, of which he 
had heard so much. The gardener, well acquainted with the vanity and 
benevolence of his master, granted his request. Giving his horse to 
the gardener, he walked forward, and, in a very respectful manner, 
accosted the squire, who received him very courteously, and, sitting 
down together in an arbour, Gettings said, "Your worship has got a 
very fine diamond ring upon your finger." "Yes," replied Sir James, 
"it ought to be a very fine one, for it cost me a very fine price." 
"Why, then," said Gettings, "it is the fitter to bestow on a friend; 
therefore, if your worship pleases, I must make bold to take it, and 
wear it for your sake." Sir James stared at his impudence, but 
Gettings presented a pistol, and made a short process of the matter. 
Having taken the ring, he added, "I am sure your lordship does not go 
without a good watch, too." Making free with that also, and some 
guineas, he bound the gentleman, and went off with his booty, 
requesting the good squire to be patient, and he would send some 
person to set him at liberty. When he came to the gate, he gave the 
gardener a shilling, informing him that Sir James wanted to speak to 
him. He accordingly went, and untied his master, who returned him 
thanks for sending a man into his own garden to rob him.

Upon another day he undertook a long journey, for the express purpose 
of robbing the house of a friend; and he being well acquainted with 
all parts of the house, he was successful, and brought off money, 
plate, and goods, to a considerable amount. He at last robbed Squire 
Harrison of four guineas, some silver, and a watch; and being 
detected, he was tried, condemned, and executed, in the twenty-second 
year of his age.



CAPTAIN URATZ 
Highwayman and murderer, who argued with the divine 
under the gallows

THIS robber was the son of a gentleman in Pomerania. The scantiness of 
his fortune determined him to commence highwayman, and he had so much 
temerity, that he would undertake what was sufficient for six men. One 
day he attacked the King of Poland, the Duke of Lorrain, and their 
attendants, and seized as many diamonds as brought him eight thousand 
ducatoons, besides a considerable quantity of gold. He also continued 
his depredations in Hungary, until he acquired as much money as 
purchased a captain's commission in the German service.

In this station he became acquainted with Count Koningsmark, who, 
being disappointed in a young lady, by the more successful addresses 
of Thomas Thynn, Esq., the count was so enraged, that he was resolved 
that nothing but the fortunate lover's life would satiate his revenge. 
He intimated his desire to Captain Uratz, who procured John Stern, 
lieutenant, and George Borosky, who way-laid Mr. Thynn in his coach, 
shot him with a blunderbuss, and he died in a few days.

The murderers were apprehended, committed to Newgate, and, being 
tried, were sentenced to death. 	While Captain Uratz was under 
sentence, he was visited by Dr. Herneck and Dr. Burnet. The former of 
these divines says, "that, putting the criminal in mind of the all-
seeing eye who knew his crimes, though he concealed them from man, he 
said, that he had far other apprehensions of God than I had, and was 
confident that he would consider a gentleman according to his rank, 
and would not be offended, if a soldier, who lived by the sword, 
should revenge an affront.

"I replied, that there was only one way to eternal happiness, and that 
God had made no difference between any man in that respect; and that 
revenge in a gentleman as well as in a peasant, was criminal in his 
sight; and that he would not pardon it without repentance. He asked 
what I meant by repentance. I replied, that it was to hate and to 
avoid sin. The captain replied, that though he was to live, he would 
always give any man as good as he brought, with many other similar 
expressions, that made such an unpleasant impression upon my mind, 
that I left him." Dr. Herneck adds, that "the last time I visited him, 
I said, that I hoped that he had seriously reflected upon his 
situation, and that he had a better sense of his character, than when 
I saw him last. He said he was ignorant of my meaning. I explained. He 
replied, that he was convinced that he was a great sinnerthat he 
truly repented, and was confident that God had forgiven him; that he 
could not well understand the English divines, who pressed him to 
declare things contrary to truth; and he was the more surprised at 
this, because our church was against auricular confession. When he had 
finished his speech, I informed him, that he was mistaken in his 
sentiments concerning the Church of England, who neither revealed 
private confessions, nor obliged offenders to confess contrary to the 
truth; that the confession he was exhorted to, was a public confession 
of a public offence; and I farther informed him, that the blood of 
Christ was only applied to the penitent, and that true repentance must 
discover itself in meekness, humility, tender-heartedness, compassion, 
righteousness, candid confession, and reparation, in so far as in our 
power, as, notwithstanding the blood of Christ, men might drop into 
hell. Upon this he replied, that he did not fear hell. I answered, 
that probably he did not believe in any, or it might be an easy one of 
his own making. He said, he was not such a fool as to believe that 
souls could fry in material fire, or be roasted as meat upon a great 
hearth, or in a kitchen, pointing to the chimney. He believed, that 
the punishment of the wicked consisted in deprivation from the 
presence of God; upon which deprivation, there arose a terror and 
anguish in their minds, because they had missed so great a happiness. 
He added, that possibly I might think him an Atheist; but he was so 
far from that, that he could scarcely suppose that there was a man so 
sottish in the world, as not to believe in the being of a God, 
gracious, just, and generous to his creatures; nor could any man, who 
was not either mad or drunk, believe that things came fortuitously, or 
that this world was governed by chance. I said, that I was glad to 
find him settled in the reasonableness of that principle; and for 
material fire, I would not quarrel with him for denying it, but rather 
supposed, that the fire and brimstone spoken of in Scripture, were 
emblems of those inward terrors which would gnaw and tear the 
consciences of impenitent sinners; but still, this was a greater 
punishment than material fire, and that this punishment he had reason 
to fear, without a sincere repentance. I was once in doubt whether I 
should publish his answers, as some of them approach to profaneness; 
but I have done it in hopes that these may be a warning, to prevent 
others from running into the same erroneous sentiments. He seemed to 
be carried away with false conceptions of honour and bravery, and to 
view God as some generous but partial prince, who would regard men's 
rank and quality, and make great allowances for breeding and 
education." Doctor Burnet has also recorded the substance of his 
conversations with him. Among other things the doctor says, "when I 
saw him at the place of execution he smiled, and before I spoke to 
him, said, "that I should see that it was not a false bravery, but 
that he was fearless to the last" I wished him to consider well upon 
what he grounded his confidence. He said, that he was sure to be 
received into heaven, and that his sins were forgiven. I asked him if 
he had anything to say to the people. He said, no. After he had 
whispered a little to a gentleman, he was willing that the rope should 
be tied to the gibbet. He called for the German minister, who could 
not get near for the crowd.

"He desired me to pray in French, but I told him, that, as he 
understood English, I would pray in that language. I observed that he 
had some touches in his mind, when I offered up that petition, that 
for the sake of the blood of Christ, the innocent blood shed in that 
place might be forgiven, and that the cry of the one for mercy, might 
prevail over the cry of the other for justice. At these words, he 
looked up to heaven with the greatest fervour I had at any time 
observed him. After prayer he said nothing, but that he was now going 
to be happy with God." He continued in his undaunted manner, looking 
up often to heaven, and sometimes round upon the spectators. After he 
and his two fellow-sufferers had stood about half an hour under the 
gibbet, they were asked to give the signal; so in a little time the 
cart was driven forward. His fellow sufferers were also grave and 
penitent.



CHRISTOPHER DICKSON, JOHN GIBSON, AND CHARLES 
WEYMOUTH 
Highwaymen, executed 10th March, 1714

THESE men were companions in guilt, and they are therefore united in 
this narrative. Their first adventure upon the highway was with a poor 
old man, who had nothing but a pair of spectacles. Dickson took these 
from him, upon which he earnestly entreated him to return them, 
because, being above threescore, he could not see without them. 
Dickson swore that he would not, but Gibson interfered, saying, 
"Prithee, Dickson, give the old fellow his spectacles; for, if we 
follow this trade, we may assure ourselves we shall never reach his 
years to make use of them." One morning, as these brethren were 
waiting to see what would come to pass, they found the carcass of a 
dead horse by the wayside, and removed it into the centre of the road.

A countryman came riding at full gallop before it was light, and, 
stumbling over the horse, was not only thrown from his own horse, but 
cast into a ditch. The robbers drew him out of the ditch, robbed him 
of three pounds, bound him hand and foot, while his horse, through 
fear, had run home with all speed. Some passengers soon relieved the 
countryman, who, seeing the dead horse upon the road, exclaimed, "Such 
rogues as these were never heard of before, for they have stolen the 
very skin of the horse that I rode on." But going home and seeing his 
horse in the stable, he said to his wife and servants, "How came 
Dobbin alive again? I'm sure it can't be himit must be the devil in 
his shape; for my horse was killed and flayed not above three or four 
hours ago, by a parcel of rogues, who robbed me of all the money I had 
about me." Nor could he ever be persuaded that it was his own horse.

These desperate fellows continued their depredations with varied 
success, until they were apprehended for assaulting and robbing Mr. 
Thomas Blake, Mr. Samuel Slap, and Mr. John Edwards (who was 
dangerously wounded by Weymouth) taking from them several goods and 
money, upon the Queens highway in Stepney parish, on the 8th of 
February 1714. They were tried, and suffered the punishment awarded to 
their crimes.



RICHARD KEELE 
Highwayman, executed 23rd December, 1713

THIS man was born at Ramsey, in Hampshire, and was bound apprentice to 
a barber in Winchester. In that station he acquitted himself so well, 
that he received his master's daughter in marriage. But, after 
remaining with her about seven or eight years, he went to reside with 
another woman, who had an annuity of fifty pounds.

To gratify his vicious inclinations, his time was chiefly spent in the 
company of the most abandoned men and women; and it was not long 
before he excelled them in every species of wickedness. He at last 
commenced bailiff, of which character one says, "that the beginning is 
detestable, the course desperate, and the end damnable;"assertions 
equally absurd and unjust: the office of bailiff being both necessary 
and lawful, it may be, and often is, executed to the honour of the 
individual, and the good of the community.

Not long after he went to reside with the annuitant, he set up an 
alehouse, but was soon arrested in an action at the instance of a 
soldier in the Foot-guards, for keeping company with his wife, whom he 
aided in her robberies, until she was condemned, but obtained a 
pardon. When arrested, no person would bail him out, and he had not 
been long there before no less than forty robberies were laid to his 
charge. But, no prosecution being instituted against him, he was 
admitted to bail. But, being a prisoner on the first action, he 
removed himself by a writ of habeas corpus to the Fleet prison. He 
was, not long after, removed to Newgate, upon an accusation of 
blasphemous expressions.

He was tried before Justice Parker, who sentenced him to stand twice 
in the pilloryonce at Charing-cross, and once without Temple-barand 
to suffer imprisonment during a year.

His time being expired, he became a bailiff's follower; but that being 
a poor trade, he again began to make free with other men's property. A 
coat and two periwigs were his prize, for which he was unluckily 
committed to Newgate. He was found guilty, burned in the hand, and 
ordered to hard labour in the Bridewell for twelve months.

Accordingly, along with William Lowther and Charles Houghton, he was 
carried to Bridewell. When Captain Bureman was going to put them in 
irons, they rebelled. Houghton was shot dead, Lowther wounded, and 
Keele had one of his eyes shot out. But, having killed Edward Perry, 
one of the turnkeys, they were committed again to Newgate. Keele was 
maintained in prison by Isabel Thomas, for whom an arrest was formerly 
issued against him by her husband. She was a notorious thief, and had 
been married to many husbands; was burnt several times in the hand, 
but was at last tried, condemned, and executed for theft.

In addition to the villainies of Keele, before he was committed at 
this time, he was one time in want of money, having paid twenty or 
thirty pounds to an adversary; and, meeting an honest man called Bond 
and Judgment, from his lending money on bond, and, when it became due, 
pushing very hard for payment, he commanded him to "stand and 
deliver!" Bond and Judgment answered, "Do you not know me, sir?" "Ay," 
replied Dick, "you villain! I know you to be a mercenary rogue, who 
would send your mother and father to jail for the fillip of a 
farthing; therefore, it is but a just judgment befallen you, to take 
all you have from you." So, clapping a pistol to his breast, poor Bond 
and Judgment was under the necessity of stopping the force of the 
bullet by three-score guineas. This so lessened his stock, that, when 
he was, not long after, lodged in Newgate, he found a difficulty to 
raise as much money as would remove his corrupted carcass to the 
King's Bench prison.

At another time, Keele being well mounted, and accoutred with sword 
and pistol, met an officer, lately a tradesman, on Hounslow Heath. 
Keele gave him the word of command, "Stand and deliver!" He was indeed 
at a stand, but, supposing that the colour of his coat would inspire 
Dick with fear, said, "Don't you see what livery I wear?" "See whose 
livery you wear!" replied Dick; "you are a footman." "No," said C 
again, "I am an officer in the army; therefore, at your peril be it, 
if you presume to stop me when I am about lawful occasions." "Nay," 
said Dick, "if you go about lawful occasions, I am about unlawful. 
Therefore, deliver what you have, or we must try who is the best man." 
Said C, "I don't bear a commission to fight with highwaymen. I only 
wear her Majesty's cloth, to fight for my queen and country." "Why, 
then," replied Dick, "this cloth, nor any other, must be a protection 
against my arrest; therefore, as this pistol is my tip-staff, I demand 
your money upon pain of death." But, finding no money in the affair, 
he stripped off his coat, waistcoat, and small-clothes, and ordered 
him to get another suit, and place it to the account of the regiment.

Dick was at last brought to his trial, and, the evidence being 
decisive against him, he and William Lowther were both sentenced to 
death. In consequence of the influence of a sister, who lived with a 
gentleman of rank, he was confident that he would obtain a pardon, but 
was miserably disappointed.

It may be proper to remark, that it was his usual custom to say, that 
he boasted in all manner of wickedness, and that, should he ever come 
under the sentence of death, he would never behave himself similar to 
the generality of those in that condition: that he should neither 
confess his crimes, shed a tear, nor show the least contrition or 
uneasiness. But, when he came to be in that situation, he was neither 
without his dread, nor the expressions of his awful forebodings.



CAPTAIN WORLEY 
Pirate, whose beginning was bold and desperate, his 
course short and prosperous, and his end bloody and 
disgraceful

IN a small open boat with only eight companions, Worley entered upon 
service. Provided with six old muskets, and correspondent ammunition, 
with a few biscuits, one or two dried tongues, and a cag of water, 
they left New York, and sailed towards Delaware river. Though the 
distance is about fifty miles, they met with no prey, so they went up 
the river as far as Newcastle. Near this place they captured a shallop 
with household goods and plate, and, having emptied her of everything 
valuable, they permitted her to depart. As this was not done upon the 
high seas, it could not be construed piracy. The shallop conveyed the 
intelligence to New York, which, alarming government, several vessels 
were fitted out to go in quest of this formidable rover. But he was 
not yet destined to be taken; for, after several days cruising, the 
government vessels returned without their prize.

In sailing down the river, Worley met with a sloop bound for 
Philadelphia, and, quitting his own shallop, he and his men went on 
board the sloop, and increased their strength by the hands who were in 
her. In a few days they took a sloop homeward-bound for Hull, with all 
manner of provisions, which enabled them to undertake some bolder 
adventure.

Upon the success of these pirates, the government issued a 
proclamation for apprehending all pirates who refused to surrender 
upon a specified day. To follow out the intentions of this 
proclamation, a vessel of twenty guns was fitted out to cruise upon 
the coast, and to protect the trade. Informed of this, Worley and his 
men set out to sea. In their cruise, they captured a sloop and a 
brigantine; the former they sunk, as she belonged to New York, and 
might inform upon them; and they permitted the other to prosecute her 
voyage.

Worley was now in reality become formidable. He had twenty-five men, 
six guns, plenty of small arms, and a good vessel. Accordingly, he 
assumed a more systematic plan, hoisted black colours, formed certain 
regulations, and swore every man to stand to his colours, and receive 
no quarter.

They now went into an inlet in North Carolina, to clean their vessel, 
and the government receiving intelligence of their being in that 
place, two sloops, one of eight and another of six guns, manned with 
seventy men, were sent in search of them. Worley was gone before they 
arrived, but, tracing his course, they discovered him off the Capes of 
Virginia. Upon the supposition that they were two vessels intending to 
enter St. James's river, Worley hastened to got between them and that 
entrance of the river, in order to secure his prize. The inhabitants 
of St. James's Town, supposing that all three were pirates, and that 
they would land to plunder and destroy the country, the Governor 
ordered all the vessels to hale into the shore, unless they thought 
that they were in a situation to fight the pirates. He beat to arms, 
collected all the force that could be mustered, erected a temporary 
battery with the guns of the ships, and put the island in a posture of 
defence. But to their surprise, they soon saw what they imagined to be 
pirates, fighting with each other.

Meanwhile, as Worley was waiting at the entrance of the river, with 
the black colours flying, to seize the two vessels as they approached, 
to his sad mortification they hoisted King's colours, and fired a gun. 
Thus he found, that, instead of entrapping others, he himself was 
entrapped and hemmed in by a superior force. Agreeably to their 
engagements to each other, the pirates determined to conquer or die.

The two sloops gave him a broadside, and immediately boarded, the one 
upon the quarter, the other upon the bow. Worley and his men drew up 
on deck, and fought it hand to hand, in a most desperate manner. They 
were true to their oathnot a man called for quarter, and many were 
slain before they could be overcome; not one survived, except the 
captain and another man, who were both severely wounded. These were 
brought on shore in irons, and, lest they should have died of their 
wounds, they were hanged the following day. Thus Worley's beginning 
was bold and desperate, his course short and prosperous, and his end 
bloody and disgraceful.

CAPTAIN LOWTHER 
Pirate

GEORGE LOWTHER sailed from the Thames, in the character of second mate 
in the Gambia Castle, of sixteen guns and thirty men, belonging to the 
African Company. There was a number of soldiers, under the command of 
John Massey, intended to garrison a fort which was destroyed by 
Captain Dawson.

The Gambia Castle arrived safe, and landed Massey and his men; but the 
military power was overruled by the merchants and traders. To them it 
belonged to victual the garrison; and, being scanty in their 
allowance, Massey was highly offended, and remonstrated in terms more 
suitable to his feelings than their interests. He boldly declared, 
that he had brought these brave men here under the assurance that they 
were to have plenty of provisions, and to be treated in the most 
handsome manner; therefore, if they were not so treated, he would be 
under the necessity of consulting for himself.

The governor was then sick, and, for his better accommodation, was 
taken on board the Gambia Castle. During this period, the captain 
being offended with George Lowther, his second mate, ordered him to be 
punished. The men interfered in behalf of Lowther, and the captain was 
disobeyed. Lowther and Massey having become intimate during the 
voyage, they now aggravated their grievances to each other, and the 
result of their consultations were, to seize the ship, and sail for 
England.

When matters were ripe for execution, Lowther sent a letter to Massey, 
informing him, "that he must repair on board, as it was now time to 
put their design in execution." Massey then harangued the soldiers in 
the barracks, saying, "You that have a mind to go to England, now is 
the time." They in general agreed, and, when all things were ready, he 
sent off the boat with this message to the chief mate, "that he should 
get the guns ready, for that the king of Barro would come on board to 
dinner." Lowther knew the meaningconfined the chief mate, and 
prepared to sail. In the afternoon, Massey came on board with the 
governor's son, having almost emptied the store-houses, and dismounted 
the guns of the fort.

The captain of the Gambia Castle having gone on shore to hold a 
council with the governor and others, was not permitted to come on 
board. He called to Lowther and his associates, and offered them what 
terms they chose, to restore the ship; but all in vain. They put the 
governor's son on shore, and three others who did not choose to go 
along with them, and immediately sailed.

Scarcely were they out at sea, when Lowther addressed them in the 
following manner: "That it was the greatest folly imaginable, to think 
of returning to England, for what they had already done could not be 
justified upon any pretence whatever, but would be looked upon by the 
government as a capital offence, and none of them were in a condition 
to withstand the attacks of such powerful adversaries as they would 
meet with at home. For his part, he told them he was determined not to 
run such an hazard; and therefore, if his proposal was not agreed to, 
he desired to be set on shore in some place of safety; that they had a 
good ship under them, a parcel of brave fellows in her; that it was 
not their business to starve or be made slaves; and therefore, if they 
were all of his mind, they would seek their fortunes upon the seas, as 
other adventurers had done before them." The crew was unanimous, 
knocked down the cabins, prepared black colours, and named the ship, 
the Delivery. She was mounted with sixteen guns, and had fifty hands 
on board.

To enforce order, and to provide for the stability of this government, 
several articles were drawn up, signed, and sworn to; and they soon 
began their operations, by capturing a vessel belonging to Boston, 
emptied her of her stores, and allowed her to depart.

Proceeding to Hispaniola, the Delivery met with a French vessel laden 
with wine and brandy. In the character of a merchant, Captain Massey 
went on board, viewed the liquors, and offered a price for the greater 
part of them, which was not accepted of But after a while, he 
whispered in the Frenchman's ear, "that they must have them all 
without money." The captain understood his meaning, and with no small 
reluctance agreed to the bargain. They took out of her about seventy 
pounds, besides thirty casks of brandy, five hogsheads of wine, 
several pieces of chintzes, and other valuable goods. Lowther returned 
five pounds to the Frenchman for his civility.

But this commonwealth was soon to experience the effects of discord. 
Massey had been trained a soldier, and was solicitous to move in his 
own sphere; therefore, he proposed to land with fifty or sixty men and 
plunder the French settlements. Lowther represented the rashness, 
imprudence, and impracticability of such an adventure; Massey remained 
resolute in his determination. It became necessary to decide the 
matter, by a reference to the community. A great majority were of the 
opinion of Lowther; but, though overruled, Massey was not convinced, 
so became fractious, and quarrelled with Captain Lowther. The men also 
were divided; some were land pirates, and some were sea pirates, and, 
ere long, they were prepared to decide the matter with the sword.

But employment terminated dissension. The man at the mast-head cried, 
"A sail! a sail!" In a few hours they came up with her, and found that 
she was bound for England. They supplied themselves with necessaries, 
and took a few hands out of her. Lowther proposed to sink her and all 
the passengers on board; but Massey interfered, and prevented this 
cruel action. Accordingly, she was permitted to depart, and arrived 
safe in England.

The next day they captured a small sloop, and detained her. Massey 
still remained uneasy, and declared his resolution to leave the 
Delivery. Lowther proposed that he and all those who were of his 
sentiments should go on board the sloop which they had just taken, and 
seek their own fortunes. This was instantly agreed to, and Massey, 
with ten more, went on board, and sailed directly for Jamaica. With a 
bold countenance he went to the governor, informed him that he had 
assisted in running off with the vessel; but his object was to save 
the lives of his Majesty's subjects from perishing, and that his 
express design was to land them in England; but, in opposition to this 
determination, Lowther and the majority were for becoming pirates; and 
that he had embraced the first opportunity to leave them, and 
surrender himself, his men, and his vessel, to his excellency.

Massey was kindly received, and sent along with Captain Laws to cruise 
in quest of Lowther; but, not finding him, returned to .Jamaica, 
received certificates of his surrender, and came home a passenger to 
England. When he came to town, he wrote a narrative of the whole 
matter to the African Company, who returned him for answer, "that he 
should be fairly hanged." He was accordingly seized, and, upon his own 
letter, and the evidence of the late captain of the ship, who had been 
left at the fort, and the governor's son, and some others, he was 
condemned to end his course at Tyburn.

Lowther, cruising off Hispaniola, captured a small ship from Bristol, 
and a Spanish pirate. He rifled and burnt both ships, sending the 
Spaniards away in their launch, and constraining the Englishmen to 
turn pirates. In a few days they took another sloop, which they 
manned, and carried along with them, and then harboured at a small 
island to clean. Here they spent their time more like demons than men, 
in all manner of debauchery, drunkenness, and rioting.

Having again set to sea, they met with Edward Low, a pirate, in a 
small vessel with thirteen hands; and, upon the request of Lowther, he 
united his strength with theirs, Lowther retaining the command, and 
Low becoming lieutenant. Proceeding on their voyage, they met with a 
vessel of two hundred tons, called the Greyhound, commanded by 
Benjamin Edwards. Piratical colours were hoisted, and she was 
commanded to strike. The captain declined, an engagement ensued; but, 
finding the pirates too strong for him, he surrendered. Instead of 
treating the captain and his men with generous lenity, they beat them 
in a merciless manner, drove them on board their own ship, and then 
set fire to it.

In their course they took several other ships, rifled and dismissed 
them; but two they fitted up for their own service. With this small 
fleet:viz. Admiral Lowther in the Happy Delivery, Captain Low in the 
Rhode Island sloop, and Captain Harris (who was second mate, in the 
Greyhound) in a sloop formerly belonging to Jamaica, they sailed to 
Port Mayo in the gulf of Matique, and made preparations to clean their 
vessels; with this view they made tents of their sails, stored their 
provisions in tents also, and then commenced their operations; but 
scarcely were they at work, when a body of the natives came down upon 
them, drove them to their ships, seized their tents and stores, and 
set fire to the Delivery, which was stranded on shore.

Lowther and his men now went on board the largest sloop, called the 
Ranger, and left the other at sea. They were soon reduced to great 
want, and commotion ensued; but when they had got to the West Indies, 
they took a prize, which supplied their wants; and, having sunk her, 
they sailed for America.

They in a short time captured a brigantine, and the company, being 
divided in their sentiments, Low, and those who were of his views, 
went on board the prize, and went off, while those who agreed with 
Lowther remained in the Ranger. On his way to the mainland of America, 
Lowther took several ships with very little resistance; but, upon the 
coast of South Carolina, he met with a ship bound for England. An 
engagement took place, and Lowther was so hard pressed, that he was 
under the necessity of running aground, and landing his men; but when 
the captain of the English vessels had taken the boat, in order to 
burn the pirate ship, a bullet from the pirates on shore put an end to 
his life; which so discouraged his men, that they returned to their 
vessel.

After their departure, Lowther got off his sloop, though in a very 
shattered condition, having suffered much in the engagement, and many 
of his men having been killed or wounded. With no small difficulty he 
went into an inlet in North Carolina, where he remained during the 
winter.

In spring he again took to sea, steered for Newfoundland, took several 
vessels of small importance, and, in his way to the West Indies, 
captured a brigantine, plundered her, took two men into their own 
ship, and sent her off. 	Having cruised a considerable time, it was 
necessary to clean, and, for that purpose, went into the Isle of 
Blanco. While they were keenly employed in this work, the Eagle sloop, 
belonging to the South Sea Company, with thirty-five men, attacked 
Lowther, and constrained him to cry for quarter. While they were 
surrendering, Lowther and twelve of the crew escaped out of the cabin 
window, and fled to the woods. Five of them were taken, but the rest 
remained upon the island.

Informed of this meritorious action, the Spanish government condemned 
the ship to the crew of the Eagle, and sent a small sloop to the 
island, with twenty-five men, to search the woods for the other 
pirates. Three others were found, but Captain Lowther, with three men 
and a boy, escaped! As the captain was afterwards found dead, and a 
pistol beside him, it is supposed that in desperation he had shot 
himself.

The Eagle sloop brought the prisoners to St. Christopher's, where they 
were all tried; three were acquitted, eleven found guilty, and two 
recommended to mercy.



CAPTAIN SPRIGGS. 
Pirate.

SPRIGGS sailed with Lowther for some time, and left him in company 
with Low. He was quarter-master, and, by consequence, had a large 
share in all the barbarities of that execrable crew. He quarrelled 
with Low concerning one of the men who had killed anotherSpriggs 
insisting that he should be hanged, and the other that he should not. 
After this dispute, Spriggs took an opportunity to leave him in the 
night, along with eighteen men, having seized the Delight, a prize of 
twelve guns.

Scarcely were they beyond reach of Lowther and his crew, when Spriggs 
was elected captain, black colours hoisted, and the guns fired as a 
salute to themselves and their captain. In their way to the West 
Indies, they took a Portuguese barque, loaded with rich plunder, and, 
after using the men in a cruel and barbarous manner, they put them 
into the boat, with a small quantity of provisions, and set the ship 
on fire.

They took another vessel belonging to Barbados, which they plundered, 
used the men also in a most barbarous manner, then put them into the 
boatleft them to the mercy of the waves, and set fire to the ship. 
Some of the men signed their articles, and joined their association. 
The next capture was a ship from Martinique; and, though they did not 
burn the vessel, the men were used in the same cruel manner. Some days 
after, they took one coming from Jamaica, robbed her of stores, arms, 
ammunition, and everything that they pleased, and what they did not 
think useful, they threw overboard. They forced the two mates and 
several other hands into their service, and then sent her off. They 
were not more fortunate in gaining prizes, than they were wantonly 
cruel to the men. A sloop from Rhode Island fell into their hands; 
they constrained all the men to join them; and the mate, being a 
grave, sober man, he resolutely declined. He was then informed that he 
should be allowed to go with his discharge written upon his backthis 
was, a lash from every man in the ship; which was rigorously put in 
execution.

The next day one of the mates taken out of the prize signed their 
articles, which was deemed a great acquisition, because he was a good 
artist. They gave three huzzas, fired all the guns, and appointed him 
master. The day was devoted to feasting and carousing, and, among 
other healths, that of George II . was drunk. It had been related to 
them that the old king was dead, and they expected a general pardon 
upon the accession of the new sovereign. Thus they proclaimed his 
Royal Highness the Prince of Wales, saying, "that they doubted not but 
there would be a general pardon in twelve months, which they would 
embrace, and come in upon; but, if they should be excepted from it, 
they would murder every Englishman that should fall into their hands."

Not long after, they espied a sail and gave her chase. They supposed 
that she was a Spaniard, and so gave her a broadside. But a lamentable 
cry for quarter being heard from every part of the ship, they ceased 
firing. But how mortified were the rogues, when they found that it was 
the same vessel that they had sent away, not worth a penny. Enraged at 
this disappointment, about fifteen of these cruel wretches attacked 
the captain with sharp cutlasses, and would certainly have put an end 
to his life, had not Burridge, his former mate, rushed in among the 
thickest of them, and begged for his life. In the madness of their 
rage, they made a bonfire of the ship, and, even when they were sat 
down to supper, they called down the unfortunate captain, to have some 
more cruel sport at his expense. In two days they anchored at an 
uninhabited island, and, with a musket and some ammunition, they sent 
on shore the captain and several of his men. They subsisted for some 
time, and then were taken off by one Jones.

Spriggs now anchored at a small island and cleaned, and then sailed in 
search of the Eagle sloop, which had taken Lowther at Blanco, with the 
determined resolution to put him to death as soon as found, for 
attacking his friend and brother. But, to his surprise, this vessel 
proved to be a French man-of-war, on which he crowded all the sail he 
could. He would, however, have been taken, had not the main-top-mast 
of the Frenchman been broken.

Spriggs then sailed northward, took a schooner belonging to Boston, 
took out the men, sunk the vessel, and, having taken another sloop, 
they used the men in the most cruel and barbarous manner, hoisting 
them as high as the main and fore-tops, and letting them fall upon the 
deck. After using them in that manner, they whipped them about the 
deck until they themselves were fatigued, then allowed them all to go 
except two men.

They next captured a vessel from Rhode Island with provisions and some 
horses. The brutal pirates mounted the horses, and rode at full gallop 
upon the deck, until the animals became infuriated, and threw their 
riders. They then wreaked their vengeance upon the men. In this manner 
these unnatural wretches continued their cruelties so long as they 
could maintain their community, to the disgrace of human nature, and 
to the sad sorrow of all who were so unfortunate as to fall into their 
hands.



CAPTAIN UPTON 
Pirate

JOHN UPTON was born at Deptford, of honest but poor parents, who gave 
him an education such as their circumstances could afford. He served 
an apprenticeship to a waterman upon the river. In the character of 
boatswain, quarter-master, and other inferior offices, he served on 
board different men-of-war. After the death of his wife, he found 
several demands made upon him, and several actions raised, for which 
he was in danger of being arrested; he therefore went on board the 
John and Elizabeth merchant- man, bound for Bonavista, in 
Newfoundland.

When he arrived there he was discharged, and served a planter during a 
year, for the sum of eighteen pounds. He next went a passenger to 
Boston, and from thence made a voyage to the Bay of Honduras. He next 
went on board the Perry galley, bound to Barbados and Bristol. At 
Barbados the ship was delivered and loaded again, and set forward to 
England. The Perry galley, in her voyage home, was taken by a pirate, 
and Upton was constrained to enter along with them.

The pirate carried the Perry galley to the island of Ruby, and, in a 
short time, they captured a Dutch sloop. Upton and some others were 
put on board that sloop, and, embracing an opportunity, escaped, 
carrying off the sloop.

He left the pirate service, and, after moving from place to place, he 
was, at last, pressed on board his Majesty's ship the Nottingham, 
where he remained until he was accused of piracy, and brought home for 
trial.

Upon his trial it was proved, that he had entered with the pirates, 
signed their articles, been active in their exploits, and received a 
share of their plunder; and that he had advised to burn the Perry 
galley, with her captain and mate in her; and that he had made a cat-
o'-nine-tails, with which the mate received two hundred lashes. He was 
condemned, and, at the age of fifty years, suffered as a pirate.



CAPTAIN EDWARD LOW 
Pirate

THIS ferocious villain was born at Westminster, and received an 
education similar to that of the common people in England. He was by 
nature a pirate; for even when very young he raised contributions 
among the boys of Westminster, and if they declined compliance, a 
battle was the result. When he advanced a step farther in life, he 
began to exert his ingenuity at low games, and cheating all in his 
power; and those who pretended to maintain their own right, he was 
ready to call to the field of combat.

He went to sea along with his brother, and continued with him for 
three or four years. Going over to America, he wrought in a rigging-
house at Boston for some time. He then came home to see his mother in 
England, returned to Boston, and continued for some years longer at 
the same business. But being of a quarrelsome temper, he differed with 
his master, and went on board a sloop bound for the Bay of Honduras.

While there, he had the command of a boat employed in bringing logwood 
to the ship. In that boat there were twelve men well armed, because of 
the Spaniards, from whom the wood is taken almost by force. It 
happened one day that the boat came to the ship just a little before 
dinner was ready, and Low desired that they might dine before they 
returned. The captain, however, ordered them a bottle of rum, and 
requested them to take another trip, as no time was to be lost. The 
crew were enraged, particularly Low, who took up a loaded musket and 
fired at the captain, but, missing him, another man was shot, and they 
then ran off with the boat. The next day they took a small vessel, 
went on board her, hoisted a black flag, and declared war with the 
whole world.

In their rovings, Low met with Lowther, who proposed that he should 
join him, and thus promote their mutual advantage. We have already 
related their adventures so long as they remained in company. Having 
captured a brigantine, Low, with forty more, went on board her, and 
leaving Lowther, went to seek their own fortune.

Their first adventure was the taking of a vessel belonging to Amboy, 
out of which they took the provisions, and allowed her to proceed. 
Upon the same day they took a sloop, plundered her, and allowed her to 
depart. That sloop went into Black Island, and sent intelligence to 
the governor that Low was on the coast. Two small vessels were 
immediately fitted out, but before their arrival, Low was beyond their 
reach. After this narrow escape. Low went into port, to procure water 
and fresh provisions, and then renewed his search of plunder. He next 
sailed into the harbour of Port Rosemary, where were thirteen ships, 
but none of them of any great strength. Low hoisted his black flag, 
assuring them, that if they made any resistance they should have no 
quarter; and, manning their boat, the pirates took possession of every 
one of them, plundered and converted to their own use according to 
pleasure. They put on board a schooner ten guns and fifty men, named 
her the Fancy, and Low himself went on board of her, while Charles 
Harris was constituted captain of the brigantine. They also 
constrained a few of the men to join them, and sign their articles.

After an unsuccessful pursuit of two sloops from Boston, they steered 
for the leeward islands, but in their way were overtaken by a terrible 
hurricane. The search for plunder gave place to the most vigorous 
exertion to save themselves. On board the brigantine, all hands were 
at work both day and night; they were under the necessity of throwing 
over board six of her guns, and all the weighty provisions. In the 
storm, the two vessels were separated, and it was some time before 
they saw each other.

After the storm, Low went into a small island west of the Caribees, 
refitted his vessels, and got provision for them in exchange for 
goods. As soon as the brigantine was ready for sea, they went on a 
cruise until the Fancy should be prepared; and during that cruise they 
met with a vessel which had lost all her masts in the storm, and they 
plundered her of goods to the value of one thousand pounds, and 
returned to the island. When the Fancy was ready to sail, a council 
was held what course they should next steer. They followed the advice 
of the captain, who thought it not safe to sail any longer to the 
leeward, lest they should fall in with any of the men-of-war that 
cruise upon that coast; so they sailed for the Nores.

The good fortune of Low was now singular; in his way thither, he 
captured a French ship of thirty-four guns, and carried her along with 
them. Then entering St. Michael's roads, he captured seven sail, 
threatening with instant death all who dared to oppose him. Thus, by 
inspiring terror, without firing a single gun he became master of all 
that property. Being in want of water and fresh provisions, Low sent 
to the governor demanding a supply, upon condition of releasing the 
ships he had taken, otherwise he would commit them to the flames. The 
request was instantly complied with, and six of the vessels were 
restored. But a French vessel which was among them, they emptied of 
her guns and men, except the cook, who, they said, being a greasy 
fellow, would fry well; so bound the unfortunate man to the mast, and 
set the ship on fire.

The next who fell in their way was captain Carter, in the Wright 
galley; who, because he showed some inclination to defend himself, was 
cut and mangled in a barbarous manner. There were also two Portuguese 
friars, whom they tied to the foremast, and several times let them 
down before they were dead, merely to gratify their own ferocious 
dispositions. Meanwhile, another Portuguese, beholding this cruel 
scene, expressed some sorrow in his countenance; upon which one of the 
wretches said, he did not like his looks; and, so giving him a stroke 
over the centre with his cutlass, he fell upon the spot. Another of 
the miscreants, aiming a blow at a prisoner, missed his aim, and 
struck Low upon the under jaw. The surgeon was called, and stitched up 
the wound; but Low finding fault with the operation, the surgeon gave 
him a blow, which broke all the stitches, and he left him to sew them 
himself. After he had plundered this vessel, some of them were for 
burning her, as they had done the Frenchman, but, instead of that, 
they cut her cables, rigging, and sails to pieces, and sent her adrift 
to the mercy of the waves.

They next sailed for the island of Madeira, and took up a fishing boat 
with two old men and a boy. They detained one of them, and sent the 
other on shore with a flag of truce, requesting the governor to send 
them a boat of water, else they would hang the other man at the mast-
arm. The water was sent, and the man dismissed.

They next sailed for the Canary islands, and there took several 
vessels; and, being informed that two small galleys were daily 
expected, the sloop was manned and sent in quest of them. They, 
however, missing their prey, and being in great want of provision, 
went into St. Michael's in the character of a trader, and being 
discovered, were apprehended, and the whole crew conducted to the 
castle, and treated according to their merits.

Meanwhile, Low's ship was overset upon the Careen and lost; so that, 
having only the Fancy schooner remaining, they all, to the number of 
an hundred, went on board her, and set sail in search of new spoils. 
They soon met a rich Portuguese vessel, and, after some resistance, 
captured her. Low tortured the men, to constrain them to inform where 
they had hid their treasures. He accordingly discovered that, during 
the chase, the captain had hung a bag with eleven thousand moidores 
out of the cabin window, and that, when they were taken, he had cut 
the rope, and allowed it to fall into the sea. Upon this intelligence. 
Low raved and stormed like a fury, ordered the captain's lips to be 
cut off and broiled before his eyes, then murdered him and all his 
crew.

After this bloody action, the miscreants steered northward, and in 
their course seized several vessels, one of which they burnt, and, 
plundering the rest, allowed them to proceed. Having cleaned in one of 
the islands, they then sailed for the Bay of Honduras. They met a 
Spaniard coming out of the bay, which had captured five Englishmen and 
a pink, plundered them, and brought away the masters prisoners. Low 
hoisted Spanish colours, but when he came near, hung out the black 
flag, and the Spaniard was seized without resistance. Upon finding the 
masters of the English vessels in the hold, and seeing English goods 
on board, a consultation was held, when it was determined to put all 
the Spaniards to the sword. This was scarcely resolved upon, when they 
commenced with every species of weapons to massacre every man; and, 
some flying from their merciless hands into the waves, a canoe was 
sent in pursuit of those who endeavoured to swim on shore. They next 
plundered the Spanish vessel, restored the English masters to their 
respective vessels, and set the Spaniards on fire.

Low's next cruise was between the Leeward islands and the main land, 
where, in a confirmed course of prosperity, he successively captured 
iio less than nineteen ships of different sizes, and in general 
treated their crews with a barbarity unequalled even among pirates. 
But it happened that the Greyhound, of twenty guns and one hundred and 
twenty men, was cruising upon that coast. Informed of the mischief 
these miscreants had done, the Greyhound went in search of them. 
Supposing they had discovered a prize, Low and his crew pursued them, 
and the Greyhound, allowing them to run after her until all things 
were ready to engage, turned upon them. When Low discovered with whom 
he had to contend, he run off with all the sail he could make. The 
Greyhound discontinuing the fire, took to her oars, and came up with 
the pirates. A desperate engagement ensued, and in a short time the 
Ranger had her main-yard shot off. In these circumstances, Low 
abandoned her to the enemy and fled. The crew soon cried for quarter, 
and were reserved to endure a more shameful death. The Greyhound 
returned with her prize, to the great joy of the country, but at the 
same time regretting that Low, the principal offender, had escaped.

Nothing, however, could lessen the fury, or reform the manners, of 
that obdurate crew. Their narrow escape had no good effect upon them, 
and, with redoubled violence, they renewed their depredations and 
cruelties. The next vessel they captured, was eighty miles from land. 
They used the master with the most wanton cruelty, then shot him dead, 
and forced the crew into the boat with a compass, a little water, and 
a few biscuits, and left them to the mercy of the waves: they, 
however, beyond all expectation, got safe to shore.

Low proceeded in his villainous career with too fatal success. 
Unsatisfied with satiating their avarice, and walking the common path 
of wickedness, those inhuman wretches, like to Satan himself, made 
mischief their sport, cruelty their delight, and the ruining and 
murder of their fellow-men their constant employment. Of all the 
piratical crews belonging to the English nation, none ever equalled 
Low in barbarity. Their mirth and their anger had the same effects. 
They murdered a man from good humour, as well as from anger and 
passion. Their ferocious dispositions seemed only to delight in cries, 
groans, and lamentations. One day Low having captured Captain Graves, 
a Virginia-man, took a bowl of punch in his hand, and said, "Captain, 
here's half this to you." The poor gentleman was too much touched with 
his misfortunes, to be in a humour for drinking; he therefore modestly 
excused himself. Upon this, Low cocked and presented a pistol in the 
one hand, and his bowl in the other, saying, "Either take the one or 
the other."

Low next took a vessel called the Christmas, mounted her with thirty-
four guns, went on board her himself, assumed the title of admiral, 
and hoisted the black flag. His next prize was a brigantine half 
manned with Portuguese, and half with English. The former he hanged, 
and the latter he thrust into their boat and dismissed, while he set 
fire to the vessel. The success of Low was unequalled, as well as his 
cruelty; and, during a long period, he continued to pursue his wicked 
course with impunity. We at present, however, take our leave of this 
notorious character.

CAPTAIN JAEN 
Captain who flogged his cabin-boy to death 

JOHN JAEN'S parents being in comfortable circumstances, he received a 
good education, and was bound an apprentice to a cooper. He not only 
served his time with approbation, but, after he entered upon business 
for himself, he was industrious and eager to gain money. In order to 
this, he frequently took a voyage at sea, and at last became master of 
a vessel fitted out by some merchants of Bristol for South Carolina.

It appears that Jaen's dispositions were naturally fierce and 
domineering; and, having used his cabin-boy so harshly that he died, 
he was, upon his return, immediately apprehended and committed for 
trial. He, however, pleaded that two of his principal witnesses were 
absent; therefore, his trial was delayed until their return. It 
appeared upon evidence, that he had either whipped, or caused to be 
whipped, the boy every day during the voyage, until the time of his 
death. That he had ordered him to be tied with ropes to the main-mast 
for nine days, with his arms and legs extended to the utmost, while he 
whipped him until he was covered with blood, then filled the wounds 
with brine and pickle. It was also deponed, that, under this terrible 
usage, the boy soon became speechless, but the captain still continued 
to maltreat him, by stamping upon, kicking, and bruising him; nay, 
causing him to eat and drink that which modesty and humanity forbid us 
to mention; and, to close this scene of inhuman cruelty, that, upon 
the very last day of his life, the unhappy youth had received eighteen 
lashes.

It was further deponed, that when the men were sewing up his body in a 
hammock, to be thrown overboard, it had as many colours as the 
rainbow; that his flesh was in some places as soft as jelly, and his 
head swelled bigger than any two. Upon the whole, that a more cruel, 
premeditated, and wilful murder, had never been perpetrated. The 
evidence being decidedly against him, Captain Jaen was sentenced to 
suffer death.

After sentence, he behaved himself with great humility and contrition, 
had a clergyman to attend him daily in private, though he declined 
attending in the public chapel, because, from the general indignation 
so justly excited against him, he was in danger of being insulted, and 
his devotions marred. As the time of his death drew near, he became 
faint and feeble under the apprehensions of futurity. He was about 
twenty-nine years of age. In order to be a warning to others, his body 
was hung in chains over the King's Powder-house.



NAN HERFORD 
Swindler and Shoplifter, Executed 22 December 1690

THE natural interest which we take in the history and character of the 
female sex, renders their actions more an object of curiosity when out 
of the common path. Nan was descended of honest parents, who both died 
when she was about seventeen years old. She then came to London, and 
served a family for six months. It was her misfortune to fall in with 
bad company, which seduced her from the path of sobriety and honesty, 
and led her to that course of life which was hurtful to many, and in 
the end destructive to herself.

One instance of her cunning and address may suffice for an example. 
Her ingenuity enabled her to devise means by which she always appeared 
genteelly dressed, and so saved appearances. She took lodgings in 
King-street, and entertained an old woman as her accomplice, because 
she could not execute her plans herself. After mature reflection, they 
directed their attack upon a rich apothecary in the neighbourhood. Nan 
remained close at home, while the old woman was sent many an errand to 
the apothecary's shop. Being a constant customer, from civility, he 
became familiar with the good woman.

One day, in a pleasing accent, she asked him, "why he did not marry?" 
The miser replied, "that the times were hard, trading dead, and house-
keeping expensive." "That's true, man, but a rich wife, man, would 
make amends for all this." "A good one and a rich one, too!" quoth he, 
"would be a brave thing, indeed. I must confess, I should be glad to 
embrace such an opportunity of changing my condition." She insinuated 
that such a fortune might be procured. Curiosity was excited, and she 
left him. He was eager to embrace the first opportunity of a farther 
conversation. At her own time she informed him, that there was a niece 
of a wealthy citizen; who had two thousand pounds in her uncle's 
hands, to be paid at her marriage; and that, as she was once a nurse 
in the family, the young lady occasionally called upon her, and that 
every time the poor girl calls, she is lamenting the harsh usage of 
her uncle, and wishing that some good gentleman would free her from 
his unpleasant hands. The apothecary was charmed with her narrative, 
and engaged her to do all in her power for him.

To proceed with certainty and caution, he took a note of the names of 
the uncle and niece, and, upon inquiry, found that she had given a 
true representation. He was now all anxiety, and, to heighten his 
impatience, the woman did not visit his shop for some days. She at 
length appeared, and, with no small degree of seeming reluctance, she 
promised to introduce him. Nan was all modestyall blushesall 
diffidence; insomuch that she would have imposed upon one whose senses 
were not confounded, and his eyes dazzled with the contemplation of 
two thousand pounds. Their interview was short, for fear her uncle 
should discover that she had been from home.

The cold apothecary was now all flame, and ready to kneel before the 
old woman and the young heiress, in order to gain his object. The 
former now ventured to hint, that as she was poor, it was reasonable 
she should have some return for her trouble. A hint was only necessary 
in such an hour, and a bond was immediately executed, agreeing to give 
her an hundred pounds on the happy day he was married to the rich 
heiress.

He was soon favoured with another meeting; and to both parties it 
seemed better not to delay matters too long. The young lady consented 
to marry him; and, as she had been always kept so short of money and 
clothes by her uncle, and could not, on the present occasion, request 
an advance, lest it should create suspicion, therefore hinted it would 
be necessary to have money, that she might appear like his wife. "My 
fortune may be demanded," said she, "when we are married; and it is 
best not to trouble the old man, until all is secure." Her scheme 
succeeded, and two hundred and fifty pounds were instantly brought, 
and more offered. They were married, and, as she could not stay all 
night out of her uncle's house, the marriage was consummated during 
the day.

Both the old and young lady changed their lodging; and, after three 
days' impatience, the apothecary dressed himself as he was upon his 
wedding day, and hastened to the uncle, to demand his wife and her 
fortune. The coach drove to the door, and, being introduced to the 
uncle, he, in an imperious tone, said, "he was come to demand his 
wife." "I know nothing of your wife, nor you neither, and desire, 
therefore, you would explain your meaning." "I mean your niece, sir, 
who is my lawful wife." "Your wife, man! since how long, pray?" The 
apothecary mentioned the day and the circumstances, in order to 
convince. The uncle told him, that his niece was not out of his house 
upon that day, and he could not comprehend his meaning. They came to 
high words, and, the apothecary continuing positive and serious, the 
old man, at last, suspected that he was imposed upon. Accordingly, he 
asked him if he would know his wife when he saw her? "I should be glad 
if you would try me." The niece came. "This is none of my wife." "But 
this is my niece, though, and all the nieces I have in the world, 
too." They were both astonished, and the young lady equally so, to 
hear herself named a wife, without any previous knowledge why or 
wherefore.

The uncle then said, "Sir, I perceive that there has been some 
deception in this matter; relate the whole circumstances, that we may 
be able to judge of the case." It was done, and the conspiracy 
disclosed. It only remained to exercise patience, and, either by 
parsimony, or laying an additional price upon his medicines, to redeem 
his losses.

After this. Nan became enamoured of a player, who consented to reside 
with her. To support their extravagances, she visited the shops, and 
he the highways. It was fortunate for society that his first robbery 
proved his last: he was apprehended and hanged. Nan, however, 
continued her business during the space of six years, in which time it 
was supposed that she stole goods to the amount of four thousand 
pounds. But while Nan visited a linen-draper's in a chair, with two or 
three footmen attending, he was so uncivil as to detect her in 
removing a piece of muslin from his shop. Before her trial, she 
offered an hundred guineas to her adversary, not to appear against 
her. But he remained determined in his resolution. During her 
confinement, she attempted to set fire to Newgate, but being 
unsuccessful, she was fettered and hand-cuffed. She was executed 
before the prison, and her body given to the surgeons.



TOM MARSH 
Thief, Executed 4 May 1696

MARSH was born at Ludlow, in Shropshire, was bred a mason, and, coming 
up to London, married a very industrious woman, by whom he had one 
daughter. Indulging his indolent disposition, his wages were 
insufficient to supply his wants; so that he commenced thief, and was, 
several times, detected and punished. Tom was accustomed, in his 
rambles, to frequent an alehouse, where the landlady, an handsome 
woman, was desirous to increase her customers, by the most insinuating 
manners. Tom ranked among her visitants; and, after arranging all the 
preliminaries, he was permitted, one night, to pay her a late visit. 
To banish thoughtfulness, and to produce repose in the absence of the 
husband, who had gone to the country, some of the best in the house 
was placed upon the table. Tom, who was as much disposed to sacrifice 
to avarice as to love, infused some somniferous ingredients in the 
indulgent hostess's cup, so that, in a little time, he, undisturbed, 
robbed her of three rings, the best of her clothes, and forty pounds 
in money.

His next adventure was to wander the country in the character either 
of a discharged soldier, or a disabled seaman. Nor was he very 
scrupulous at helping himself when the country-people were slow in 
their movements. He was, at length, detected in his robberies, and, 
entering a man's yard to steal, he was fined twenty pounds, and 
committed to Newgate, until it was paid. There he remained four years; 
and, having twice broke out, he was both times put in irons, and hand-
cuffed. When his fine was remitted, and he was set at liberty, he 
again renewed his pilfering, was recommitted, and hanged at Tyburn. 
Before his death, he confessed having murdered a farmer, for which 
Charles Dean, the attorney, was executed.



ANDREW BAYNES. 
A Hardened Malefactor, who Tried Many Dodges, and was 
Hanged on 8 August 1711

THIS man was vicious from his infancy, and his depravity increased 
with his years. His vanity and avarice first displayed themselves in 
renting large houses, and ordering elegant furniture from the 
different mechanics, and, at a convenient time, disposing of the same, 
and leaving the owners to seek redress where they best could. Upon one 
occasion he removed no less than four hundred pounds worth of goods 
into the Mint, which were removed from thence by an express order of 
court.

Being one time in want of money, he went before a justice of peace in 
Norwich, and swore that he had been robbed of one hundred and fifty 
pounds, within five miles of the city, between sun and sun. He 
obtained three or four knaves to swear that he had such a sum of money 
when he left town; the county, therefore, had to pay the money. In 
company with Tom Bets, he next turned housebreaker.

Bets was an old offender; he was tried at the Old Bailey, and sent 
over a soldier into Flanders. He was taken prisoner by the French, 
and, after suffering great calamities, he escaped, and went into the 
service of the King of Sweden. In that service he was sent into 
Poland, from whence he made his escape to Holland. While there, he 
went on board a Dutchman, which was sent to Muscovy to convey a fleet. 
In that country Bets went on shore in the night, stole one of the 
Czar's bears, which he brought to Holland, and, after his discharge, 
gained his bread by showing the animal. He some time after came over 
to England, and, having robbed the houses of Lord Georges in Covent 
Garden, he was tried, and condemned to be executed at Tyburn.

Undismayed by Bets' awful example, Baynes pursued his evil courses. 
After continuing for some time, he was detected, tried, and condemned, 
but had the good fortune to be reprieved. He was scarcely relieved, 
when he robbed the Earl of Westmoreland's house of goods to the value 
of five hundred pounds. Upon the information of one concerned, he was 
detected, but, upon restoring part of the goods, he was liberated.

Thus a second time escaping just punishment, he became more desperate 
than ever; and, being unsuccessful in house-breaking, he commenced 
foot-pad. The first that he and his associates met was a tailor, to 
whom he owed the making of a coat while he was in Newgate. That honest 
man knew Baynes, and addressed him, saying, "Don't you know me?" 
"Yes," replied Baynes, "I know you well enough, and therefore am 
resolved to send you home like a gentleman, for you shall have no 
money in your pockets." Then searching him, he took eight shillings 
and his watch. Not satisfied with that small plunder, he stripped him 
naked, tied him to a tree, and set a bulldog that accompanied him to 
bark and tear at him, until he was completely terrified, and greatly 
hurt; and, had it not been for the compassion of those who were with 
Baynes, he would have allowed the animal to tear him in pieces. Nor 
was his clothes restored to the poor tailor, Baynes telling him, that, 
whether right or wrong, he would soon provide himself of a second suit 
from among the remnants of his customers.

A poor shoemaker upon another day met Baynes and his associates, who 
commanded him to "stand and deliver!" Crispin entreated them to use 
some degree of conscience, and not ruin both him and his family in one 
hour. "You son of Crispin!" said Baynes, "don't talk of conscience to 
us, for we shall now stretch it as you do your leather." He then took 
from him about sixty pounds, and tied his hands and feet Baynes then 
cried, "Is this all the money that you have?" "Yes, indeed!" "You, 
sirrah! you ought to have every bone in your skin broken for bringing 
no more with you." In vain did the shoemaker repeat his request to 
have a small part of his money restored; tying him hand and foot they 
bade him remain until the day of judgment, that they came to relieve 
him.

At another time, this band met three female Quakers, robbed them of 
the small sums they had upon them, then stripped them entirely naked, 
and left them in that exposed situation. Nor could all the entreaties 
of his companions in their favour mitigate the rage of Baynes.

One time Baynes was taken by Dent, the informing constable, and sent 
to Flanders as a soldier. Having run from his colours, he one day, 
along with his companions, met Dent in an alehouse, and, knowing him 
again, they waylaid him at Bloody-bridge, and Baynes said, "Thou 
insolent rascal! who hast sold many a man's blood at twenty shillings 
per head, I will now make you suffer for your conduct." Then using him 
in a cruel manner, he bound him hand and foot, and left him in that 
situation, where he lay until morning. After a course of villainy, 
this miscreant was apprehended, and executed at Tyburn in the twenty-
sixth year of his age.



WILLIAM WARD, SAMUEL LYNN, RALPH EMMERY, JOHN PRIOR, 
ROBERT VICKERS, AND FRANCIS PARQUET 
Malefactors who Were all Hanged on 19 February 1719

THE lives of these men being barren of events, and their deaths 
happening in one day, it was deemed proper to include them in one 
narrative.

William Ward was born in the county of Norfolk. His father, who was a 
mill-wright, removed to Norwich, and he reared his son to his own 
business. Having acquired the knowledge of his business, he went up to 
London, and there married a very amiable young woman, and conducted 
himself with great propriety, until falling in with improper company, 
he was seduced from the paths of industry and honesty. His first 
robbery was the taking a portmanteau from the back of a hackney-coach, 
in which there was a gold watch, a gold chain, and cloth to a 
considerable value. The spoil produced about fourteen guineas, which 
were divided between him and his accomplices. By some accident, 
however, the rightful owner recovered them at the expense of twenty-
one guineas.

At another time, Ward riding through Holborn in a hackney-coach, 
perceiving a porter with a large trunk upon his back, desired the 
coachman to stop, and, calling the porter, gave him a shilling to go 
across the street a message, and desired him to put his burden into 
the coach, and he would take special care of it. Ward immediately 
called to the coachman to drive off to an alehouse, which was the 
common haunt of all kinds of villains. Upon examining the trunk, he 
found about eighty pounds, and a great quantity of clothes. Meanwhile, 
the poor porter was making an outcry through all Holborn for his 
trunk, which his cautioners had to reimburse to the owner, and these 
seeking redress from the porter, he was thrown into jail to meditate 
upon his folly.

Not long after, Ward was detected in taking from a coach a trunk, and, 
being instantly carried to Newgate, he was deprived of the pleasure of 
examining into the contents of his prize. Upon trial and conviction, 
he was sentenced to transportation; but his voyage overseas was 
interrupted by two indictments being brought against him; upon which 
he underwent a new trial, and was sentenced to visit Tyburn instead of 
a foreign land.

Samuel Lynn was born at Bramston, in Norfolk. His father was a grocer 
and tallow-chandler, and his son was taught the same business. Leaving 
the country, the abode of industry and innocence, he went to London, 
and there became acquainted with some who acquired money with more 
rapidity than by the slow returns of labour. In the course of picking 
pockets he was called to plead before a justice, and, being 
unsuccessful in his oratorical efforts, he was sentenced to lose his 
life in the presence of numerous spectators at Tyburn. The clemency of 
his prince, however, exchanged the sentence for that of transportation 
in six months. But, either to support his extravagance, during that 
time, or to gratify his avaricious disposition, he made free with 
other persons' property, and so in the nineteenth year of his age died 
at Tyburn.

Ralph Emmery was a parish boy, and bound apprentice for nine years to 
a chair-maker. He served his time with great fidelity, and afterwards 
gained his bread by the same employment. He commenced his wicked 
career by drinking, swearing, and neglecting the duties of religion, 
and soon proceeded to pocket-picking. For this and similar practices, 
he was once in Whitechapel jail, six times in Newgate, thrice whipped, 
and twice sent to Bridewell; but none of these punishments had the 
least effect in promoting his reformation.

He advanced a step farther in his profession, and went upon the road 
to ease passengers of the unpleasant burden of carrying either gold or 
silver. In this character he and two other companions met a nonjuring 
parson; one of them jostled the honest doctor, while the other two 
came to his protection. They took the doctor in between them, and went 
along, reproaching and quarrelling with the person who first insulted 
him. Arriving at a ditch, the first rogue, while the two guides were 
not aware, came behind, and threw the good parson into the ditch. 
"Look you," said the other two, "Did we not tell you that he was a 
rogue? therefore, we hope that you will be pleased to give us 
something for our trouble in bringing you here." Then they seized his 
hat, wig, coat, and sword, while they emptied his pockets, and left 
the reverend gentleman to emerge from his watery dwelling in the best 
manner he could.

Emery was at last convicted for being accessary to a murder along with 
William Audley and Sarah Brown.

John Prior was born in Bedfordshire, but his parents were either so 
poor or so negligent, that he was bred up in great ignorance, so that 
he could neither read nor write. During some years, he served in the 
country, but, coming to London, he enlisted into the Foot-guards. This 
was the beginning of a life of wickedness. He frequented the company 
of profligate women, who soon drove him to the highway, to support 
their extravagances. He speedily became dexterous in his profession, 
and both in the country and about London, he committed many flagrant 
robberies. He was at last apprehended, and, several of these robberies 
being put into the indictment, he was condemned to terminate his days 
and his depredations at Tyburn.

Robert Vickers was a native of Warwickshire, and, when very young, he 
was bound apprentice to a baker. When his time was expired, he went to 
London, and served some time with two masters, to his own honour, and 
to their satisfaction. But, leaving the path of industry, he went into 
the Foot-guards. In that station his manners and habits soon underwent 
a sad change. Deserting his colours, he commenced foot-pad, and the 
first he attacked was an Irish barrister. He not only robbed him of 
his money, but wantonly stripped him, and, daubing his shirt in a 
pond, and then putting it upon him, he said, "that now he looked 
something like a limb of the law, since he was in black." Then, tying 
him neck and heel, he left him to ponder upon the voluminous authors 
of the law. This robber soon terminated his journey at the well-known 
boundary of thieves.

Francis Parquet was born in France, and, about the age of fifteen, 
came over to England. He lived three years with a French traveller, 
then went to Bath, where he commenced business for himself, and 
succeeded for some time; but at last, getting into debt, he came to 
London and pursued his business, until, by evil companions, he was 
seduced to join them in house-breaking, which he continued to 
practise, until, with his companions in depredation, he ended his days 
at Tyburn.


JOHN TRIPPUCK, ROBERT CANE, THOMAS CHARNOCK, AND 
RICHARD SHEPHERD. 
Malefactors who were all Hanged on 29 January 1720

THE first of these obtained the name of the Golden Tinman, for a 
similar reason to that which procured another the name of the Golden 
Farmer. Similar also to the Golden Farmer, he scorned to be under 
obligations to any other man in the way of his business, or risk his 
neck in the hands of one that might choose to save his own. Our 
adventurer had carried on his depredations in town and country until 
he was notorious in both. Being apprehended, and sentenced, his money 
procured him a pardon, but it did not produce any reformation; for he 
renewed his depredations. It was not long before he met again a 
serious interruption by being requested to pay a visit to Newgate.

Nor was he so fortunate in finding an avaricious prosecutor, for no 
money would induce this one to turn aside the current of justice. His 
former pardon induced him to hope for a second; so that, while the 
ordinary was admonishing him to prepare for death, he would interrupt 
him with the inquiry, "Do you believe I can obtain a pardon?" "I don't 
know, indeed." "But you know one Counsellor ; pray make use of your 
interest with him, and see whether you can get him to save me; I'll 
not be ungrateful, doctor."

The Ordinary was greatly troubled at his conduct, but he still 
persevered in his sacred duty. One day the criminal opened his breast 
to the doctor, and, showing the many scars which he had received, he 
said, "And will not these, good doctor, and the severe pain I have 
endured in their cure, in some sort lessen the heinousness of the 
crimes that I have committed?" "No," said the doctor, "what evils have 
fallen upon you in such expeditions, you have drawn upon yourself, and 
you are not to imagine that these will, in any degree, make amends for 
the multitude of your offences. You had much better clear your 
conscience by a full and ingenuous confession of your crimes, and 
prepare in earnest for another world, since I dare assure you, that 
there is no hope of your being permitted to remain in this any 
longer."

When his hopes of a reprieve had vanished, his natural courage failed, 
and he experienced all the terrors of an awakened conscience, and the 
dreadful foreboding of coming misery. It was reported that he was 
concerned in the murder of one Hull; but that he denied to the very 
last moment. And to the ordinary, a few moments before his death, 
pointing to the rope, he said, "As you see this instrument of death 
about me, what I say is the real truth." He died seemingly penitent.

Robert Cane was naturally of an active rambling turn of mind, and 
though his parents bound him apprentice to two different trades, he 
would settle at neither. He at last went to sea; and the ship in which 
he sailed having captured a Spanish vessel of prodigious value, he 
received a very large sum as his share of the prize-money, which, 
however, did not serve his extravagancies long. He soon emptied his 
pockets, and then had recourse to unlawful means to replenish them. 
Not long after this, Robert became enamoured of a virtuous young 
woman, who was a stranger to his character and crimes. She was soon 
prevailed upon to consent to marry him, but he pretended that it 
behoved to be done privately, not to offend his relations. Not having 
money sufficient to procure a license, he one evening went with the 
determination to procure some. Accordingly, he attacked a man in the 
streets, a little the worse for liquor, and stripped him of his hat 
and coat. The hue and cry was immediately raised. Cane was 
apprehended, and, instead of raising money to be married, he procured 
his death in an ignominious manner.

While he lay in Newgate, the miserable young woman constantly visited 
him, and bewailed his situation; and even her mother became sick, and 
was confined to bed on account of the wretched situation of her 
intended son-in-law. When the day that was to terminate his crimes and 
his sufferings approached, he bitterly bemoaned his vicious courses, 
and the sorrow which they had occasioned to his intended wife, and her 
poor mother. He read a paper at the place of execution, containing a 
confession of his crimes, a vindication of the character of his bride, 
and a profession of his faith, and of universal good-will to all 
mankind. He died in the twenty-second year of his age.

Richard Shepherd was born of respectable parents in the city of 
Oxford, and received an education suitable to their circumstances; but 
he had so totally forgot what he had been taught, that he knew neither 
the Lord's Prayer nor the Creed, at the time when he had most need of 
them.

He was trained to the profession of a butcher, and, becoming attached 
to an industrious, sober, young woman, he was married before his 
apprenticeship was finished. But though his marriage was kept secret 
for some time, yet it was at length discovered by his master, who 
lessened his weekly wages, and constrained him to grant a bond for 
twenty-eight pounds, which proved his ruin. Unable to support himself 
and his wife, while he had so considerable a sum to accumulate for his 
master. Shepherd was easily persuaded by vicious companions, to hazard 
both his conscience and his life, to procure what has been justly 
termed the "root of all evil." They began by housebreaking; but in his 
new occupation he was so unfortunate, that in his second or third 
attempt he was apprehended, and, being tried, was condemned; but his 
friends, on account of his youth, and in the hope of amendment, 
procured his pardon.

But in his, as in almost every similar case, clemency wrought no 
reformation in his morals; he returned to his former employment, and, 
being detected, saved his life by turning evidence against others. No 
unhappy criminal had ever more indulgence than Shepherd, or more 
warnings of his miserable fate; but, under the influence of confirmed 
vice, what are advices! what are terrors! and what even the sight of 
death itself? He had scarcely procured his liberty, when he returned 
to his former ways, was detected, and suffered the due demerit of his 
crimes.

Thomas Charnock had a short journey to Tyburn. He was soberly and 
religiously educated, and, when arrived at maturity, placed in a 
respectable mercantile house; but, desirous to make a figure above his 
station, he robbed his master, and soon cut a very miserable figure at 
Tyburn.

The very narration, and still more the sight, of so many young men, in 
the bloom and vigour of their lives, suffering an untimely death, is 
peculiarly painful to human feelings.



TOM DORBEL 
Highwayman Turned Servant who Robbed and Murdered his 
Mistress' Niece

THIS robber was bred a glover; but before he had served one half of 
his time, he run off from his master, and, coming to London, soon 
became acquainted with men of dispositions similar to his own. About 
the age of nineteen, Tom ventured to appear upon the highway; but he 
was nearly outwitted in his first attempt.

Meeting a Welshman, he demanded Taffy's money, or he would take his 
life. The Welshman said, "Hur has no of hur own, but has threescore 
pounds of hur master's money; but Cot's blood I hur must not give hur 
master's money: what would hur master then say for hur doing so?" Tom 
replied, "You must not put me off with your cant; for money I want, 
and money I will have, let it be whose it will; or expect to be shot 
through the head." The Welshman then delivered the money, saying, 
"What hur gives you is none of hur own; and, that hur master may not 
think hur has spent hur money, hur requests you to be so kind as to 
shoot some holes through hur coat-lappets, that hur master may see hur 
was robbed." So, suspending his coat upon a tree, Tom fired his pistol 
through it. Taffy exclaimed, "Gots splatter a-nails! this is a pretty 
pounce; pray give hur another pounce for hur money I" Tom fired 
another shot through his coat. "By St. Davy, this is a better pounce 
than the other! pray give hur one pounce more!" Quoth Tom, "I have 
never another pounce left." "Why, then," replied the Welshman, "Hur 
has one pounce left for hur, and if hur will not give hur hur money 
again, hur will pounce hur through hur body." He quietly returned the 
money, and was thankful he was allowed to depart.

But this narrow escape did not deter Dorbel, and he continued his 
villainies about the space of five years. It happened, however, that a 
gentleman's son was taken for robbing on the highway; and, as he was 
formerly pardoned, he now despaired of obtaining mercy a second time. 
Tom undertook, for the sum of five hundred pounds, to bring him off. 
The one-half was paid in hand, and the other half was to be paid when 
the deliverance was effected. When the young gentleman came upon his 
trial he was found guilty; but when the judge was about to pass 
sentence, Tom cried out, "Oh I what a sad thing it is to shed innocent 
blood! Oh I what a sad thing it is to shed innocent blood!" and, 
continuing to reiterate the expression, he was apprehended, and, the 
judge interrogating him what he meant by such an expression, he said, 
"May it please your lordship, it is a very hard thing for a man to die 
wrongfully; but one may see how hard-mouthed some people are, by the 
witnesses swearing that this gentleman here at the bar now, robbed 
them on the highway at such a time, when indeed, my lord, I was the 
person that committed that robbery." Accordingly, Tom was taken into 
custody, and the young gentleman liberated. He was brought to trial at 
the following assizes; and being asked, whether he was guilty or not? 
he pleaded not guilty! "Not guilty!" replied the judge; "why, did not 
you at last assizes, when I was here, own yourself guilty of such a 
robbery?" Quoth Tom, "I don't know how far I was guilty then, but, 
upon my word, I am not guilty now; therefore, if any person can accuse 
me of committing such a robbery, I desire they may prove the same." No 
witnesses appearing, he was acquitted.

Tom living at such an extravagant rate in the prison, had scarcely any 
part of the five hundred pounds remaining, when he obtained his 
liberty; therefore, endeavouring to recruit his funds by robbing the 
Duke of Norfolk, near Salisbury, his horse was shot, and he taken, and 
condemned at the next assizes. While under sentence, he found a lawyer 
who engaged, for the sum of fifty guineas, to obtain his pardon. He 
accordingly rode to London, was successful, and just arrived in time 
with the pardon, when Dorbel was about to be thrown off, having rode 
so hard, that his horse immediately dropped down dead. Such, however, 
was Tom's ingratitude, that he refused to pay the lawyer, alleging, 
that any obligation given by a man under sentence of death, was not 
valid.

Dorbel was so much alarmed upon his narrow escape from a violent 
death, that he resolved to abandon the collecting trade, and served in 
several families in the station of a footman. He also served six or 
seven years with a lady in Ormond-street, who had a brother a merchant 
in Bristol, who, having an only daughter sixteen years of age, she 
prevailed upon her father to allow her to come to London to perfect 
her education. Dorbel being a person in whom her aunt thought she 
could place unlimited confidence, he was left alone with her, when the 
miscreant first shockingly abused her person, then robbed her of her 
gold watch, diamond ring, jewels to the amount of an hundred pounds, 
and, cutting a hole in the back of the coach, escaped, leaving the 
young lady in a swoon. It was with difficulty she recovered, to inform 
her relations how she had been treated. Her mother hastened to town to 
see her, and, after speaking a few words to her, the poor girl 
breathed her last. The disconsolate father soon after lost his senses.

Dorbel was pursued in different directions, and apprehended just after 
he had robbed a gentleman of three pounds five shillings. He was 
tried, and condemned to be executed and hung in chains.



TOM GARRET 
Highwayman, who Proved less Clever than his Victim

THOMAS GARRET was an only son of respectable parents, living at 
Ipswich, in Suffolk; and, being bred an ironmonger, began trade with a 
stock of one thousand pounds, and soon married a wife with a portion 
of eight hundred. In the space of two years, however, he, by gaming 
and dissipation, wasted all his means, and, in order to evade the 
importunities of his creditors, came up to London. Arrived in the 
capital, he was soon versant in all the ways of vice, and, to support 
his extravagance, he soon began to collect upon the highway.

When his father was informed of his embarrassments, he came up to 
town, and again gave him a thousand pounds to commence business in an 
honest way. But even in this situation, he and a profligate mercer 
frequented the road, and took a purse occasionally.

He and his companion were, one evening, at an inn in Hertfordshire, 
and a gentleman lodging there, gave the landlord his portmanteau to 
put up for safety. Acquainted with the character of Garret and his 
companions, the rascally innkeeper gave them the hint, and, 
introducing the gentleman to them, that so they might learn from 
himself the route he intended to take, they entertained him, and would 
not suffer him to pay anything. Next day they breakfasted with the 
gentleman, insisted upon paying the whole bill, and then proceeded on 
their journey. When they found a convenient place, they opened the 
gentleman's portmanteau, took out of it two hundred pounds, and rode 
off.

Finding that he had paid too dear for his supper and breakfast, he 
alighted from his horse, took out his penknife, and slightly wounded 
his horse in the foot, so that he halted; he then filled the vacancy 
of his portmanteau with stones, returned to the inn, and, informing 
the landlord that an accident had happened to his horse, it was 
necessary to send immediately for a farrier. Meanwhile he again gave 
his portmanteau to the landlord to preserve, who, finding that it was 
not lessened in its weight, was much chagrined, because he was to have 
his share of the booty. As the farrier was dressing his horse, the 
gentleman requested the favour of the landlord to drink a bottle with 
him, and the whole of the conversation turned upon the generous 
travellers; and the gentleman remarked, that if he knew where to find 
them, he would bring them down, and spend ten guineas in treating 
them. From this conversation the landlord was confirmed in his 
suspicions that he had not been robbed; therefore, gave him their 
names and places of abode. He expressed his satisfaction on receiving 
this information, and said, that "he was resolved to see them as soon 
as he could." The farrier assured him, he might ride safely to London, 
without injuring his horse; accordingly he set forward and arrived in 
town that evening.

At five next morning, he called at Garret's house, and when the 
servant answered, he told him, "He must speak with his master." The 
servant replied, "He was not stirring, and he believed he would not 
until ten or eleven of the clock, as being weary and fatigued in 
coming off a journey late last night." The gentleman replied, "It is 
upon such extraordinary business I want to see him, that I must and 
will speak with him just now." The servant then acquainted Garret, 
that "there was a gentleman below stairs, who says, he must and will 
speak with you presently." Conscious of guilt. Garret, with tremulous 
heart, put on his night-gown, and moved down stairs. Seeing that it 
was the gentleman he had robbed the day before, he took him into a 
back room, when the gentleman told him, "that he had borrowed a 
hundred pounds of him, which, if he would not then pay, he must expect 
to feel the utmost severity of justice. The money was instantly paid. 
He then went to the mercer's house, made the same uproar, and received 
the same sum.

The anecdote was circulated, but the person concealed. Even this 
narrow escape wrought the reformation neither of the one nor the 
other. After rendering themselves notorious upon the highway, they 
turned to house-breaking, and Garret was apprehended, and suffered for 
his crimes.



COLONEL TURNER 
Officer and Gentleman who Maintained his Position by 
Robbery

THIS young man was born in Winchester, in 1604, of rich and 
respectable parents, who sent him to be a goldsmith, and, at the 
termination of his time, gave him a stock of three thousand pounds to 
commence business; and, by marriage he received two thousand more. 
With this ample fortune he was very successful in business, and was 
soon esteemed one of the wealthiest men in the place.

But he was too much addicted to company, and greatly attached to the 
officers of the militia, amongst whom he was received as captain, and 
at last attained to the rank of colonel. He was generous and 
extravagant, and, in the different places where he resided, he gave 
such splendid entertainments as involved him in unnecessary expenses. 
He was also liberal with his money in other respects, and delighted in 
splendour. The usual effects of such conduct were experienced by the 
colonel. Nor had he wisdom to retrench his expenses with his 
diminished fortune. He had recourse to dishonourable means, and for 
some time remained unsuspected. Among other things, he purchased from 
a merchant three hundred and sixty pounds of train oil and rice, went 
to his house to pay him, and, while the whole of the money was lying 
upon the table, two of his accomplices came in, and one of them 
pretending some urgent business, occupied the attention of the master, 
while the other went off with the greater part of the money. At 
another time, the colonel resolved to rob a rich merchant, and, for 
that purpose, one of his associates conveyed himself into the 
gentleman's cellar, and, as soon as he was in bed and asleep, he 
admitted the colonel. They went to the gentleman's room, bound and 
used him in a most barbarous manner, went to his wareroom, and robbed 
it to the amount of more than five thousand pounds.

Minute inquiry was made after the robbers, and the goods being 
described, some of them were seen in the colonel's house; so that, 
notwithstanding his high character, which had screened his villainies, 
his house was searched, many of the articles found, and the colonel, 
and his wife, and three sons were liberated; but he was executed on 
the 1st January, 1663. After his death there was another robbery of 
his discovered. A letter was sent to a dealer in the country, by a 
rich merchant in town, requesting him to come up quickly, as there was 
an advantageous purchase that might be made. He hastened with all the 
money be could collect, and was robbed upon his journey.



CONCLUDING NOTE 
To the Jackson 1795 edition.

THUS have we endeavoured, and we hope not unsuccessfully, to complete 
this work, in conformity to the proposals originally offered to the 
public. We trust we have not omitted any trials of great importance, 
nor inserted many of a trifling nature. Those who wish well to society 
will be pleased to see vice exposed in every shape, and reprobated 
under all the variety of forms it may assume. Too much cannot be said 
to discountenance its propagation, or to enhance the charms of true 
religion and virtue.

To advance these important purposes should be the aim and end of every 
publication. The book that does not tend to make people wiser and 
better is a nuisance to society, and a disgrace to the press.

As the reformation of prisoners, rather than the punishment of them, 
should be the great aim of our legislators, we beg leave to submit to 
our readers some extracts from letters written by a gentleman to a 
Member of Parliament, both of them of the most amiable private 
characters, and both of them zealous promoters of every public good.

Jonas Hanway, Esq., in a letter to Sir Charles Bunbury, says, 'In the 
general view of our prisons, I beg leave to make a few remarks, which 
to those who have not considered the subject may carry some degree of 
information. Of all the abuses which ever crept into civil society, 
professing Christianity, considering the evil propensities of the 
common run of our malefactors, the tap-house seems to stand in a 
distinguished rank. What reformation can be expected, where it is the 
interest of the keeper of a prison to promote inebriety and 
dissipation of thought? If he is suffered to sell strong liquors for 
his own emolument, he will be tempted to shut his gates against 
everyone who would relieve the real crying wants of those who are in 
need, and open them wide to all such as will supply the means of 
drunkenness. There can be no good reason for an indulgence, which, 
scattering the thoughts, will create a desperate repugnance to the 
calls of heaven. When the foul ought to tremble, as being on the verge 
of eternity, such a conduct is abominable beyond all expression.

'Doth not the magistrate prostitute his authority, in granting 
licences, on the puerile presumption that he shall increase the 
revenue? Or is it that knowing how scanty the allowance is to the 
keepers of prisons, he gives them a liberty which he knows cannot be 
used without the most deadly consequences, even that of promoting the 
very temper and disposition which encouraged the malefactor to commit 
the crime for which he is imprisoned! This conduct is reproachable in 
the highest degree. The magistrate ought rather to refuse the licence, 
and represent the necessity of allowing keepers of prisons salaries 
suitable to the importance of their office.

'The conversion of a house, which ought to be a scene of sorrow and 
repentance, into jollity, and carelessness to all events, is one of 
the chief causes of the evil with which we are so sorely afflicted. If 
this is not remedied, can any expedient restore good discipline and 
true economy in prisons? If some prisoners should be thus deprived of 
a comfort they might be entitled to, it would be far better than 
granting an indulgence, so pregnant with mischief to the generality.

'By an act of the third of his present majesty, no jailer in Ireland 
is to sell ale, beer, or any other liquor, by himself or any other 
person, under the penalty of £5 for every offence; and I am assured it 
operates happily in preventing the ordinary bad effects. With us the 
case is different; for every capital prison is a public-house; and 
though spirituous liquors, commonly so called, are prohibited, yet, 
under the name of cordials, I am told they pass; or at least that by 
the force of wine, and malt liquor, all the bad effects of 
intoxication are continued.

'Among the several grievances which rise in judgment against us, are 
the fees demanded of malefactors, now softened, but not abolished. The 
want of medical assistancethe deficiency of bathsinattention to 
cleanlinessfoul air for want of ventilationwant of a change of clean 
washed and well-dried garments, with a regular change of linenwhere 
these are wanting, death must be a familiar guest to a prisoner. Even 
the regular washing of hands and feet is of consequence. A proper 
regard to diet, according to the apparent wants of prisoners, is 
necessary to the preservation of life in prisons, more than in other 
places; and the defect often operates like a plague.'

That a reform in the management of our prisons is necessary, no man of 
common sense can doubt; and it remains with the wisdom of legislature 
to provide a remedy for the evil.

Perhaps the keeping prisoners separate from each other, and totally 
denying all the means of intemperance, would go far towards effecting 
that reformation which is so much wanted. As matters now stand, the 
man charged with felony is repeatedly visited by the most abandoned of 
his acquaintance, and they mutually harden each other in vice. These 
visits should be very unfrequent, and never permitted but in the 
presence of the keeper or his deputy, who should be people of the most 
unexceptionable character, and take care that not an improper word is 
uttered.'

To drop, however, this subject, let us conclude this volume by a 
fervent wish that the readers of it may carefully and steadily avoid 
every vice therein recorded, every folly therein exposed. Let honesty 
be the prevailing, the ruling, principle among us; let us be humbly 
content in the situation which Providence hath allotted us; not 
seeking to possess ourselves of the property of others; and paying a 
devout reverence to that divine command, the authority of which no one 
will deny:

'Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's house, thou shalt not covet thy 
neighbour's wife, nor his man-servant, nor his maid-servant, nor his 
ox, nor his ass, nor ANYTHING that is his.'
