The Diary of a Lover of Literature
by
Thomas Greene

First published 1810

Published by the Ex-classics Project, 2018. 

Public Domain


Introduction by Edmund Gosse

It may be that, save by a few elderly people and certain lovers of old 
Gentleman's Magazines, the broad anonymous quarto known as The Diary of 
a Lover of Literature is no longer much admired or even recollected. But 
it deserves to be recalled to memory, if only in that it was, in some 
respects, the first, and in others, the last of a long series of 
publications. It was the first of those diaries of personal record of 
the intellectual life, which have become more and more the fashion and 
have culminated at length in the ultra-refinement of Amiel and the 
conscious self-analysis of Marie Bashkirtseff. It was less definitely, 
perhaps, the last, or one of the last, expressions of the eighteenth 
century sentiment, undiluted by any tincture of romance, any suspicion 
that fine literature existed before Dryden, or could take any form 
unknown to Burke.

It was under a strict incognito that The Diary of a Lover of Literature 
appeared, and it was attributed by conjecture to various famous people. 
The real author, however, was not a celebrated man. His name was Thomas 
Green, and he was the grandson of a wealthy Suffolk soap-boiler, who had 
made a fortune during the reign of Queen Anne. The Diarist's father had 
been an agreeable amateur in letters, a pamphleteer, and a champion of 
the Church of England against Dissent. Thomas Green, who was born in 
1769, found himself at twenty-five in possession of the ample family 
estates, a library of good books, a vast amount of leisure, and a 
hereditary faculty for reading. His health was not very solid, and he 
was debarred by it from sharing the pleasures of his neighbour squires. 
He determined to make books and music the occupation of his life, and in 
1796, on his twenty-seventh birthday, he began to record in a diary his 
impressions of what he read. He went on very quietly and luxuriantly, 
living among his books in his house at Ipswich, and occasionally rolling 
in his post-chaise to valetudinarian baths and "Spaws."

When he had kept his diary for fourteen years, it seemed to a pardonable 
vanity so amusing, that he persuaded himself to give part of it to the 
world. The experiment, no doubt, was a very dubious one. After much 
hesitation, and in an evil hour, perhaps, he wrote: "I am induced to 
submit to the indulgence of the public the idlest work, probably, that 
ever was composed; but, I could wish to hope, not absolutely the most 
unentertaining or unprofitable." The welcome his volume received must 
speedily have reassured him, but he had pledged himself to print no 
more, and he kept his promise, though he went on writing his Diary until 
he died in 1825. His MSS. passed into the hands of John Mitford, who 
amused the readers of The Gentleman's Magazine with fragments of them 
for several years. Green has had many admirers in the past, amongst whom 
Edward FitzGerald was not the least distinguished. But he was always 
something of a local worthy, author of one anonymous book, and of late 
he has been little mentioned outside the confines of Suffolk.

It would be difficult to find an example more striking than the Diary of 
a Lover of Literature of exclusive absorption in the world of books. It 
opens in a gloomy year for British politics, but there is found no 
allusion to current events. There is a victory off Cape St. Vincent in 
February, 1797, but Green is attacking Bentley's annotations on Horace. 
Bonaparte and his army are buried in the sands of Egypt; our Diarist 
takes occasion to be buried in Shaftesbury's Enquiry Concerning Virtue. 
Europe rings with Hohenlinden, but the news does not reach Mr. Thomas 
Green, nor disturb him in his perusal of Soame Jenyns' View of 
Christianity. The fragment of the Diary here preserved runs from 
September 1796 to June 1800. No one would guess, from any word between 
cover and cover, that these were not halcyon years, an epoch of complete 
European tranquillity. War upon war might wake the echoes, but the river 
ran softly by the Ipswich garden of this gentle enthusiast, and not a 
murmur reached him through his lilacs and laburnums.

I have said that this book is one of the latest expressions of 
unadulterated eighteenth-century sentiment. For form's sake, the Diarist 
mentions now and again, very superficially, Shakespeare, Bacon, and 
Milton; but in reality, the garden of his study is bounded by a thick 
hedge behind the statue of Dryden. The classics of Greece and Rome, and 
the limpid reasonable writers of England from the Restoration downwards, 
these are enough for him. Writing in 1800 he has no suspicion of a new 
age preparing. We read these stately pages, and we rub our eyes. Can it 
be that when all this was written, Wordsworth and Coleridge had issued 
Lyrical Ballads, and Keats himself was in the world? Almost the only 
touch which shows consciousness of a suspicion that romantic literature 
existed, is a reference to the rival translations of Burger's Lenore in 
1797. Sir Walter Scott, as we know, was one of the anonymous 
translators; it was, however, in all probability not his, but Taylor's, 
that Green mentions with special approbation.

In one hundred years a mighty change has come over the tastes and 
fashions of literary life. When The Diary of a Lover of Literature was 
written, Dr. Hurd, the pompous and dictatorial Bishop of Worcester, was 
a dreaded martinet of letters, carrying on the tradition of his yet more 
formidable master Warburton. As people nowadays discuss Verlaine and 
Ibsen, so they argued in those days about Godwin and Horne Tooke, and 
shuddered over each fresh incarnation of Mrs. Radcliffe. Soame Jenyns 
was dead, indeed, in the flesh, but his influence stalked at nights 
under the lamps and where disputants were gathered together in country 
rectories. Dr. Parr affected the Olympian nod, and crowned or checkmated 
reputations. "A flattering message from Dr. P——" sends our Diarist into 
ecstasies so excessive that a reaction sets in, and the "predominant and 
final effect upon my mind has been depression rather than elevation." We 
think of
 
The yarns Jack Hall invented, and the songs Jem Roper sung. 
And where are now Jem Roper and Jack Hall?

Who cares now for Parr's praise or Soame Jenyns' censure? Yet in our 
Diarist's pages these take equal rank with names that time has spared, 
with Robertson and Gibbon, Burke and Reynolds.

Thomas Green was more ready for experiment in art than in literature. He 
was "particularly struck" at the Royal Academy of 1797 with a sea view 
by a painter called Turner:

"Fishing vessels coming in with a heavy swell in apprehension of a 
tempest, gathering in the distance, and casting as it advances a 
night of shade, while a parting glow is spread with fine effect 
upon the shore; the whole composition bold in design and masterly 
in execution. I am entirely unacquainted with the artist, but if he 
proceeds as he has begun, he cannot fail to become the first in his 
department."

A remarkable prophecy, and one of the earliest notices we possess of the 
effect which the youthful Turner, then but twenty-two years of age, made 
on his contemporaries.

As a rule, except when he is travelling, our Diarist almost entirely 
occupies himself with a discussion of the books he happens to be 
reading. His opinions are not always in concert with the current 
judgment of to-day; he admires Warburton much more than we do, and 
Fielding much less. But he never fails to be amusing, because so 
independent within the restricted bounds of his intellectual domain. He 
is shut up in his eighteenth century like a prisoner, but inside its 
wall his liberty of action is complete. Sometimes his judgments are 
sensibly in advance of his age. It was the fashion in 1798 to denounce 
the Letters of Lord Chesterfield as frivolous and immoral. Green takes a 
wider view, and in a thoughtful analysis points out their judicious 
merits and their genuine parental assiduity. When Green can for a moment 
lift his eyes from his books, he shows a sensitive quality of 
observation which might have been cultivated to general advantage. Here 
is a reflection which seems to be as novel as it is happy:

"Looked afterwards into the Roman Catholic Chapel in Duke Street. 
The thrilling tinkle of the little bell at the elevation of the 
Host is perhaps the finest example that can be given of the sublime 
by association—nothing so poor and trivial in itself, nothing so 
transcendently awful, as indicating the sudden change in the 
consecrated Elements, and the instant presence of the Redeemer."

Much of the latter part of the Diary, as we hold it, is occupied with 
the description of a tour in England and Wales. Here Green is lucid, 
graceful, and refined: producing one after another little vignettes in 
prose, which remind us of the simple drawings of the water-colour 
masters of the age, of Girtin or Cozens or Glover. The volume, which 
opened with some remarks on Sir William Temple, closes with a 
disquisition on Warton's criticism of the poets. The curtain rises for 
three years on a smooth stream of intellectual reflection, unruffled by 
outward incident, and then falls again before we are weary of the 
monotonous flow of undiluted criticism. The Diary of a Lover of 
Literature is at once the pleasing record of a cultivated mind, and a 
monument to a species of existence that is as obsolete as nankeen 
breeches or a tie-wig.

Isaac D'Israeli said that Green had humbled all modern authors to the 
dust, and that he earnestly wished for a dozen volumes of The Diary. At 
Green's death material for at least so many supplements were placed in 
the hands of John Mitford, who did not venture to produce them. From 
January 1834 to May 1843, however, Mitford was incessantly contributing 
to The Gentleman's Magazine unpublished extracts from this larger Diary. 
These have never been collected, but my friend, Mr. W. Aldis Wright, 
possesses a very interesting volume, into which the whole mass of them 
has been carefully and consecutively pasted, with copious illustrative 
matter, by the hand of Edward FitzGerald, whose interest in and 
curiosity about Thomas Green were unflagging.





Title Page

EXTRACTS

FROM

THE DIARY

OF A

LOVER OF LITERATURE.

=======================

IPSWICH:

PRINTED AND SOLD BY JOHN RAW;

SOLD ALSO BY LONGMAN, HURST REES, AND ORME, PATERNOSTER-ROW, LONDON
——-
1810.





PREFACE.

At length, after much hesitation, and in an evil hour perhaps, I am 
induced to submit to the indulgence of the public, the idlest work, 
probably, that ever was composed; but, I could wish to hope, not 
absolutely the most unentertaining or unprofitable.

For the errors and defects naturally incident to a composition 
successively exhibiting the impressions of the moment in the language 
which the moment prompted, and which must derive any interest it may 
possess from the ease and freedom with which these impressions are 
communicated, it would be fruitless and absurd to attempt an apology. 
That remarks, hastily made, will sometimes prove unfounded; that first 
views of an author's meaning and spirit, will occasionally be erroneous; 
that references, suddenly set down amidst the instant pressure of other 
matter, and, not always open to subsequent revision, will now and then 
be incorrect; and that expressions, eagerly seized on the exigency of 
the occasion, will here and there appear too daring, and frequently 
uncouth—these, and topics of extenuation such as these, must 
spontaneously suggest themselves to every Reader: and as the just 
allowances, on these accounts, will cheerfully be made by every candid 
mind, so with none but the candid can I expect that any excuses I could 
offer on the subject would avail to obtain them. For faults of every 
other description, and for more than a due proportion of these, I feel 
that I am strictly accountable; and present myself before the Audience 
whose attention I have presumed to engage with my babble, under an 
appalling sense of the responsibility which my rashness has incurred.

To the objector, who should fiercely demand, why I obtruded on the 
public at all, matter confessedly so crude and so peccant,—I have really 
little to allege which is quite satisfactory to my own mind, or which I 
could reasonably hope, therefore, would prove so to his: but to an 
offended spirit of a gentler nature, I might perhaps be allowed to 
intimate, that, whatever my faults may be, I have not attempted to decoy 
unwary readers by an imposing title, nor to tax their curiosity with the 
costly splendours of fashionable typography. It has been my earnest 
wish, at least, to obviate disappointment, by accommodating, as much as 
possible, my appearance to my pretensions. These are simple, and of easy 
statement. To furnish occupation, in a vacant hour, to minds imbued with 
a relish for literary pursuits, by suggesting topics for reflection and 
incentives for research, partly from an exhibition of whatever struck me 
as most interesting in the thoughts of others, during a miscellaneous 
course of reading, and partly, too, from a free and unreserved 
communication of the thoughts they gave rise to in my own mind—this is 
all that I venture to propose to the Reader as my aim in the publication 
of the following Extracts: and if, in the prosecution of this purpose, I 
should be so happy as to conciliate that good will which is not unlikely 
to result from the tolerable execution of such a design, I shall fully 
have accomplished everything, so far as an author's feelings are 
concerned, to which my ambition, or my vanity (if it must be so), 
aspires.

With respect to my success in this adventure, if I am not generally very 
sanguine, there are certain moments—under the encouraging influence of a 
balmy air, bright sky, and vigorous digestion—in which I am not 
altogether without hope. When I advert, it is true, to the numerous 
faults that deform the following pages, all crowding in hideous 
succession before me—when I reflect on the various improvements of which 
the whole would be susceptible, even under my own mature revisal—above 
all, when I compute what brighter talents and ampler attainments might 
have achieved in a similar career—my heart, oppressed with the load of 
my infirmities, sinks in despondency within me: but when I consider, on 
the other hand, the wretched trash with which the public is sometimes 
apparently content to be amused, my spirits, in a slight degree, revive; 
I cannot disguise, from myself, that I am at least entitled to equal 
indulgence with some of these candidates for public favour; and in the 
momentary elation of this ignoble triumph, am tempted to anticipate a 
reception, which however moderate and subdued for an illusion of the 
fancy, may perhaps prove ridiculously flattering compared with the 
actual doom that awaits me.

Though the substance of my Journal is merely literary, other matter 
occasionally occurs; and perhaps I ought to notice here, from its bulk, 
what I have purposely neglected proclaiming in the title, from its 
quality—the notes, I mean, taken on different excursions through the 
picturesque parts of this island. They are certainly slight and 
superficial; and though they recall very distinct images, and are 
associated with many delightful sensations, in my own mind, are little 
likely, I fear, to afford much gratification to the general reader. 
Those who have visited the same, scenes, or who propose to visit them, 
may possibly derive some pleasure from their perusal:—and, at all 
events, as the die is cast (though I sometimes wish it back again), they 
must now pass muster, and take their chance, with the rest.

The following sheets are, of course, only a sample, though a pretty 
large one, of a more considerable work:—but the purchaser of the present 
Volume (I hasten to add) need not be alarmed. I cannot flatter myself 
that the materials for a future selection, are eminently better than 
those from which I have thus far drawn; and with the present extracts I 
am so little satisfied, on a review of them in print, that unless they 
should experience the most unequivocal symptoms of public favour, they 
are the last that will appear. An idle experiment, however unsuccessful, 
may be good-naturedly excused; but to persist.in a piece of folly of 
this kind, after a fair warning that it is such, would betray an 
unpardonable disregard of what is due, on the occasion, both to public 
feeling and my own character.

Ipswich. April the 20th, 1810.





1796.
SEPTEMBER the 12th

ON this day, the twenty-seventh anniversary (as Gibbon, in stately 
language, would describe it) of my birth, I begin a register of my 
observations and reflections:—a task which I deeply lament has been so 
long deferred, but which I am resolved to prosecute with vigour, now it 
is begun; anticipating much delight from the review it will enable me to 
take of my occupations and pursuits, and of the feelings and opinions 
with which they were accompanied.

Read, in the evening, "Temple on the Origin of Government:" in which the 
source of political power is justly traced; and the doctrine of an 
original compact, as an historical fact, successfully exploded. He 
plainly states, what, though very obvious, is often overlooked, that all 
government is a restraint upon liberty; and, in all modes of it, the 
dominion over individuals equally absolute. Pope probably borrowed, from 
a part of this essay, his thought-

"For forms of government let fools contest; 
"Whate'er is best administered, is best".— 
Essay on Man, Epistle 3, v. 303.

A position, however, not defensible, since the form may influence the 
administration.—The whole essay is extremely judicious and unreserved. 
Temple is a very sensible writer; and draws more from his own stock of 
observation and reflection, than is usual with the writers of the 
present day.

Finished, afterwards, Gulliver's Travels. Could this severe satire on 
poor human nature, be designed to reform it; or was it the overflowing 
merely of that "saeva indignatio,"<1> which in Swift, it is to be 
suspected, sprung less from a strong abhorrence of vice, than the 
exacerbations of mortified ambition? I am afraid we cannot hesitate in 
adopting the latter alternative.—Nothing can transcend the felicity of 
his contrivance for exposing our follies and our frailties, nor the 
consummate skill with which he has availed himself of it.

SEPT. the 14th

Looked into the New Annual Register for 1795. The tone of politics in 
the History of Literature, and in the British and Foreign History, 
materially differ: but the wonder is, how so much consistency is 
preserved in works of this nature; and, instead of marvelling, with 
Johnson, how anything but profit should incite men to literary labour, I 
am rather surprised that mere emolument should induce them to labour so 
well.—To review, in a connected series, those events which we caught 
only by detached snatches as they passed, is very amusing. Even an old 
newspaper, in a moment of listlesness, has, with me, its charms. It puts 
one into something like the condition of a prescient being, perusing the 
journals of the day: we see passions agitating, which are now extinct; 
reports affirmed, which we know to be false; alarms sounded, which we, 
are sure had no foundation; and expectation all alive—upon projects 
which have ended in nothing.

SEPT. the 19th

Met Mr. E—n at Mr. R.'s. The conversation (in which I took no part) 
turned, after dinner, on the prophecies applicable to the present 
period. Both Mr. E. and Mr. R. think there are such. Mr. E. is 
convinced, from a passage in the Apocalypse, that monarchy and hierarchy 
will be restored in France for three years. Appearances indicating so 
little the completion of this event, he was tauntingly asked, what he 
would think of the prophecies, if it did not take place? I see, said he, 
so manifestly that many parts of them have been fulfilled, that I should 
only conclude my application of this part was erroneous, and that it 
still remained to be accomplished. I should, of course, be disposed to 
examine very seriously, and to adopt if it was plausible,.any other 
interpretation which might be offered; but my assurance of the truth of 
the prophecies at large, would not be in the least impaired.—Though, to 
a profane eye, the Book of Revelations may seem like the wild rhapsody 
of an euthanasic and distempered mind, mistaking dreams for visions, and 
reveries for inspiration, I was not the less pleased with this temperate 
and ingenuous reply of one of its warmest devotees. Yet I marvel at his 
confidence. If prophecy is designed to convince, (and of the force of 
the proof which it is capable of rendering, no one can be more fully 
sensible than myself), why is it not clear? To me it seems evident, that 
unless the event is so distinctly and circumstantially foretold, that it 
might be distinctly and circumstantially foreseen, we can never have 
satisfactory assurance that a prediction has been fulfilled. Obscurity 
is so readily accommodated, by a willing mind, to any contingency; an 
ardent fancy, bent on the discovery, can so easily find whatever forms 
it pleases, in the clouds, that any supposed completion must otherwise 
be received with considerable distrust. What shall we say, then, when 
there are scarcely two commentators, of any note, on the Revelations, 
who are agreed in the application of its prophecies to events allowed, 
on all hands, to be past.—I am aware of the old excuse, that if prophecy 
were so clear that the.event could be foreseen, we should be induced to 
ascribe its accomplishment to art—to conclude that the prediction led to 
its completion. Such an argument, so far as it applied, would merely go 
to show the incompetency of any such species of proof: but surely it is 
easy to imagine events foretold, which, as no human sagacity could 
foresee, so, from the opposite interests or utter ignorance; of the 
parties concerned in bringing them to pass, we might be morally assured 
no human agency designedly promoted.—The most politic defence of the 
obscurity of prophecy,,would be, to regard it as an exercise for our 
diligence and faith.

SEPT. the 22nd

Finished the New Annual Register for 1795. The account of the religion 
and government of the Japanese, is highly curious; and exhibits that 
people, of whom we have known little but through defamatory channels, as 
considerably more advanced in all the refinements of civilization, than 
we had hitherto supposed. But has not the passion for the marvellous, 
which luxuriates equally in an excess of chiaro as oscuro,<2> a little 
overcharged the picture?—The Review of Literature, is not enlivened by 
much critical discernment: the praise is far too indiscriminate, and the 
censures too feeble.

Attended a concert, in the evening; at which Hague, of Cambridge, led 
the band. His taste is refined, his tones sweet and rich, and his 
execution easy and correct: but, if I may judge from the concluding 
piece, he wants force to transfuse, and possibly genius to catch, the 
fire of Handel. It is a lamentable drawback on musical composition, that 
the author cannot exhibit his conceptions directly to the public; but 
must trust, for this purpose, to the agency of others. The painter, the 
architect, the poet, address themselves at once, and without any 
intervention, to the senses and feelings of mankind:—an inestimable 
advantage!

SEPT. the 23rd

Began with eagerness, and read, with increasing avidity, the first four 
chapters of Roscoe's Life of Lorenzo de Medici. The style is luminous 
and flowing: not curiously elaborated, perhaps, into exquisite 
precision; but utterly free from all affectation. The subject itself is 
ably treated: the thread of the narrative is steadily pursued; the 
collateral and explanatory matter, judiciously interwoven; and the 
images by which particular sentiments are enforced, are generally just, 
and sometimes original and happy.—His strained comparison, however, (C. 
3), between the disciples of Plato and of Wesley, I either do not 
comprehend, or do not feel.—In the atrocious conspiracy of the Pope, the 
Cardinal, the Archbishop, and the Ecclesiastics, (C. 4), against the 
lives of Lorenzo and his brother, a real philosopher, perhaps, might see 
nothing peculiarly repugnant to the superstition of the times. Our deep 
abhorrence of the crime of murder, is the offspring, not of devotion, 
but of a cultivated and refined humanity—of a heart revolting at blood, 
the shrieks of terror, the convulsive agonies, the ghastliness, and all 
the horrors of sudden and violent death. The soldier, who undertook the 
assassination with readiness, yet shrunk back from performing it in 
church, displayed the genuine feelings of a layman; but the Priests were 
Lords of the Sanctuary, and might surely apply it to any pious purpose. 
They probably would have shuddered with horror, at the proposal of 
throwing the consecrated wafer to the dogs.

Gibbon has touched the interesting period which Mr. Roscoe treats, with 
the hand of a master. I am surprised that in Mr. Roscoe's notice of him-
for he does refer to him—he did not bestow an ampler measure of 
applause. Robertson, on a similar occasion, in his Disquisition upon 
Ancient India, paid a just and noble tribute to the comprehensive 
erudition of this accomplished writer. Certainly in his qualifications 
as an historian and a critic, he is above all praise: but my opinion of 
him as a man and as a genius, has rather been diminished by the perusal 
of his Miscellaneous Works; and I heartily acquiesce in the very 
sensible judgment pronounced upon them, and upon the author, in the last 
Monthly Review.—Of Robertson himself, it is remarkable, that he has 
written nothing but History.

SEPT. the 24th

Read the 5th Chapter of Roscoe's Life: consisting chiefly of a critical 
disquisition on the poetical character of Lorenzo de Medici; 
injudiciously introduced in the midst of an interesting narrative, and 
by no means executed with the skill and taste which I expected. His 
exposition of the great end and object of Poetry—"to communicate a clear 
and perfect idea of the proposed subject," affords, at the outset, a 
very unfavourable prognostic; though I admit a man may understand well, 
what he defines absurdly.—Much of the matter which loads the Appendix, 
might surely have been spared.

SEPT. the 26th

Pursued Roscoe's Work. The petty squabbles of the Italian States, 
detailed in the 6th Chapter, are much too minute and insignificant to 
interest attention; nor can I think that they are related in the most 
clear and lively manner. Of Lorenzo's abilities as a statesman, but 
little is made out; and I begin to question the historical powers of his 
biographer.-In treating, however, his favourite theme—the rise and 
progress of Italian Literature—in the two succeeding Chapters, the 
spirit of the narrative revives: yet an incident is now and then very 
awkwardly lugged in, under an apparent impression of the necessity of 
telling whatever has been told, however trivial and uninteresting, of 
the domestic life of Lorenzo. Distinguishing traits of character and 
incident, are what we require from the biographer. In the great mass of 
human actions and occurrences. all mankind so nearly resemble each 
other, that there can be nothing worth recording.

SEPT. the 29th

Read the 9th Chapter of Roscoe's Lorenzo de Medici; in which the rise 
(or renovation) and progress of the arts of painting, statuary, 
engraving, and sculpture upon gems, with the merits of the respective 
artists in each department, are happily delineated. The account of 
Michael Angelo—his giant powers—and the concussion with which his advent 
shook the world of genius and taste—is even sublime.—Roscoe is not 
always exact in the choice of his expressions: for instance, he uses 
"instigate" in a good sense; which, where we have another appropriate 
term, is unpardonable: "compromise", which properly means, the 
adjustment of differences by reciprocal concession, he employs, by what 
authority I know not, to express, the putting to hazard by implication. 
A catalogue of synonyms, executed with philological skill and 
philosophical discrimination, would be a valuable accession to English 
Literature.

Read, after a long interval, with much delight, the first two Books of 
Caesar's Commentaries. The States of Gaul are represented as far more 
advanced in government and manners, than I should have expected him to 
find them; and it would puzzle the Directory of France, at this moment, 
to frame a manifesto, so neatly conceived, and so forcibly yet chastely 
expressed, as the reply of Ariovistus, a barbaric chief from the wilds 
of Germany, to the embassy of Caesar.—It is interesting to trace the 
route of this great commander (and the similitude of names will 
sometimes fix it with precision) on a modern map.-Nothing can exceed the 
ease, perspicuity, and spirit, with which this incomparable narrative is 
conducted.

Dipped into Boswell's Life of Johnson. Boswell, from his open, 
communicative, good-humoured vanity, which leads him to display events 
and feelings that other men, of more judgment, though slighter 
pretensions, would have studiously concealed, has depressed himself 
below his just level in public estimation. His information is extensive; 
his talents far from despicable; and he seems so exactly adapted, even 
by his very foibles, that we might almost suppose him purposely, 
created, to be the chronicler of Johnson. A pleasing and instructive 
pocket-companion might be formed, by a judicious selection from his 
copious repertory of Johnson's talk.

SEPT. the 30th

Read the 10th, and concluding, Chapter of Roscoe's Lorenzo de Medici. 
The last moments of the hero, whom we have so long accompanied, are 
always interesting: they are here related, with a due attention to this 
feeling, minutely and affectingly; and the subsequent fortunes of his 
family are pursued, in a masterly sketch, till they cease to interest. 
Finis coronat opus<3>—a work, not only highly creditable to the 
erudition, the taste, and the judgment of its author; but which even 
bids fair, in a national point of view, very powerfully to advance our 
literary reputation on the Continent.

OCTOBER the 1st

Began, with a view of comparing notes, Macchiavel's Historie Fiorentine. 
Macchiavel, under the persuasion, or pretext, of maintaining the 
liberties of his country, was a determined enemy to the family of the 
Medicis: he was twice concerned in a conspiracy against them; and was 
once consigned to the torture, but had nerves sufficient to refuse a 
confession;-his fortunes, however, were not spared. Such a writer may be 
presumed to be prejudiced: yet, as he dedicates his work to Clement the 
7th, the last representative of the Lorenzo branch of the Medicis, there 
can scarcely be any violent misrepresentation.—His first Book contains a 
masterly outline of a long series of history, from the first irruption 
of Alaric, to the final emergence of the Italian States as they 
presented themselves at the point of time where his immediate narrative 
commences period nearly commensurate to the three last vols. of Gibbon's 
History: and the materials for which, must have lain, at his time, very 
widely scattered. Considering when, and where, he wrote, I am amazed at 
the freedom with which he treats the successors of St. Peter:—he does 
not even cast a veil of gauze over their follies or iniquities.

OCT. the 3rd

Pursued Macchiavel's History of Florence. His talents, and the reader's 
patience, languish at the recital of the petty factions which convulsed 
the infancy of the Florentine Republic. Davila, I think, has evidently 
studied his manner, in the direct narrative: but in the general 
management of his matter, he is as far superior, as the subject which he 
treats, nor do I know a more pure and perfect historical composition, 
than the Historia delle Guerre Civili di Francia. What would we give, 
for such an account of ours!

Read the 4th Book of Caesar's Commentaries. There is nothing to 
determine the point at which Caesar embarked from Gaul, on his first 
expedition; but there appear sufficient indications to afford a probable 
conjecture of the spot where he landed in Old England, were the coast 
examined for the purpose. Curiosity seems to have been his leading 
motive in the adventure.

Looked over the last Monthly Magazine. Though conducted with 
considerable ability, this miscellany declines in general interest. The 
medical, mathematical, and agricultural departments, encroach; and there 
is little of literary anecdote or disquisition, the most tempting bait 
to such sort of reading. It is tainted, too, with the bigotry of party; 
so far as to induce (what is unpardonable) a misrepresentation, by. 
heightenings and softenings, even in the narrative department.—A narrow, 
virulent, heady zeal, usually infests the underlings, it rarely pervades 
the chiefs and leaders, of any respectable party: they see too much on 
both sides; and are often compelled, I believe, to affect greater 
acrimony than they feel.-The European Magazine, though less ably 
conducted, and not without its bigotry of an opposite cast, has 
considerable attractions from its literary anecdote; with which it is 
principally supplied by Mr. Read, whose mind is a rich quarry of such 
matter.

OCT. the 4th

Read the 5th Book of Caesar's Commentaries. He names the port from which 
he sailed on his second expedition to England—Itius—: probably, as 
affording the shortest passage, Ambleteuse; which, though now choked up, 
might then have furnished shelter to his galleys. Nothing can be 
determined from the distance, which he loosely guesses at "30 millia 
passuum"<4>, but that it was somewhere between Gravelines and Boulogne. 
From Calais to Dover Pier-Head is 23 miles; from Boulogne to Folkstone 
29; and, midway between these ports, the two coasts approach within less 
than 20 miles of each other.—As Caesar was carried by the tide in the 
night, till he found, in the morning, Britain left, sub sinistra,<5> he 
must have drifted beyond the South Foreland.—Where did Caesar ford the 
Thames in pursuit of Cassivellaunus? Stukely, I think, but on slender 
documents, fixes the place to Chertsey-Bridge.—I am glad he found our 
predecessors so impatient of submission; and could well wish to mortify 
his insatiable ambition, by exhibiting to him Rome and London in their 
present condition.

Finished the 2nd Book of Macchiavel's History of Florence. The account 
of the adoption and expulsion of the Duke of Calabria, is admirably 
given; and seasonably enlivens the dull variety of his narrative.

OCT. the 5th

Pursued Boswell's Life of Johnson. Johnson's coarse censure of Lord 
Chesterfield, "that he taught the morals of a whore, and the manners of 
a dancing master", is as unjust as it is harsh. Indeed I have always 
thought the noble author of Lord Chesterfield's Letters to his Son, 
hardly dealt with by the public; though to public opinion I have the 
highest deference. How stands the case? Having bred up his son to a 
youth of learning and virtue, and consigned him to a tutor well adapted 
to cultivate these qualities, he naturally wishes to render him an 
accomplished gentleman; and, for this purpose, undertakes, in person, a 
task for which none surely was so well qualified as himself.—I follow 
the order he assigns (L. 168), and that which his Letters testify he 
pursued. Well! but he insists eternally on such frivolous points—the 
graces—the graces!—Because they were wanting, and the only thing 
wanting. Other qualities were attained, or presumed to be attained: to 
correct those slovenly, shy, reserved, and uncouth habits in the son, 
which as he advanced in life grew more conspicuous, and threatened to 
thwart all the parent's fondest prospects in his child, was felt, and 
justly felt, by the father, to have become an imperious and urgent duty; 
and he accordingly labours at it with parental assiduity—an assiduity, 
which none but a father would have bestowed upon the subject. Had his 
Lordship published these Letters as a regular System of Education, the 
common objection to their contents would have had unanswerable force: 
viewing them however in their true light, as written privately and 
confidentially by a parent to his child—inculcating, as he naturally 
would, with the greatest earnestness, not what was the most important, 
but most requisite—it must surely be confessed, there never was a 
popular exception more unfounded. But he—I admit it: he touches upon 
certain topics, which, a sentiment of delicacy suggests, between a a 
father and son had better been forborne: yet those who might hesitate to 
give the advice, if they are conversant with the world, and advert to 
circumstances, will not be disposed to think the advice itself 
injudicious.

If the 26th Letter there is a very remarkable prediction, which, as we 
have lived to see it fully accomplished, is worth curtailing and 
transcribing. "The affairs of France grow more and more serious every 
day. The King is irresolute, despised, and hated; the ministers, 
disunited and incapable; the people, poor and discontented; the army, 
though always the supporters and tools of absolute power, are always the 
destroyers of it too; the nation reasons freely on matters of religion 
and government;—in short, all the symptoms which I have ever met with in 
history, previous to great changes and revolutions in government, now 
exist, and daily increase, in France." This was written. Dec. 25th, 
1753; and, considering the clearness with which the causes are unfolded, 
and the consequence foretold, I ant surprised that it has not been 
noticed.

Regarding Lord Chesterfield's Letters as not intended for the public 
eye, they are probably the most pregnant and finished compositions that 
ever were written.

OCT. the 6th

Pursued Boswell's Life of Johnson. The distinguishing excellence of 
Johnson's manner, both in speaking and writing, consists in the apt and 
lively illustrations by example, with which, in his vigorous sallies, he 
enforces his just and acute remarks on human life and manners, in all 
their modes and representations: the character and charm of his style, 
in a happy choice of dignified and appropriate expressions, and that 
masterly involution of phrase, by which he contrives to bolt the 
prominent idea strongly on the mind: Burke's felicity is in a different 
sphere: it lies in the diversified allusions to all arts and to all 
sciences, by which, as he pours along his redundant tide of eloquence 
and reason, he reflects a light and interest on every topic which he 
treats; in a promptitude to catch the language and transfuse the 
feelings of passion; and in the unrestrained and ready use of a style, 
the most flexible, and the most accommodating to all topics, "from grave 
to gay, from lively to severe," that perhaps any writer, in any 
language, ever attained.—"Ipsae res verba rapiunt."<6> As opposed to 
each other, condensation might perhaps be regarded as the distinguishing 
characteristic of the former, and expansion of the letter.

OCT. the 7th

Read the 6th Book of Caesar's Commentaries. His account of the religion 
and manners of the Gauls and Germans, is the succinct, but masterly, 
sketch of a well-informed spectator: his persuasion, however, that the 
former worshipped many of the same Gods as the Romans, is surely 
fanciful. That, in many of their attributes, the divinities of each 
might bear some resemblance, is so probable, that I take it to be true; 
but their denominations could scarcely be alike; and what identity has a 
God, but his name?

OCT. the 8th

Read the 7th and last Book of Caesar's Commentaries. The warrior warms, 
for once, at the recital of the affair before Alesia: he kindles at 
portraying the hot assault upon his camp, by the multitudinous forces of 
congregated Gaul; he paints; in glowing colours, the perils of that 
decisive day; he even recounts his personal achievements; and 
triumphantly exults at the total rout and irredeemable dispersion of the 
assailants, with the ardour of a veteran. After having shone with a 
clear and steady lustre through a long succession of adventures, he 
expires at last in a blaze of glory.

OCT. the 9th

Read the 3rd and 4th Books of Macchiavel's History of Florence, which 
deduce the account to the period, when Giuliano, and afterwards Cosmo De 
Medeci, silently grew, by their wealth, their wisdom, and their 
moderation, into considerable influence in the Republic. The current of 
his narrative grows clearer, and deeper, and more diffusive, as it 
flows.

Lord C. looked in. Adverting to a late event, I remarked, that Earl 
Fitzwilliam was at least consistent; that he pursued the same steps I 
should myself have taken, had I originally encouraged the war on its 
only defensible ground; and that he had put administration in a much 
more awkward situation than it was now possible for opposition to place 
them-but that I feared his motives were disappointment and chagrin. 
Burke and the Earl, his Lordship said, had deserted their political 
principles entirely. This may, or may not, be true. The principles on 
which they profess to have seceded from their party, are so distinct 
from those which originally bound that party together, that the mere act 
of separation can furnish no conclusion on the subject. To be sure, if 
they have done it on corrupt motives, they have abandoned all principle; 
but they may have separated, and retain the common principles which once 
held them together, still.—Roscoe, his Lordship remarked, was timid, and 
therefore probably deficient, in Greek; and perhaps not quite stable, in 
Latin, literature. He had been struck with the unusual sense in which R. 
employs the word "compromise." This term seems to have undergone a 
singular revolution. "Compromissum," which could have meant, originally, 
only a mutual engagement, appears to have been restricted in Roman 
jurisprudence, to a "mutual engagement to refer to arbitration:"—to 
refer to the judgment of a third person, in such a way, is "to submit to 
hazard in conjunction with another;" and in both these senses the 
derivative word, in French and Italian, seems to have been commonly and 
respectably employed: in English, at least in the most accepted use of 
the term, we seem to have dropped both the "reference" and the 
"jeopardy," and to have applied it to that "reciprocal concession" which 
either led to admit such an appeal, or which it is probable an umpire 
would award.—The conversation then turned on Burke; against whom, for 
his late conduct, his Lordship bears an enmity approaching almost to 
rancour. I ventured, notwithstanding, to remark, that I saw so 
distinctly the principles of his present opinions scattered through his 
former works, that could the case of the French revolution have been 
hypothetically put to me eight years ago, I should have predicted that 
he would take precisely the course he has pursued. The care, indeed, 
with which this wonderful man, during a long series of strenuous 
opposition to the measures of government, uniformly occupied his ground, 
and the caution with which he qualified his reasonings—a care and 
caution which really seemed superfluous on the occasion—-might almost 
indicate, that he foresaw the time would come, when he should be led to 
urge a very different strain of argument: as we can scarcely, however, 
give him credit for such foresight, it unquestionably affords a most 
extraordinary example, in a mind so vehement and impassioned, of the 
predominance of philosophical over party spirit.—It would be difficult 
to find in the English language, of equal variety and length, four such 
compositions, as Burke's Speech to the Electors of Bristol; Johnson's 
Preface to Shakespeare; Parr's Dedication to Hurd; and Lowth's Letter to 
Warburton.

OCT. the 11th

Read Hawkesworth's Life of Swift; of whose character and conduct but an 
imperfect idea is given by the narrative of Johnson. Hawkesworth is much 
more communicative and interesting; and the minuteness and simplicity 
with which he details the few, but deplorable, incidents of the four 
last years of Swift's life, are highly affecting. The circumstance of 
his struggling to express himself, after a silence broken but once for 
more than a year; and, finding all his efforts ineffectual, heaving a 
deep sigh, quite cleaves the heart.

OCT. the 13th

Finished Sheridan's Life of Swift. Every anecdote of Swift is 
necessarily interesting; but such matter could scarcely be put in a more 
uninteresting form. The beginning and end of Swift's life are borrowed 
from Hawkesworth: the intermediate materials are capriciously divided 
and perplexedly arranged; tales are tediously told and tiresomely 
repeated; the same extracts are three times quoted; and much time is 
wasted in needless disputation. Sheridan appears rather a weak man; yet 
he clearly convicts Johnson of misrepresentation: indeed the many facts 
misstated through negligence, or distorted through prejudice, in several 
of Johnson's lives, is a circumstance which considerably deducts from 
their value. I was rather surprized to hear of Swift's fervent piety, 
and secret devotion; but Sheridan's defence against the crimination 
grounded on his Yahoos, I can by no means admit: that this odious animal 
was designed as a bitter satire upon man as he is, I cannot bring myself 
for one moment to doubt.

OCT. the 14th

Read the 5th and 6th Books of Macchiavel's History of Florence. A native 
of Florence, or an adjoining state, might possibly be interested with 
the details of the former: but I confess myself heartily wearied with 
the puny contests of these Lilliputian republics; whose very warfare is 
insipid mockery, and yields, in heroic pathos, to the battles of the 
pigmies and the cranes. What can we think, at this day, of a combat 
raging between two adverse hosts, with various success, "dalle 20, alle 
24 ore"<7> and terminating, at last, in the utter rout of one of them, 
in which only a single warrior perishes; and he, unhappy wight! not by 
the ennobling sword, but an unlucky tumble from his horse! The fall from 
power, however, and the feelings on that fall, are finely depicted, 
towards the close, in the person of Francesco.—In the latter book, 
Florence, indeed, disappears; but the immediate object of my search 
approximates and expands.

OCT. the 16th

Read the 7th and 8th (the two last) Books of Macchiavel's unfinished 
History of Florence; and found that here, for my purpose, I ought to 
have begun. Roscoe, I am afraid, makes fewer.acknowledgements to 
Macchiavel, than he ought. Almost all the historical narrative with 
which he accompanies the life of Lorenzo, is comprised in these two 
Books; the general arrangement and texture are frequently the same; and 
the two relations sometimes bear a striking resemblance in minute 
coincidencies. Macchiavel, on the whole, is fair and impartial; though 
it is possible, I think, to discover some lurking propensities, with 
which, if they were really patriotic, I can well sympathise. The 
atrocious conspiracy against Lorenzo and Giuliano, he relates in his 
usual cold manner; not sparing, indeed, the conspirators, by any 
mutilation or softening of facts, but not expressing a proper and 
natural indignation at the attempt; nor warmly exulting at its failure 
in the preservation of Lorenzo, to whose character, however, at the 
close, he pays a most respectable homage. I should conjecture, that 
Roscoe took Macchiavel as his ground work in the historical department 
of his work; and afterwards wrought out the prominent parts from more 
circumstantial documents.

OCT. the 24th

.Finished Jortin's Life of Erasmus. The ease, simplicity, and vigour of 
this engaging writer (I speak of the biographer), who negligently 
scatters learning and vivacity on every subject which he treats, are 
here exercised on a most congenial topic. The chief circumstances of 
Erasmus' life, are extracted from his letters; and the notices of 
England in these letters, are peculiarly interesting. I take very kindly 
to Erasmus: circumstanced as he was, I should have conducted myself just 
as he did, towards the pope and the reformlsts:—they are only bigots, 
who will violently condemn his moderation.

OCT. the 26th

Read the first two Books of Livy's History. How infinitely superior, to 
my taste and feelings, is his clear, free, ample, and nervous style of 
narrative, to the laboured terseness and condensation of Tacitus; who 
seems eternally on the stretch to shine, instead of taking his cue from 
the theme, and contracting and expanding with his subject. The topics 
pressed by the Tarquins on Porsena (Lib. 2. c. 9) to induce him to 
assist them in recovering their sovereignty, might neatly be applied to 
Mr. Burke. "Monebant—ne orientem morem pellendi reges, inultum sineret. 
Satis libertatem ipsam habere dulcedinis. Nisi quanta vi civitates eam 
expetant, tanta regna reges defendant, aequari summa infimis; nihil 
excelsum, nihil quod supra cetera emineat, in civitatibus fore. Adesse 
finem regnis—rei inter Deos hominesque pulcherrimae."<8>

OCT. the 29th

Read the 3rd Book of Livy. To modern habits it appears amazing, how the 
Patricians, without the influence of great wealth or extensive 
patronage, could, by a dexterous availment of conjunctures, and the 
lucky diversion of wars, maintain themselves for any length of time 
against the unruly power of the Plebeians, conglomerated in one city, 
conscious of their physical strength and political authority, and headed 
by those fearless and turbulent demagogues the Tribunes. The two modern 
engines of power, the management of the revenue, and the command of the 
army, could here be of no avail; where the former was too inconsiderable 
to be named, and the latter was raised merely for the purpose of the 
moment, by a hasty and promiscuous levy, which it was in the power of 
any tribune to forbid.—A curious disquisition might be written (and it 
is much wanted) on the government of Rome, from the expulsion of the 
Tarquins to the accession of Augustus.

Looked into Burton's Anatomy of Melancholy. The prolific fancy of this 
wild writer, and his power of ready, various, and apt quotation, are 
truly wonderful.

NOVEMBER the 3rd

Read Bp. Watson's Apology for the Bible, in reply to Paine. There is an 
uncharitable and ungracious declaration at the outset, which I could 
earnestly wish had been suppressed; not for the sake of Paine, whom I 
loathe, but of Watson, whom I revere. This is certainly a very able 
defence of Revelation against many old and obvious objections very 
forcibly urged—(for I set aside the ribaldry, ignorance, and petulant 
self-sufficiency of the objector, as circumstances which give a manifest 
advantage to the respondent):—but there runs through the whole reply, 
what I have often observed and reprobated in defences of this kind,—a 
remission of orthodoxy for the purpose of removing from view the most 
obnoxious parts of the cause. The inspiration of the Evangelists, the 
divinity of Christ, &c. are here kept back; and the case is argued as if 
the writers of the Gospels were ordinary biographers, Christ a mere 
mortal inspired, &c.; although the author hints that his belief is 
different; and from the situation he holds in the Church, we must 
presume it to be so. There is in this, to my feelings, a sort of 
temporising spirit, inconsistent with the warmth and earnestness which 
we should expect in a sincere believer contending for the rock of his 
Salvation; and peculiarly repugnant to that strain of simple, manly, 
nervous, eloquence, which distinguishes the writings of this respectable 
prelate.

NOV. the 8th

I have been for some days attending lectures on chemistry. Specious as 
the advantages of the new nomenclature appear, they seem counterbalanced 
by the reflection, that on any revolution in the system, which surely 
stands on ticklish ground, the denominations deduced from it, must 
undergo a correspondent disorganization.

Saw distinctly this evening, through a microscope, the circulation of 
the white and transparent globules of blood, in the pellucid body and 
members of a water newt—a spectacle which impressed me with a more awful 
sense of the mysterious 'operations going on in nature, than the 
revolution of the planets.

NOV. the 12th

Read Burke's Letters on a Regicide Peace. I am so satisfied that Burke 
enters into the true genius and character of the principles which have 
operated in the French revolution, that I listen with reverence to 
whatever he advances on the subject. He has here pursued his original 
sentiments on these principles, with no 'abatement of his original 
vigour. In his cordial detestation of them, I heartily conspire; but by 
what measures does he propose to rescue us from their contagion? Were it 
possible to restore France and Europe to the state they were in before 
the revolution, or rather to the semblance of that state—(a thing 
probably impracticable were it ever so earnestly sought; and which the 
corruption of courts will not allow us to suppose would for any length 
of time be sincerely, honestly, and steadily pursued)—still the mind 
could never be restored; pernicious habits could not be effaced; 
prejudices, however useful, could not be revived; nor could the sacred 
cause of real liberty be purified from the stains and disgrace of 
prostitution. We are in the midst of horrible and antagonist disorders; 
nor, till they reach something like a crisis, is it easy to say, what we 
ought to think, or how we ought to act. His strictures on the war, which 
certainly never originated in the views he recommended, and which, 
prosecuted as it is, can only tend to accelerate the evils which he 
laboured to avert by it, or sink us still deeper in the bog of 
corruption, are animated with a just and lively indignation. He 
certainly places us, by these Letters, in a shocking dilemma: but I wish 
to believe that his rampant imagination has magnified the peril; and, at 
worst, have considerable reliance on that nisus<9> towards a healthy 
state, which, in the body politic, as well as natural, is often our 
safest and surest ground of hope, under the visitation of disorder.—The 
passage in which he brings the situation of the emigrants home to our 
feelings, and recalls us to a sense of our own danger by their example, 
is sketched with-masterly judgment, and coloured with a glowing pencil.

NOV. the 13th

Read two translations of Burgher's Leonora; one in the Monthly Magazine 
for March, and one by Mr. Spencer. The latter, I conjecture, more fully 
conveys the sense; the former more vigorously transfuses the spirit, of 
the original. ln the latter, many vivid images are sublimed into vapid 
abstractions, much energy is lost by a fastidious rejection of sonorous 
echoes to the sense, and the general effect is perhaps weakened by the 
refinement of the language: in the former, the sense is invigorated by 
concentration; the character of the piece is sustained by correspondent, 
popular, appropriate, and forcible expressions; and, by the artificial 
encrustation of antique phraseology, a congenial gloom is shed over a 
tale of horror, to which I can allow every merit but retributory 
justice. I would certainly sooner have written the anonymous 
translation; but, had I done so, I should have grieved at seeing, in the 
rival version, many sentiments and images which I had neglected to 
transplant; and I should have shrunk into myself, when

"Full at the portal's massy gate 
The plunging steed impetuous dashed."

Lord C. called in. He believes it to be Earl Fitzwilliam, not Fox, as I 
conceived, whom Burke's "dim eyes in vain explored" on the side of 
administration, at this crisis.—Necessity, he thought, a strange 
doctrine. The most revolting objection to it, I observed, seemed to 
vanish, with those who regarded the infliction of punishment as only a 
means of reformation. He urged the influence of punishment, regarded as 
an example to others: this, I replied, would only be a link in the 
chain; and he seemed to acquiesce.—His Lordship saw no inconsistency 
between prescience and freedom. God foresees: how he foresees, I know 
not—certainly not as man does, by arguing from cause to effect: he 
foresees; he reveals his foreknowledge to a prophet; how is the event 
affected?

NOV. the 21st

Read, with much curiosity and interest, Hurd's Life of Warburton. All 
the offensive characters of Hurd's manner, which Parr has felt with such 
discernment, and described with such force—the quaint phrase, the cool 
sarcastic sneer, the flippant stricture, the petulant gibe, the oblique 
insinuation, the crafty artifice, the mean subterfuge, the fawning 
suggestion—are here strikingly manifest. In my opinion of Warburton or 
himself, which Parr had settled and defined, it has not made a shade of 
difference.—The art with which Hurd has evaded all notice of Jortin and 
Leland, is very amusing.

NOV. the 24th

Finished Maundrell's Journey from Aleppo to Jerusalem: a plain, 
unaffected narrative; but written with an uncouthness of style, which we 
should not expect to find in any composition of this century. I can 
scarcely fancy anything more interesting to a fervent devotee, than such 
a journey. What emotions must be felt, at beholding Mount Calvary, the 
Sepulchre of Christ, &c.!

NOV. the 28th

Mr. L. spent the morning with me. I was pleased to find, that though of 
such opposite political sentiments, he fully acknowledged the integrity 
of Burke's principles, and the transcendent energies of his mind, which 
still worked with so much vigour under the most overwhelming depression. 
He stated that he had pressed Tooke, as I have done, on the ambiguity of 
his political principles, but without any satisfactory result; and 
thinks, as I do, that for the attainment of his particular and limited 
views, whatever they are, he has connected himself with a party whose 
aim extends much farther, but whom he conceives it will be possible, 
when his end is answered, to check in their career.

Looked into Gibbon's Miscellaneous Works. His ingenious Dissertation on 
"L'Homme au Masque de Fer,"<10> if not quite conclusive with respect to 
this mysterious personage, exhibits a wonderful convergescence of moral 
probabilities on—a natural son of Anne of Austria, widow of Louis XIII, 
by Cardinal Mazarin.

DEC. the 6th

Finished Robertson's History of Scotland. In the 1st and prefaratory 
Book, he skilfully evades a long tract of obscure and uninteresting 
narrative, by exhibiting a brief but masterly abstract of Scotch affairs 
till the period of Mary Queen of Scots.—The History, which properly 
commences here, and embraces only two reigns, and a term of little more 
than sixty years, evinces unquestionably very respectable talents in the 
writer; but when I recollect Gibbon's exquisite taste and critical 
discernment, can I believe him serious or sincere, in disclaiming the 
honour of forming a triumvirate of British Historians, with such a 
colleague?

DEC. the 11th

Finished the 1st Vol. of Robertson's Charles the V., obeying the 
references to proofs and illustrations. I am confounded at the immense 
researches which furnished materials for this preliminary volume: and if 
Robertson is surpassed, as he politely confesses himself to have been, 
in diligence, by Gibbon, it must be acknowledged, at least, that his 
industry has been directed to enquiries more immediately interesting to 
a modern European. The notice of Voltaire at the conclusion, is liberal 
and handsome; and, (so little are we in the habit of seeing justice done 
to this extraordinary man in this country,) was, to me, I confess, quite 
unexpected.

DEC. the 15th

Le Marquis D' A. dined with me. Had much chat on our different modes of 
society. At Paris, in dinner parties, each gentleman brings his servant; 
calls for what wine he chooses, at and between the courses: liqueurs are 
introduced with the desert; and when the lady of the house says, "je 
suis a vos ordres,"<11> all withdraw together to coffee and cards, or 
disperse to the opera: after which the same, or some other house, is 
found open for supper; which is usually composed of as great a variety 
of dishes as the dinner. Young fellows drink only "dans les debauches" 
with their mistresses, or in set parties; and to appear drunk in mixed 
company, would be an unpardonable offence. Except in an hour (could it 
be restricted to an hour) of separation after dinner, the French have 
clearly the advantage of us.—He thought people of condition in France, 
in general, far more affable to the lower orders they appeared to be 
with us. I believe he is right; but then it must be recollected that 
French are, constitutionally or by habit, a far more sociable and 
affable race than ourselves.

DEC. the 17th

Read the 1st Book of Macchiavel's Discorsi sopra Livio. Is it possible 
Macchiavel could seriously believe (c. 56) that great political 
revolutions were usually ushered in by great natural portents, as 
earthquakes, meteors, &c.? In the 58th chapter, he declares himself very 
decidedly in favour of Republics over Monarchies, as possessing greater 
wisdom and steadiness in the administration of affairs, stronger 
attachments to rectitude, and more constancy in adhering to engagements; 
and professes a manly sentiment, which would form a good motto, "Io non 
giudico, ne giudichero mai, essere difetto difendere alcune opinioni con 
le ragioni, senza volervi ware o Pautorita o la forza."<12> Who would 
not think he was reading a sentence of Beccaria?

Attended, in the evening, the representation of Holcroft's "Deserted 
Daughter." H. is here very busy at his purpose: his aim, to those who 
are conversant with the tenets of his sect, is sufficiently manifest; 
but he manages and conceals it with a discretion not very consistent, 
surely, with his principles.

DEC. the 19th

Finished Robertson's Charles the V.; a sound and able exposition of an 
interesting period, which finely opens the state of Modern Europe: I 
cannot think, however, that an an historical composition, it emulates 
the lively ease, acuteness, and penetration of Heine; or the exquisite 
skill, poignant taste, and profound audition of Gibbon. Though. 
Robertson's style appears quite unexceptionable, and perfectly well 
adapted for grave communication, there is an artificiality and want of 
raciness in it, which disappoints expectation, and ultimately tires: it 
seems defecated and refined, till it has lost all flavour.—The 
preliminary Vol. forms a most useful dissertation of itself: it contains 
much matter not immediately connected with the subsequent History, which 
might well be read without it.

DEC. the 20th

Read the preliminary Book to Robertson's History of America, comprising 
a history of navigation and cosmography, from the first migrations of 
mankind to the period of Columbus. R. seems to delight and luxuriate in 
these prefaratory openings; which, however, furnish a very tempting 
precedent for literary ostentation. The present is executed in a 
perspicuous, masterly, and pleasing manner.

Finished the 2nd Book of Macchiavel's Discourse on Livy. He shows a 
considerable insight into human nature, as acting on, and acted upon by, 
political institutions; and where he does not push the refinements of 
speculation too far, his remarks are generally just. What he observes on 
the impolicy of trusting emigrants compelled to fly their country, might 
have read a lesson to the present administration. It is not often that 
history furnishes instruction of such sure and obvious application.

DEC. the 24th

Finished the first three Books of Robertson's America, collating it, as 
I went along, with Burke's "European Settlements;" a work which has 
never been estimated by the public as it ought to be. Burke's is the 
hasty, but free and spirited, sketch of a master-artist; Robertson's the 
elaborate composition of a very eminent proficient: the one writer, we 
perceive, by a thousand careless strokes, is capable of more; the other 
has done the best he can.

DEC. the 27th

Read the 4th Book of Robertson's America; containing an elaborate 
description of the country and its inhabitants, delivered in too much 
state and pomp, and upon which, much redundant thought and matter seems 
disgorged, for fear it should be lost to the world. Burke has treated 
the same subject, in the four short chapters which form the Second Part 
of his work, with infinite spirit; and, contrasted with his lively 
strokes and glowing touches, the laboured perfection of Robertson is 
heavy.—Compare their descriptions of the torture inflicted upon 
captives: Robertson, B. 4. c. 5; Burke, P. 2. c. 4.

DEC. the 29th

Read the 9th Book of Livy and was most powerfully struck with the 
uncommon public spirit displayed by the army and the state, in the 
affair of the Caudian defiles: from such men we could expect nothing 
less than the conquest of the world, which they alone seem fit to 
govern. Livy's digression on the probable consequences of Alexander's 
having turned his conquests towards Rome, from an estimate of the 
respective resources of each party, is highly interesting; and, from 
Livy, quite unexpected.





1797

JANUARY the 1st, 1797.

Read the 21st and 22nd Books of Livy. How fortunate is it, that the 
preceding chasm in this history (of ten Books) extended no farther! His 
description of Hannibal's passage over the Alps, is lively and 
picturesque; and our interest in the narrative kindles, as the Scourge 
of Italy advances: yet we look, in vain, for that greatness of soul 
which should have distinguished the Roman people under such afflicting 
reverses; though Livy is disposed to say all he can for them.

Dipped into Addison's Travels; of which the chief merit is the classical 
allusions. Our style has so much improved of late, that many of his 
expressions appear already uncouth and mean.

JAN. the 6th

Read the 24th Book of Livy. An astonishing and unaccountable languor 
seems to have seized both the Roman and Carthaginian forces, after the 
battle of Cannae; just when we should have expected the mightiest and 
most decisive achievements, on one side or the other. The spirit of the 
Romans we may suppose to have been broken; but what shall we say for 
Hannibal, in not following up that stupendous victory!

JAN. the 8th

Attended Church in the afternoon. Mr. S., confounded (as among all sects 
of Christians, it is remarkable, has ever been the case) the Christian 
Lord's Day with the Jewish Sabbath:-a strange blunder, surely, however 
respectably sanctioned. We might as well confound Easter with the 
Passover.

JAN. the 9th

Finished the 27th Book of Livy. The forced march of the Consul Claudius 
Nero through the whole extent of Italy, to form a junction with his 
colleague M. Livius; their total defeat of Asdrubal; and the eagerness, 
the transports, with which the rumour, the report, and, at last, the 
official statement, of this momentous victory, was received at Rome, are 
recounted with uncommon animation. Hannibal's inertia, all this time, is 
perfectly amazing: he seems to have possessed great talents to gain an 
advantage; but not to make the most of it, when won.

JAN. the 15th

Looked over, by a cursory perusal, Beattie's Essay on Truth. I remember 
to have been much charmed with this work; but it has sunk lamentably in 
my estimation, on this maturer review. Its declamation, indeed, is 
lively and specious: but, as a disquisition, it is miserably deficient 
in acuteness of discrimination and solidity of judgment; and though we 
should allow that the author has, on many occasions, felt justly, we 
must confess that throughout he has reasoned very weakly. The great 
object of this Treatise, is, to prove, to the confusion of Des Cartes, 
Malbranche, Berkeley, and Hume,—that there are principles intuitively 
certain or intuitively probable,—that common sense determines what these 
principles are,—that all reasoning rests upon these principles, and that 
to bring such principles themselves to the test of reason, is a measure 
preposterous in its nature, and highly injurious to the interests of 
truth and virtue. In answer to all this, it might well be observed, that 
reasoning consists in nothing but the production of some one or more 
propositions, from which it follows, as. a necessary, or as a probable 
consequence, that the proposition to be proved or disproved, is true or 
false;—that the propositions thus adduced, are amenable to the judgment 
that if the dictates of common sense are consistent, they cannot 
overthrow each other;—that all fair reasoning, consequently, must at 
least be harmless; and, that to encourage men to adopt any opinion, and 
shut their ears, to all discussion upon it, as a point previously 
settled by common sense, and beyond the jurisdiction of reason, would be 
to give the privilege of sanctuary to every species of prejudice.

Read the 34th Book of Livy. The arguments on the Oppian Law, at the 
beginning of this Book, are highly curious. Valerius's, in favour of the 
ladies, though ingenious, passes over many topics which we should expect 
to be pressed with much spirit, on a similar occasion, at the present 
day.

JAN. the 20th

Read Moore's History of the French Revolution; a very inferior 
production to what I had promised myself from such a writer on such a 
subject. The causes of that momentous change are loosely investigated; 
their progressive operation and development, imperfectly displayed; in 
the reflections on the passing events, there is too frequent an 
affectation of smartness and naivety of sentiment; and there runs 
through the whole narrative, the same debility and languor which 
pervades his Journal—a composition, which, for any intrinsic marks to 
the contrary, might have been compiled in Grub-Street.

The critique on Burke's Regicide Peace, in the last Monthly Review, is 
ably written: the passage which warms, in defending our national horror 
at despotism, is uncommonly animated;—it breathes the eloquence of 
passion.

FEBRUARY the 1st

Finished the 40th Book of Livy. The speeches of Persius and Demetrius, 
indeed most of those which Livy introduces, bear a strong resemblance to 
the rhetorical theses of the schools, and seem formed on that taste. 
They are, of course, the entire composition of Livy; and I suppose he 
thought them fine.

Read the Castle of Otranto; which grievously disappointed my 
expectations. The tale is, in itself, insipid; and Mrs. Radcliffe, out 
of possible contingencies, evokes scenes of far more thrilling horror, 
than are attained by the supernatural and extravagant machinery, which, 
after all, alone imparts an interest to this Romance.—Let me, however, 
except from all censure, and honour with all praise, the scene in which 
Manfred receives the mute messengers of Challenge:—it is capitally 
supported.—The prefixed strictures on Voltaire, are just, but feeble.

FEB. the 5th

Read the 43rd Book of Liyy. The kind of apology which he makes (chap. 
12) for recounting, as he regularly does, the portents of the year, 
marks the state of religious sentiment in his time; and paganism, about 
the beginning of our sera, seems to have been in much the same degree of 
credit, as Christianity is now.

FEB. the 7th

Finished the 45th and last Book extant, of Livy. Literature has never 
sustained a severer loss, than in the disappearance of the 105 Books, 
which are wanting to complete this comprehensive and elaborate History. 
How inestimable, from such a writer, would be the account of Roman 
affairs, from the passing of the Rubicon by Julius Caesar, to the 
establishment of Augustus! As it is, we leave the Roman Empire, perhaps 
in its most respectable condition: Spain, in part subdued, and 
throughout in awe; the Macedonian monarchy extinct, and its king a 
captive; Carthage, tributary and dependent: and all surrounding 
monarchies and states, looking up, as to the lords of nature and 
arbiters of their fate, with gratitude, and fear, and reverence, to the 
senate and people of a single city—whose integrity and firmness (let me 
add), magnanimity and wisdom, seem worthy of holding that transcendent 
sway, which a long succession of these virtues had painfully won. Livy 
is a sound and satisfactory historian: he never soars; nor ever 
languishes—but with his subject: to this he steadily adheres; and 
pursues the stream of time with the same even current that it flows.

FEB. the 9th

Read the Dissertation prefixed to Dacier's Horace. The nature of Lyric 
Poetry is very vaguely defined; its origin and progress, confusedly 
traced; and the epithets "le grand," "la gracieuse," "le sublime," 
fortuitously applied to Horace, where we should expect to find his 
distinguishing excellencies appropriately marked. The defence of poetry 
in general, and of the Ancient poets, against the sophisms of Despreaux 
and others, is, I think, the soundest part: but, upon the whole, like 
many a French piece of goods, it is extremely showy and tasty, but 
defective both in materials and workmanship.

FEB. the 12th

Looked over the first fourteen Odes of Horace, Lib. I, with Dacier's and 
Bentley's Annotations. I am still undecided as to the construction of 
the twelve lines succeeding the 2nd, in the first ode: a verse seems 
wanting between the 10th and 11th "Siccis oculis" in the 3rd ode, 
appears a strange epithet—"rectis" is what one would wish; but I see no 
other authority for substituting it: to instance a man's fortitude, by 
saying that he can face danger without blubbering, is certainly not 
felicitous: but might not Horace sometimes be unhappy; and do we not 
criticise with more scrupulosity than he wrote?—It would be difficult, 
anywhere, to find a cramper construction of words than in the conclusion 
of the 5th Ode-

Me tabula sacer 
Votiva paries indicat uvida 
Suspendisse potenti 
Vestimenta maris Deo.<13>

Could this ever have been clear, or pleasing?—Tarteron's prudery in 
suppressing, in his edition, the four last lines in the 4th, 6th, and 
9th Odes, and the whole of the 5th, is perfectly ridiculous: one can 
have no opinion of the purity of that mind, which could suspect such 
verses as unchaste.

FEB. the 19th

Read De Pouilly's Critique sur la fidelité de l' histoire (Memoires de 
L'Academie des Inscriptions, Tom 8me.); in which, the nature of 
historical evidence is very ingeniously discussed. Hume, I think, has 
borrowed from this tract in his Essay on Miracles.-Allowing for the 
superior spirit of attack over defence, De Pouilly has shown himself a 
very superior writer to his antagonist l'Abbè Sallier, in a previous 
tract in the same vol., on the uncertainty of the earlier part of the 
Roman History, which well repays the reading.

Perused, but hastily, Erskine's pamphlet on the Causes and Consequences 
of the Present War; and was much struck with that part, in which he 
exposes the mischiefs of the coalition against France, by supposing that 
a similar confederacy had been formed against England, on the 
decapitation of Charles I.: yet, on the whole, the admirers of this 
great advocate must surely be disappointed with this specimen of his 
powers; and will be tempted to apply to him, what Cicero observed of 
Galba—"cujus in verbis mens ardentior spirat, ejus in scriptis, omnis 
illis vis et quasi flamma oratoris extinguitur."<14>

FEB. the 24th

W. who, by a happy choice of characteristic features, and the dexterous 
use of intermediate ideas, possesses, beyond any man I know, the 
enchanting art of painting vividly to the imagination whatever he has 
seen, has been for some days, delighting me with descriptions of what 
occurred during a voyage along the Western coast of Italy, the tour of 
Sicily, and a visit to Rome. The ample basin of the Bay of Naples, with 
its gay shores, surmounted by the awful form of Vesuvius—the Isles of 
Lipari, emitting flames and coruscations as he passed' them in the dead 
stillness of night—the first distant view of AEtna, through the clear 
medium, of an Italian atmosphere, tinged with ethereal blue, and lifting 
his snow-capped head in solitary majesty—the iron frontier of the coast 
of Scylla—the ascent of Etna in the night, by a torrent of liquid lava, 
surcharged with scoria, reddening the air with its glow, and plunging 
with a tremendous crash over a precipice equal to the cliffs of Dover—
the pillar of smoke, slowly and steadily ascending through the vast 
concavity of the crater, till it caught the breeze upon. the summit, and 
scudded horizontally away, coldly tinged by the morning twilight—the 
first sparkle of the long expected sun; gilding, as he rose, the highest 
points. of the eminences beneath, while all below was buried in a purple 
gloom—Sicily, through all its extent and waving shores, at length spread 
under the eye, like an illuminated map; and Calabria and Malta, in 
opposite directions, rising faintly in the distance—the approach to Rome 
from the South, descending through a thick forest on the flat and dreary 
expanse of the Campania—Claudius' aqueduct, while Rome was yet 
invisible, shooting athwart the level, in a long line and endless 
succession of arcades—the first aspect of the Imperial City—the Coliseum 
as he passed it, bleached to the North, and apparently fresh from the 
architect:—The bare recital, of such scenes, fires the imagination, and 
kindles an eager curiosity to behold them: yet the perplexing 
difficulties, the vexatious delays, the misery of accommodation, the 
fatigue of body, and anxiety of mind, which would in many cases, attend 
the actual inspection of these interesting objects, must considerably 
deduct from the delight they are calculated to afford; and it is, 
perhaps, only under the purifying process of recollection, that the 
luxury of having seen them, can be fully enjoyed.—W. confessed, that the 
ruins of Rome, widely scattered as they are, in different directions, 
choked up with buildings, and in many instances artificially supported 
by iron cramps, at the first view, miserably disappointed him; as they 
inevitably must do, every one whose expectations have been formed on the 
sketches of Piranesi, &c. in which, all that is offensive is carefully 
excluded, and whatever is most interesting in these remains, selected 
and combined.—St. Peter's, though yielding to its powerful rival in 
exterior elegance of form, exhibits such vast dimensions and surpassing 
splendour within, that St. Paul's, on a review, appeared like the inside 
of a deserted tap-room.

MARCH the 14th

Read Freret's Essay on the Evidence Of Ancient History, Tom. 8me., of 
the Memoires de L' Academie—a masterly disquisition, which, so far as it 
forms a general argument, (for of its particular application to certain 
points of ancient history, I am an incompetent judge), has thy fullest 
assent. The concluding part, on the different and inconvertible natures 
of mathematical and moral evidence, particularly meets my ideas.

Pursued the Odes of Horace, Lib. 1. What does Dacier mean, in his 
concluding note on the 30th, by hinting, with a sort of pregnant 
brevity, that the reason is obvious why the ancients attached Mercury to 
Venus? Had he been criticising a modern, I should have supposed he meant 
to be smart.—I cannot bring myself to think, with him, that the 34th Ode 
is ironical: it appears very evidently to me, to have been written under 
a sudden fit of piety, produced, as such fits often are with the 
dissolute,—by imminent danger escaped.

MARCH the 21st

Looked over Malone's Enquiry into the Authenticity of Ireland's 
Shakespearian Papers; a learned and decisive piece of criticism, which 
would have settled my doubts, if all doubts had not been already removed 
by the forger's impudent confession. Yet Malone sometimes insists too 
strongly on slight proofs; as in his Objection from the word "amuse" in 
Q. Elizabeth's Letter, which affords sense in its primitive meaning, of 
arresting attention: his violent politics, too, are violently 
introduced; and suggest but a feeble argument against Shakespeare's Love 
Letter.

Read with much delight in the 8me. Tom of Memoires de L' Academie, 
Gedoyn's 'Dissertation de l' Urbanité Romaine, in which the origin and 
expansion of this quality are delicately traced, its volatile form 
delineated with elegance and spirit, and its separate nature forcibly 
and pointedly discriminated; nor is there any part of this disquisition 
exceptionable, but the application of this accomplishment to Homer, 
Pindar, and others, in whom it surely does not predominate. Amongst the 
moderns, I should point without hesitation to St. Evremond, as 
exhibiting this qualification in its purest form.—Racine, in a 
subsequent Essay, resolves the essence of poetry, into the language of 
passion.

Finished The Italian. This work will maintain, but not extend, Mrs. 
Radcliffe's fame as a novelist. It has the same excellencies and defects 
as her former compositions. In the vivid exhibition of the picturesque 
of nature, in the delineation of strong and dark character, in the 
excitation of horror by physical and moral agency, I know not that Mrs. 
R. has any equal: but she languishes in spinning the thread of the 
narrative on which these excellencies are strung; natural characters and 
incidents are feebly represented; probability is often strained without 
sufficient compensation; and the development of those mysteries which 
have kept us stretched so long on the rack of terror and impatience (an 
unthankful task at best) is lame and impotent. Eleanor and Vivaldi, 
either in their separate character or mutual attachment (a wire-drawn 
theme), touched me but little; but I confess myself to have been deeply 
and violently impressed, by the midnight examination of the corpse of 
Bianchi; by the atrocious conference of Schedoni and the Marquesa, in 
the dim twilight of the Church of San Nicolo; and, above all, by what 
passed in Spalatro's solitary dwelling on the sea shore. If Mrs. 
Radcliffe justly consulted her fame, she would confine herself to 
fragments.—She and Miss Burney might compose a capital piece between 
them—Mrs. R. furnishing the landscape, and Miss B. the figures.

MARCH the 26th

Finished Gibbon's Memoirs of himself—an exquisite morceau of literature, 
but which might have been rendered far more interesting by anecdotes of 
such of his acquaintance as were distinguished characters—a disclosure, 
properly conducted, of which I cannot see the harm; and by less reserve 
on the subject of his progress in infidelity—a topic which the 
biographer touches with all the caution of the historian.—ln the 
Memoirs, and in the Journal, there is one strange and material 
inconsistency which cannot reconcile. In the former, he represents 
himself as overpowered with admiration of the calm philosophy, and 
careless inimitable beauties of Hume's history: in his Journal, 
descriptive of a period immediately succeeding that in which he paints 
himself thus struck, he calls Hume's history, ingenious but superficial. 
The accuracy of Mr. Gibbon's memory, it is to be presumed, forsook him, 
on this occasion, in his Memoirs; and he has been led to ascribe to too 
early a period, the more enlightened judgment of maturer years.

MARCH the 31st

Read Swift's Four last Years of Queen Anne; a clear, connected detail of 
facts, exhibited with exquisite art (artis est, celare artem)<15> to 
give the particular impression he wished. How different do the same 
transactions appear, under the colouring of Swift and Burnet!—The Letter 
to a Whig Lord (Vol. 24, Nichols' edition) strikingly displays Swift's 
talents as a party writer: under the show of serious and earnest 
admonition., he shrewdly urges, with cutting force, and in galling 
succession, all the topics which malice could suggest, to bring the 
opponents of the Oxford administration, at the critical juncture when it 
was written, into general contempt and obloquy—.

... Si Pergama dextra 
Defendi possent, etiam hac defensa fuissent.<16>

Read the first five Odes (Lib. 2.) of Horace. Bentley has completely 
puzzled himself with the passage in the 5th,—

illi, quos tibi dempserit 
adponit annos:<17>

and proposed an emendation," quod" "annus,". by which, if there were any 
difficulty, it would doubtless be removed; but Dacier's explanation, 
that, to a certain period of life, the passing years may be considered 
as added, and after that period, as taken away, seems quite clear and 
satisfactory.

Gibbon might have applied the remarkable pun, which occurs somewhere in 
his history, with good effect to Ausonius' epigram, quoted in Dacier's 
last note to this Ode,

Dum dubitat Natura, marem faceretne puellam, 
Factus es, o pulcher, pene puella, puer.<18>

APRIL the 4th

Looked through the European Magazine for last month. I hardly remember 
to have been more struck, on any occasion, by any composition, than with 
the remonstrance of one Gibbins, a Quaker, against the proceedings of 
the Monthly Meeting at Birmingham towards his expulsion, for 
manufacturing and selling firearms, is a masterpiece of sound and close 
reasoning, forcibly urged in the clearest, purest, and precisest 
language. I hope it will have its intended effect on those to whom it is 
addressed: such a man, if his integrity is on a par with his ability, 
would be an irreparable loss to any society.—On what principles do the 
Quakers reconcile to themselves the payment of war taxes, rather than of 
tithes?

APRIL the 5th

Read Swift's burlesque of Collins' arguments against Christianity,<19> 
in the 24th Vol. of his works:—some of these arguments will not be 
burlesqued.—It is related of Swift, in the preceding volume, that it was 
his custom, before committing his writings to the press, to read them 
over in the presence of two domestics, demanding occasionally what they 
understood by such and such passages; and if any appeared beyond their 
clear comprehension, that he carefully altered the language till they 
fully caught the sense. This test could hardly be applied on all 
occasions. Where the subject matter is understood by an auditor, it is 
doubtless always practicable to render oneself intelligible to him in 
the treatment of it; but surely not otherwise, without such an excess of 
explanation as would appear tedious and ridiculous where it was not 
wanted.

APRIL the 13th

Looked into the 18th and 19th Vols. of Swift's Works, Nichols' edition. 
Lord B—'s, (Qu. Lord Bathurst's?) Letters are written with the engaging 
ease and playful spirit of one who can afford to trifle without 
detriment; Gay's display the cheerful carelessness of his temper; and 
Lord Bolingbroke's exhibit that impetuous, indignant, overbearing 
vehemence of soul, and majesty of diction, which distinguish all the 
compositions of this noble writer.

Pursued Lib. 2. of Horace's Odes. The character ascribed to Bacchus in 
the 6th and 7th stanzas of the 19th Ode, a poem peculiarly devoted to 
the celebration of his praises, should have taught Bentley to tremble at 
depriving him of the epithet "proeliis audax" in the 12th Ode Lib. 1., 
on the ground of his being an effeminate and luxurious deity. The God of 
wine seems to have been as great in the field, as some of our modern 
heroes at the bottle.

APRIL the 15th

Finished a cursory perusal of Burke on the Sublime and Beautiful. The 
penetrating sagacity, various knowledge, and exquisite taste displayed 
in this disquisition, are subordinate merits: it is the original and 
just mode of investigation on such topics, of which it exhibits so, 
brilliant an example, that stamps upon it, in my estimation, its 
principal value.

Looked over Swift's Journal to Stella, in, the 20th Vol. of his Works. I 
can allow for the relaxations of greatness: trifling however, as their 
general cast and complexion may be, they usually confess, somewhere and 
by accident, the stock from whence they sprung.: but these Letters are, 
uniformly, and throughout, the most childish things I ever read; and it 
is wonderful how such a man as Swift could possibly keep his mind down 
to such a level, for any length of time.

APRIL the 16th

Read Sir William Temple on Popular Discontents, on Gardening, and on 
Ancient and Modern Learning. Temple, whatever topic he treats, always 
entertains: he has an easy regular stream of good, sense, which never 
overflows, or fails, or stagnates. In his Introduction to the History of 
England, he has opened our history to the death of William the 
Conqueror—a dark and confused period—very successfully; and laid a good 
foundation for a subsequent narrative. Swift, from a fragment of English 
history which he has left, beginning with the reign of William the II., 
appears to have had an intention, at one time, to follow his patron's 
career; but, from the specimen he has given, one cannot regret that he 
dropped: it. I am unable to discover, in this fragment, any traces of 
Swift, or of superior ability of any kind.

APRIL the 19th

Began Lib. 3. of. Horace's Odes. We should have despised such 
compositions.as the 12th, the 17th, and the 18th, had they been written 
by anyone but Horace. That "privatus" in the 8th, means "throwing aside 
public cares for a time, and becoming a private individual," appears to 
me to admit no doubt; nor do I feel, with Bentley, that this 
construction is harsh.

Consulted, for a particular purpose, Warburton's Divine Legation. One 
would, a priori, have supposed it impossible to weave such a 
miscellaneous mass of knowledge on all subjects, upon the slender and 
fragile thread of his Demonstration. For vigour of intellect, and 
amplitude of information, Warburton is almost without a rival: but his 
judgment and his taste are both defective. An implicit adoption of the 
first and hasty suggestions of his prompt and ardent mind, seems to have 
been his predominant foible; and to this cause, I think, may be 
referred, that waste of powers and erudition, in the support of 
untenable paradoxes, which vitiates so large a portion of his literary 
labours:—the pains which should have been bestowed on the discovery of 
truth, were perversely misapplied to the maintenance of error.

APRIL the 22nd

Read Adam Smith's History of Astronomy, in his posthumous tracts, 
published by Dugald Stewart.—Any unusual succession of events in the 
appearances of nature, by obstructing the ready passage of the 
imagination from one to the other, creates the uneasy and restless 
sensation of wonder; which we endeavour to remove, by filling up the gap 
between them, with some connecting element—some middle term—over which 
the mind can glide from one to the other with customary facility: on 
this principle he takes his stand, in reviewing the science of 
astronomy; and proceeds to consider, the various expedients which have 
been offered to explain the phenomena of the heavens, according to the 
advanced state of knowledge at the time, from the revolving concentric 
spheres of Aristotle, to the simple and sublime suggestion of Newton. It 
was Smith's design to have traced a history of all the leading divisions 
of philosophical enquiry, on the same original and happy idea; and, from 
the fragments he has left behind him, one deeply regrets that he did not 
pursue and complete a task, so congenial to his temper and his habits, 
and for which he was, in all respects, so admirably qualified.—This 
phasis<21> of philosophy seems bottomed on Hume's doctrine of cause and 
effect. There is frequently an earnestness in Smith's manner, arising 
from an anxiety to exhibit and enforce his opinion, which is very 
impressive. The preceding Memoirs of Smith, by Dugald Stewart, 
disappointed me; they are jejune in matter, and lifeless in expression.

APRIL the 27th

Finished the first Volume of Gregory's Essays: a most prolix and diffuse 
composition; from which you may just collect, by wading through 500 
pages, that the author means to establish the liberty of human action, 
on a distinction between physical cause and intellectual motive.

Read the 24th of Horace's Odes, Lib. 3. I am not satisfied with 
Bentley's emendation and explication of the lines,—

Si figit adamantinos 
Summis verticibus dire necessitas 
Clavos:<22>

Substituting "sic" for "si," and reading the whole parenthetically: but 
Dacier should have understood his construction, before he derided it; 
and far from thinking that his own (and the ordinary) interpretation of 
the passage, exhibits an idea "juste et belle," it appears to me that 
nothing can be more forced or uncouth than the image thus presented.

APRIL the 30th

Ran over Beattie's Elements of Moral Science—a miserable work; which 
does not answer to the title, and is deficient even in the wonted 
animation of its author. B. shines but as a disputant: as a calm 
disquisitionist, he is nothing.

Attended Church in the afternoon. It is strange, how differently the 
same subject appears to the same man at different times—how present 
consideration magnifies its relative importance! S. preached a sermon in 
which he represented "good works," as the substance of religion; and 
speculative dogmas, as dust in the balance: yet, I have heard him 
insist, at other times, on many particles of this dust, as points of 
supreme moment!

Looked over the first Vol. of the Tatlers—a happy design; which, however 
unequally executed, claims our esteem, as the. venerable parent of a 
literary progeny, that has rendered inestimable service, in quickening 
the understandings, enlarging the knowledge, refining the taste, and 
improving the morals, of the people of this country.—The character of 
Orlando, in the 50th and 51st Nos, is original and striking.

MAY the 7th

Began Lib. 4. of Horace's Odes. The 1st Ode opens most gorgeously, but 
concludes impotently: the 2nd is throughout of consummate excellence: in 
the 4th Horace loses himself, I think, by attempting to soar too high—
his forte is elegance, not sublimity.

Read Coulthurst's Sermon on the 25th of Oct. 1796, with Geddes' version 
of it. The travesty is humourous and happy; but the original is so truly 
ridiculous, that it is difficult, by any burlesque, to render it more 
so.

Met Mr. E. He has given up his exposition of the prophecies, as applied 
to the present period; and does not seem prepared, or inclined, to adopt 
any other. He is convinced however, contrary to my opinion, that the Old 
Catholic establishment will start up again in France, as soon as the 
present hurricane is over.-His liberal views in politics, derived from 
an ample knowledge of men and things, and purified, by long commerce 
with the world, from all bigotry, are quite refreshing in these days of 
party violence.

MAY the 10th

Pursued the Tatlers. The 95th No. is particularly happy in describing an 
amiable domestic couple;—there are touches of truth and unaffected 
simplicity in it, which are quite pathetic the Vision Nos. 100 and 102-
(l am not in general fond of these visions)—is neatly introduced, and 
prettily told: the 114th No. is affecting, connected with the 95th

Read the 6th and 7th Odes (Lib. 4.) of Horace. The former is 
disproportioned in its parts, involved, and obscure; nor do I think 
Horace successful in his laboured efforts to be great: the latter—a 
congenial theme—breathes all that simplicity, and tenderness, and 
graceful ease, for which I most admire this captivating poet. How 
naturally do the trains of imagery and sentiment follow each other!

MAY the 20th

Finished, by a continued perusal, Burke's Two Letters on a Regicide 
Peace. They contain as much plenitude of thought, fertility of fancy, 
and vigour of argumentation, as any of his younger productions; nor do I 
perceive any symptoms of that decay of mind, which he so often asserts. 
How inestimable would be the remnant of such unrivalled powers!

Looked over Horace's Epodes—an unmeaning title. The 2nd is eminently 
happy in selecting and presenting the delights of a country life; and, 
notwithstanding its neatness and point, one almost regrets the 
concluding turn by which the illusion is destroyed.—The incantations in 
the 5th are very inferior, in grotesque wildness and horror, to those of 
the Witches in Macbeth.—How Dicier can consider the lines in the 11th,

"Simul calentis inverecundus Deus, 
Fervidior mero, arcana promerat loco;"<23>

as meaning anything else than "when wine (Quid non ebrietas designat? 
Operta recludit, Epis. 5., Lib. 1.<24>) has unlocked the heart," or can 
impute any grossness to this idea, is perfectly amazing was he never 
warmed to such disclosures, by a friend and a bottle?—The 8th and 12th 
are most abominably filthy, and utterly unworthy their author.–On the 
whole, I am less pleased with the Epodes, than with any of Horace's 
compositions; and fancy, at least, that I discover in many of them, a 
hardness of manner, perplexity of construction, and acridness of spirit, 
very remote from the usual ease, suavity, and urbanity of this Favourite 
of the Graces.

JUNE the 2nd

Visited the Royal Exhibition. Particularly struck with a sea view by 
Turner—fishing vessels coming in, with a heavy swell, in apprehension of 
a tempest gathering in the distance, and casting, as it advances, a 
night of shade; while a parting glow is spread with fine effect upon the 
shore. The whole composition, bold in design, and masterly in execution. 
I am entirely unacquainted with the artist; but if he proceeds as he has 
begun, he cannot fail to become the first in his department.

JUNE the 9th

I was much amused this evening with a ventriloquist; the most perfect in 
his art I have ever met with. He maintained a spirited dialogue with 
himself, and sung an air, with good effect, in this assumed voice. The 
deception is highly curious. That it is in the power of the professors 
of this art, according to the vulgar notion, to cast their voice 
wherever they please, is certainly untrue: the delusion they produce, 
may, I think, thus be accounted for. Though I cannot admit with Reid 
(Enquiry into the Human Mind, chap. 4, sect. 1.) that sound does not 
indicate the quarter from whence it proceeds, since, as I have often 
observed, a dog, with nothing to direct him, will instantly turn towards 
the point from whence his master calls; yet unquestionably this 
indication is very vague and slight, and leaves the mind in considerable 
suspense. When the ventriloquist first inwardly articulates, we are 
prompted to refer the sound to him; but observing that not a muscle in 
his countenance stirs, and hearing a voice entirely different from that 
in which he had just addressed us, we naturally cast about to some other 
quarter for the speaker: the ventriloquist always takes care to lead the 
imagination, with much address, to that quarter from which he wishes us 
to suppose that the ideal speaker is talking: and we eagerly refer 
thither, those accents for which we could otherwise assign no place 
whatever.

JULY the 8th

Finished the perusal of "Les Lettres Provinciales, de Pascal." In the 
first ten Letters, he exposes in the liveliest and most striking forms, 
and aggravates by a vein of the most exquisite and cutting irony, the 
subtle and mischievous casuistry of the Jesuits: in the nine succeeding 
ones, he follows up his attack upon the morality and policy of this 
order, seriously and in earnest: the latter, however, though by no means 
destitute of force; though sometimes very powerful; and though in the 
14th, particularly, the writer bursts out into a strain of vehement and 
impassioned eloquence, which; had it been found in Demosthenes, would 
have been the admiration of the world,—prove, upon the whole, far less 
interesting to a modern reader; and it is to the former, that Pascal 
will ultimately stand indebted for the meed of immortal fame.

JULY the 15th

Read in the Star, this morning, the following solemn and affecting 
account of the death of Edmund Burke. It has all the appearance of 
coming from authority.

"On Saturday night died, at his seat near Beaconsfield, after a 
long and painful illness, which he bore with a pious fortitude 
suited to his character, in his 68th year, the Right Honourable E. 
B. His end was suited to the simple greatness of mind which he 
displayed through life; every way unaffected; without levity, 
without ostentation. Full of natural grace and dignity, he appeared 
neither to wish nor to dread, but patiently and placidly to await, 
the appointed hour of his dissolution. He had been listening to 
some essay of Addison's, in which he ever took delight: he had 
recommended himself in many affectionate messages to the 
remembrance of those absent friends whom he never ceased to love: 
he had conversed some time with his accustomed force of thought and 
of expression, on the awful situation of his country, for the 
welfare of which, his heart was interested to the last beat: he had 
given, with steady composure, some private directions, in 
contemplation of his approaching death: when, as his attendants 
were conveying him to his bed, he sunk down, and, after a short 
struggle, passed quietly and without a groan, to eternal rest, in 
that mercy which he had just declared, he had long sought with 
unfeigned humiliation, and to which he looked with a trembling 
hope."

I shall never forget the chilling reply of a French Emigrant of 
condition, to whom I had communicated this awful event with some 
considerable emotion; "Ah! une grande perte: voila un orateur de 
mains!"<25>

JULY the 20th

Finished the perusal of some of the Orations of Demosthenes. Upon the 
whole, I am rather surprised, I confess, though it be to my shame, at 
the transcendental fame of this orator; and cannot help ascribing it, in 
some measure, to traditional veneration. Of the effects of these 
harangues upon. an Athenian audience at the time, I can readily believe 
anything: but they exhibit nothing of that artificial construction and 
rhetorical embellishment, which is calculated to extort the applause of 
the critic by profession; nor of that impassioned and overwhelming 
eloquence, which secures the admiration of the world at large. Sheer 
sense, urged with masculine force and inextinguishable spirit, is all 
they have to boast; nor.do I meet with anything in any of them—(and when 
I say this, I am not unmindful of Partridge's critique upon 
Garrick<26>)—which a person of sound judgment and strong feeling, long 
practised to an Athenian auditory, might not very naturally be supposed 
to urge in the same manner, on a similar occasion, without much 
premeditation. The speech on the Crown, is evidently the most laboured 
of any; yet, how inferior is it in genius, erudition, taste, and pathos, 
to Burke's matchless diatribe on the attack of the Duke of Bedford and 
Earl of Lauderdale!

JULY the 21st

Read the first Satire of Horace, Lib. 1.: a composition of exquisite 
urbanity: but in which I am unable to discover any adequate connection 
in the transition from discontent to avarice, even by the light of the 
"Illuc, unde abii, redeo,"<27> in the 108th verse. It is not merely from 
the love of gain, and envy of superior wealth, that we are discontented 
at our own situations, and sigh for those of others: nor do the 
instances which Horace adduces at the opening of this piece, appear to 
originate from this cause at all.

JULY the 23rd

Read Hurd's Discourse on Poetical Imitation: a critical disquisition of 
considerable depth and skill; but debased by a superfluous intricacy, 
and frequent affectation of quaintness. I cannot think that he 
satisfactorily exculpates Virgil from the charge of borrowing from 
Homer.—Read afterwards his Marks of Imitation; of which the canons are 
just, but the examples not always convincing.—The first dissertation, 
perhaps, would render us too credulous of originality; and the latter, 
too suspicious of imitation.

Pursued Horace's Satires, Lib. 1. One wishes that he had preserved more 
connection of thought, in many of these incomparable effusions:—it is 
really difficult in several passages of the 4th and 5th to make out and 
pursue the train of his ideas. The humour of the 7th, I confess myself 
unable to relish; but the 8th is infinitely curious.

JULY the 27th

Read Hurd's Dissertation on the Idea of Universal Poetry—a most impotent 
attempt to ravish a barren generality. Formally to deduce the necessity 
of versification to the constitution of a poem, from the abstract 
principle, that the end of poetry is pleasure, demanded a vigour of 
powers, and violence of compression, to which only his MASTER was equal. 
The fierce attack on novel writing, towards the close, appears 
unseasonable and unprovoked.—In the subsequent Dissertation on the 
Drama, Hurd recovers his wonted powers; and I am inclined to acquiesce 
in the different provinces which he assigns, with much subtlety of 
discrimination, to Tragedy, Comedy, and Farce.

Read the 2nd Satire of Horace, Lib. 2. The difficulty, is hardly repaid 
by the pleasure, of understanding this satire on luxurious gluttony. 
Many of its points are happily adapted to modern circumstances, and 
neatly urged, in Pope's spirited Imitation.

AUGUST the 4th

Read Burke's Memorial on a projected secession of Opposition during the 
American War—a most masterly composition; not breathing the fierce 
passions and party violence of the day, but temperate, guarded, firm; of 
measured strength; and adapted, by the largeness of its views, to the 
reason of unborn generations.

It is brought forward in the Monthly Magazine; but they do not mean, I 
should hope, to charge this against him as a proof of inconsistency.

AUGUST the 6th

Attended, by particular invitation, a public Meeting of the Quakers, at 
which P. W. of G. with his suite, and between three and four hundred 
soldiers, were present. There were four principal speakers; two men, and 
two women. The dismal twang, the braying whine, the suspiration of 
forced breath, the sudden and violent transitions, from oracular 
slowness to vehement rapidity, and from sibyllistic fury to colloquial 
familiarity, in wild rhapsodies without coherence or drift, and 
perplexed applications of shreds of Scripture, Old and New, with no 
discoverable propriety, to no apparent purpose——contrasted with the mute 
attention, the sobs and tears of their own auditory—were really 
convulsive. With every disposition to be serious, it was difficult to 
preserve a decency of deportment. This sect completely puzzles me. That 
persons, all above the vulgar, many of excellent good sense and 
extensive information, most exemplary in their conduct, mingling in the 
business if not the pleasures of the world, performing all the common 
offices of life like other folks, and governing their own society by 
maxims of the soundest discipline, should, at this time of day, persist 
in nourishing a fanaticism so extravagant and revolting to all common 
sense, is very surprising: that they should wish, as in this instance, 
to exhibit a public spectacle of their folly, is altogether 
unaccountable.-On showing a disposition to withdraw, we were repeatedly 
pressed to stay till the conclusion; and thanks were then formally 
returned for the general silence and decorum maintained by the 
spectators (which indeed was exemplary), as if they were sensible of the 
difficulty of preserving it. I really thought the thanks well merited.

Read the 3rd Satire of Horace, Lib. 2. The humour of this piece is 
rather recondite; and the personages introduced in the narrative of 
Damasippus, renders it frequently perplexed. I was at one time, inclined 
to transpose the transition which Dacier places at the 187th verse, to 
the 182nd

AUGUST the 18th

Finished the perusal of Mattel's Droit des Gens: a masterly work, in 
which the duties of the sovereign power of nations, are ingeniously and 
ably deduced, in applicable detail, from the simple principle of the 
general good; and the rights of humanity, forcibly and eloquently 
vindicated against the maxims and practice of ambition. The Editor, an 
initiate apparently of the New School of Philosophy, seems possessed 
with a fanatical horror against the idea of punishment, in its ordinary 
acceptation, as inflicted by equals on equals, by man on man; and to 
surprise, and hunt, and combat, this many-headed monster, wherever it 
starts up in the text, appears the eternal purpose of his tasteless 
annotations.

 Began the 1st Book of Horace's Epistles. The first of these Epistles is 
a most delightful and mellifluous composition, full of natural ease and 
grace. Dacier, appears to me, to misunderstand the 19th verse,

Et mihi res, non me rebus, submittere conor:<28>

this he considers as a qualification on his relapses to Epicureanism: I 
am inclined to regard it as opposed to the 17th verse, and expressive of 
the effect of such relapses; which was, that he endeavoured to 
accommodate things to his mind, like an Epicurean; and not his mind to 
the nature of things, like a Stoic. Pope, in his spirited imitation, 
seems to have viewed it in the same light; and "subjungere," I observe, 
is substituted for "submittere," in the text. I am disposed to adopt 
Bentley's emendation of "lenta" for "longa" V. 21., as "piger" is the 
varied epithet to "annus."—The 3rd Epistle is written with uncommon ease 
and spirit.—If the 4th was addressed by way of consolation to Tibullus, 
on his ruin,—as Dacier plumes himself on having discovered,-never were 
topics more unhappily selected.-Dacier has translated the 9th in the 
true spirit of a Frenchman under the old regime.

AUGUST the 25th

Read the 1st Epistle of Horace, Lib. 2. (the celebrated Epistle to 
Augustus) with the aid of Dacier's notes, and Hurd's Commentary. I am 
not entirely satisfied with the explanations of either of these critics. 
Dacier is less happy than usual in his auxiliary lights; and Hurd 
extracts an order and coherence, which I am unable to recognize in the 
original, the true connection and bearing of which, in various passages, 
eludes all my research. Bentley, tempted perhaps by the difficulty of 
the subject, is more than usually audacious in his conjectural 
emendations: he appears on this occasion, in the elation of conscious 
superiority, to give the full reins to his genius; and where it is 
impossible to force our assent, he at least extorts our admiration, by 
the extent of his learning and the vigour of his fancy. Hurd, 
complexionally of a very different temperament, is always acute and 
ingenious, and plausible, even in his most eccentric aberrations. His 
explanation, in a note on the 14th verse, of Virgil's Allegory at the 
opening of the 3rd Georgic, if it be chimaerical, is gradually wrought 
out with exquisite art, and ultimately displayed with matchless effect; 
and his disquisitions on the double sense of verbs (note v. 97.) and the 
rules of criticism (note v. 214.), though in both cases depraved by too 
extreme a subtlety of refinement, are unquestionably, in substance, at 
once profound and just. For his fulsome adulation of Warburton; for the 
servile application of his minute and microscopic researches, to justify 
the casual glances of his patron, he well deserves the burning lashes of 
Parr: yet, when I estimate his critical achievements, I could wish his 
fierce assailant had given weight to his censures of them, by having 
previously asserted to the world the strength of his own powers in this 
congenial department of literature.—Pope's Imitation of this Epistle to 
Augustus, though sometimes flat, is frequently felicitous. He is still 
more unequal in his Imitation of the next—a composition in which Horace 
particularly shines: his account however, of the obstructions in London-
Streets, is eminently happy; Horace's description fades beside it.

AUGUST the 28th

Read Horace de Arte Poetica. I eagerly adopt Bentley's substitution of 
"adfient" for "adsunt," v. 101.; of "qui" for "quae," v. 277.; and 
incline to read, with him, "praesectum" for "perfectum" v. 294.: but 
cannot bring myself to embrace his emendation, however strenuously 
enforced, of " ter natos" for "tornados" v. 441.—I wish to believe, that 
"tornatos" may be translated "rounded" as well as turned." His 
restoration, in a note on v. 402., of a corrupted passage in Ampelius, 
is very masterly: it flashes instant conviction; and does him greater 
credit, in my judgment, than all his other emendations put together.—
With regard to this celebrated Epistle to the Pisos,<29> if it has any 
method, I confess I am unable to discover it; and, considered as a 
didactic tractate on the art of Poetry, I cannot help regarding it as a 
miserably lame and defective composition.

AUGUST the 29th

Read Hurd's Commentary on Horace's Art of Poetry. Hurd's idea is, that 
this Epistle is nothing but a critique on the Roman Drama, and he spins 
out on this principle, sometimes with difficulty enough, a sort of loose 
epistolary connection through all its parts. But what must we think of a 
poem, whose subject, method, and drift, though anxiously investigated by 
the ablest critics, have defied detection for seventeen centuries and a 
half. The annotations appended to the commentary, are replete with 
critical entertainment.—On v. 47., he successfully illustrates, from 
Shakespeare, his idea of Horace's direction, "so to order old words, 
that they shall have the effect of new."—On v. 94., he justly deduces, 
that poetry is the language of passion; that each passion presents its 
peculiar images, and suggests its appropriate expression; that these are 
modified by the situation, habits, age, profession, &c. of the person 
thus affected; and, that the just exhibition of the passions thus 
modified, constitutes the excellence of dramatic composition.—On v. 99., 
he very ingeniously traces the signification of "pulchrum" from its 
original and appropriate sense of "beauty in visible form," to "every 
species of pleasurable image whatever," and finally "to whatever excites 
any pleasurable feeling through the imagination:" and he then proceeds 
to set the sense of the terms "pulchra" and "dulcia," as opposed to each 
other in this verse, in a very happy light; restricting the former, 
which might singly have denoted poetical excellence in general, to 
beautiful imagery; and assigning the other to pathos.—On v. 103., he 
endeavours to solve the celebrated question, why we are pleased in 
representation, with what would shock us in reality; but omits the grand 
cause, which has been justly assigned by Burke (Sub. and Beaut. Pt. 1. 
Sect. 13, 14, 15).—On v. 244. he very happily evolves the charm of 
pastoral poetry; and traces its progress from the Idyllia of Theocritus, 
to Milton's Comus.—On v. 273., he refers the coarseness of ancient wit, 
to the free and popular government of their states, and, to their festal 
licenses.—-And, on v. 317., he very ably explains, and illustrates 
Horace's recommendation for attaining truth of expression in Dramatic 
Poetry—to study the human mind in general, to know what conduct, from 
the predominancy of certain qualities, the imputed character requires; 
and, to study real life as it prevails, to know with what degree of 
strength that character will, on particular occasions, most probably 
display itself—How lamentable is it that such erudition and acuteness 
should be occasionally polluted, by a superfluous and crafty semblance 
of intricacy and depth, by a detestable affectation of quaint 
expression, and by a pert provoking petulance, a cool, sly, contemptuous 
jeering, even of the most respected characters, the intended mischief of 
which can only recoil in shame and disgrace upon the author.

SEPTEMBER the 3rd

Read Terence's Andria. I cannot applaud the construction or conduct of 
the plot; but the dialogue is, throughout, supported with inimitable 
ease and spirit. Only one passage made me smile; and that was, where 
Pamphilus says to Davus, in a pet, on the unlucky conclusion of his 
first scheme, and the proposal of another, Act 4th Sc. 1st

Imo etiam: nam sati credo, si advigilaveris, 
Est unis, geminas mihi confides nuptias.<30>

The expression "hinc illae lachrymae"<31> comes from the 1st ecene, act 
1st: the source of these proverbial quotations is frequently unknown.

Read Sir Horace Walpole's Mysterious Mother. There is a gusto of 
antiquity, and peculiar raciness in this piece, which is quite to my 
taste: the terrible graces are finely maintained, and the passion of 
horror is ably prepared, and successfully excited; but the catastrophe 
is at last worked up to a crisis of distraction, for which no power of 
thought or language can find adequate expression.

Perused Gibbon's lively attack (Letter 9.) on the Government of Berne; 
which evinces that he had early imbibed just political notions.

SEP. the 8th

Finished, with much interest, the Pursuits of Literature. The text is 
frequently stiff and intricate; but the prefaces and notes perstringe 
with acute criticism and poignant wit, whatever has, of late years, 
obtained celebrity in politics or literature. The Author is 
unquestionably a good scholar, and has formed his taste on classic 
models: his knowledge of modern works, and of the leading characters of 
the day, and the secret history of both, is extensive and curious: in 
politics, he seems a temperate Burkite; but with a strange obliquity 
from this standard, in a ridiculous alarm, which he cherishes, of the 
return of Popery into this country, through the influence of the French 
emigrant priests: his jealous orthodoxy he evinces in a fierce attack on 
Dr. Geddes for questioning the inspiration of the historical parts of 
the Bible: he appears fully to understand, and decidedly loathe, the New 
System of Morals, with all its votaries: and he displays a mortal 
antipathy to the frippery of affected refinement, from the Della 
Cruscans, to hot-pressed vellum paper.—With an affectation of 
concealment, he throws out many hints, which, if not designed to 
mislead, might surely conduct to his detection.—His character of a true 
Poet, in the 4th Part, is itself animated with a high spirit of poetry, 
very different from the general texture of his Satire.

Read Terence's Eunuch. The characters of Gnatho and Thraso, the Parasite 
and his braggart patron, are delineated with considerable humour and 
spirit. The difference of manners, particularly in whatever respects the 
intercourse of the sexes, between the Ancients and the moderns, is very 
striking; and I think greatly to the disadvantage of the former. Love, 
it is observable, with them, seems not at all to have cooled by a 
premature and surreptitious enjoyment—at least if the representations 
here given, are just.

There is a very happy ridicule of the prevailing system of terror in 
certain modern novels, by a "Jacobin Novelist," in the last Monthly 
Magazine. It seems hard, but it is true, that original excellence in any 
department of writing, by provoking scurvy imitation, has a natural 
tendency to bring disgrace upon itself.
SEP. the 9th

Read the 1st Book of Cicero De Finibus; in which the moral system of the 
Epicureans is ably expounded and justified. The licentious air of this 
philosophy entirely results from the equivocal sense of the terms, 
pleasure, and pain, on which the system hinges—terms, which were perhaps 
adopted a little in the spirit of paradox, and which have been 
industriously perverted by the malevolence of party. In truth, the 
system itself very sensibly makes happiness the end of action; and the 
means of obtaining it, the business of wisdom; the rules which wisdom 
prescribes for this purpose, constituting the virtues.

Read the first two of Burke's Memorials on French Affairs. The latter, 
strongly marks the distinguishing character of the French Revolution; 
illustrates its influence in producing new and most important interests 
in the surrounding states, by the analogous cases of the aristocratic 
and democratic factions in Greece headed by Lacedaemon and Athens, the 
parties of the Guelphs and Ghibbelines in Italy, and the Reformation of 
Luther; and perpends, in a masterly survey, its probable course through 
all the States of Europe. We see in this grave composition, pure and 
unadorned, the native force and vigour of Burke's mind; and have a taste 
of the immense stores of information, from which he drew in his more 
popular works.

SEP. the 10th

Read the 2nd Book of Cicero de Finibus: in which Cicero himself 
dexterously attacks the Epicureans; taking the term "voluptas" in its 
more obvious and restricted sense, and bantering them on their not 
daring to expose publicly the pretended motives of their actions. 
Cicero, I think, tacitly confesses some difficulty in this attack, by 
insisting so copiously on an absurd doctrine which the Epicureans held, 
probably to avoid scandal, that privation of pain, is pleasure; and that 
all positive pleasures, are only modifications of this negative good.

Read the 3rd and 4th of Burke's Memorials on French Affairs. The latter 
opens, in a masterly style, the true interior of France; and points out, 
with infinite force of mind, and a consummate knowledge of the human 
character and the case before him, the only feasible, and the only 
honourable, course for the allied powers to pursue, in their endeavour 
to restore a regular government in France—which is, to consider the 
emigrants, each in his department, as the only true representatives of 
the French State; to treat them as their ally; and to reinstate them in 
their property and their authority, as they advance. One grieves to see 
a man of Burke's genius and intentions, conflicting against a giant evil 
with such intractable instruments!—What a hopeless case, do these 
Memorials, written in 1791, 1792, and 1793, now make out!

SEP. the 11th

Read the 3rd Book of Cicero de Finibus, in which he unfolds the Stoic 
system, in the personage of Cato. The grounds and qualifications of this 
system are intricate and obscure; but its leading feature consists in 
placing, not merely the "summum" with the Peripatetics, but the "solum" 
"bonum," not the chief only but the sole good, in the "honestum," the 
virtuous and praiseworthy: the superhumanity of which scheme is finely 
exposed by Cicero in the next Book. The truth is, these different sects 
of philosophers, though they varied prodigiously in words, were, with 
some slight shades of real difference, for which it would be easy to 
assign a philosophical reason, substantially agreed.

I was much pleased with some anecdotes of Buffon,<32> in the last 
Supplement to the Monthly Magazine; though they lower this fine writer, 
unintentionally perhaps, into a French atheistic coxcomb in private 
life.

Finished Terence's Heautontimorumenos, with which I am not much 
delighted. One becomes weary with the cajoled father, amorous son, 
cunning slave, and fond mistress. Were the Romans deficient in variety 
of character, or their poets in the skill to mark it?

SEP. the 20th

Read the ΕΡΑΣΤΑΙ (Erastai–The Rival Lovers) and ΕΥΘΥΦΡΩΝ (Euthyphron) of 
Plato.—In the former, Socrates, in his interrogatory way, leads these 
Lovers—a suspicious appellation in Greece—to concede, that Philosophy 
consists, not in attaining secondary eminence in all the arts, but pre-
eminence in the art of life, in governing oneself, one's household, and 
mankind.—In the latter, he attacks the fastness of pagan priestcraft; 
and reduces Euthyphron, who maintains that there are duties peculiarly 
due to the Gods, and who is engaged on this principle in the prosecution 
of his own father for murder, to a non plus. The toil is thus artfully 
spread. Euthyphron, on Socrates pretended wish for information, lays 
down, that what is pleasing to the Gods is sacred, what is otherwise, 
profane: a position which he is obliged to abandon, on considering the 
acknowledged difference of sentiment among the Gods; when he adopts, at 
Socrates' suggestion, the amendment, that what is pleasing to all the 
Gods, is sacred, what is displeasing to all, profane, and the rest 
indifferent. On which, Socrates, who has apparently gained little 
advantage in this first round, but the credit of giving his antagonist a 
fall and setting him on his legs again, proceeds to involve him in 
perplexity, this way. As, when anything acts or suffers, it is active 
and passive because it acts and suffers, and does not act and suffer 
because it is active and passive; so, when anything pleases, it is 
pleasing because it pleases, and does not please because it is pleasing; 
but that which is sacred, confessedly pleases the Gods, because it is 
sacred, and is not sacred because it pleases the Gods; therefore, that 
which pleases the Gods cannot be sacred, nor that which is sacred 
pleasing to the Gods, the one being pleasing because it pleases, while 
the other pleases because it is pleasing:—An entangling subtlety, which 
can hardly be exhibited but in Greek; and which we might wish, perhaps, 
with Johnson, not difficult merely, but impossible, of exhibition in any 
language. Socrates then leads Euthyphron to assert or to allow, that 
sanctity is a part of duty; that it is that part which relates to the 
service of the Gods; that it consists in rightly giving, and rightly 
asking; and that it may be regarded consequently, as a sort of commerce 
between Heaven and Earth. But, in commerce, what is useful is given for 
what is useful. Do we give, for their favours, what is useful to the 
Gods? Euthyphron, with a sort of pious horror, instantly rejects this 
idea, and says—not what is useful, list what is agreeable. He is thus 
brought round to the point from whence he started, since what is 
agreeable is synonymous to what is pleasing;—and, feigning an awkward 
excuse, abruptly breaks up the conference.—There is in all this, surely, 
much solemn trifling—a childish attempt to puzzle and confound, by 
considerations entirely foreign from the merits of the question; and the 
best apology for Socrates, if justly represented on this occasion by 
Plato, is, that he fought the Sophists with their own weapons, and 
endeavoured, in a good cause, to "win his way, by yielding to the tide."

SEP. the 26th

Finished Gibbon's Correspondence. I envy him his splendid acquaintance; 
his literary labours, tempered by the most elegant habits; the first 
appearance of his History; and his introduction to the House of Commons. 
He seems to have consummated, all that the accomplished gentleman and 
scholar could desire: nor can I complain of his insensibility to his 
happy fortune—he frequently speaks of his condition with much 
complacency. The motives which he assigns for his silence in the House, 
are addressed directly to the heart.—His Letters to Deyverdun are 
interesting as they open a little the interior of his domestic economy:—
'he seems to have entertained high end expensive notions of living. The 
concluding Letters, addressed to a Right Honourable Lady, are of 
consummate elegance.

SEP. the 29th

Read the History of Literature, and the British and Foreign History, in 
the New Annual Register for 1796. The materials for the former, though 
slight and of easy access, are judiciously managed, and with tolerable 
fairness: but the latter is conducted in a strain of partiality, highly 
unbecoming anything which assumes the semblance of historical narrative; 
and even disgusting, I should think, to those who might be disposed to 
make similar reflections on the events related.

Began the 2nd Vol. of Gibbon's Miscellaneous Works. I was disappointed 
with his remarks on Hurd's Horace, which, though certainly ingenious, 
possess little interest, and give no satisfaction. His final sentence on 
Hurd's Essay on Poetical Imitation-"Mr. H. thinks these circumstances, 
all or some, necessary to form a suspicion; I allow they are very useful 
to confirm one," is pointed and just.

OCTOBER the 13th

Finished Longinus on the Sublime; to which I had been led, by Gibbon's 
critique in his Extraits Raisonnés. Notwithstanding the unquestionable 
merits of this critical composition in many points of view, I doubt 
exceedingly, from its want of method and exactness, whether it would 
have been favourably received, had it now made its appearance for the 
first time, as the production of a modern author. Longinus seems to have 
possessed a nice sensibility and just taste; but to have wanted 
penetration and discernment to ascertain the causes by which he was 
affected. His conception of his subject, is confused, since he places it 
in whatever so violently agitates and transports the mind, as to 
overpower reflection; his five sources of the sublime, are neither 
distinctly assigned, nor distinctly kept; and he evidently ascribes to 
expression, what is due to sentiment.

OCT. the 15th

Read Boileau's Reflections, prefixed to his translation of Longinus; 
with which, however, they have very little connection. The first nine 
are levelled at Perrault, for degrading the Ancients; and the three last 
at Messrs. Huet and Le Clerc, for contesting the sublimity of the 
celebrated passage in Genesis—"And God said, let there be light; and 
there was light." He has the advantage on both occasions; but uses it 
arrogantly. Read, afterwards, the Examen of this disputed passage, by 
Messrs. Huet and Le Clerc; and Le Clerc's Reply to Boileau's strictures 
on his Remarks.—After all, there seems little substantial ground of 
difference in the conflict so fiercely worked up between them: Le Clerc 
and Huet acknowledge the sentiment, though necessarily and 
unintentionally, to be sublime; and what can Boileau want more?—With 
respect to the other theme of literary warfare—the merits of the 
ancients—in our judgment of them, there seems one prejudice to be 
guarded against—a fond admiration of whatever is antique, which leads us 
to treat old writers like young children, and to be transported with an 
overweening delight at any excellence they may display; and one 
presumption most deliberately to be weighed—that what has extorted 
applause for so many generations, from such varieties of tastes and 
tempers, and through such changes of ephemerous fashion, must possess 
intrinsic merit deserving permanent esteem.

OCT. the 18th

Finished Gibbon's Extraits Raisonnés. His critique on Burke's Sublime 
and Beautiful, evinces that he had not sufficiently entered into the 
spirit of that disquisition. He expresses a surprise at the difference 
between Longinus and Burke, on the effect of the sublime; the former, 
describing it as calculated to rouse and elevate the mind; the latter, 
to overpower and depress it: but this is not a just representation of 
Burke's sentiments. B. makes the sublime turn, indeed, on pain and 
danger, which, when near, overpower and oppress; but on pain and danger 
removed; in which case, the mind, arrogating to itself some portion of 
the importance which these qualities confer, feels that swelling and 
triumph, that glorying and sense of inward greatness, which he expressly 
quotes Longinus as ascribing to the Sublime.

Read Boileau's Arret Burlesque—Discours sur la Satire,—Lettre au Duc de 
V.—,and his reconciliatory Letter to Perrault. The first, is an 
exquisite piece of irony on the obstinate adherence of old foundations 
to exploded error:—the second, a neat defence of personal allusions in 
satire:—the third, a happy sample of French flummery:—and the last, a 
delicate execution of a difficult task; containing a judicious mixture 
of firmness and concession.

OCT. the 23rd

Looked over the Postulata prefixed by Saunderson to his Algebra. I 
should have expected from him a better explanation of the Rnle of 
Proportion; with the rationale of which, I have found even proficients 
unacquainted. The object of this Rule is, to find a number bearing a 
proposed ratio to a given number. In the Rule of Three, Direct, it is to 
find a fourth number, bearing the same ratio to the third, as the second 
does to the first. What is the process which reason prescribes for this 
purpose? Divide the second number by the first—this will ascertain the 
ratio between them; then multiply the third with the quotient, which 
must necessarily produce a fourth number bearing precisely the same 
ratio to the third. In the Rule of Three Inverse, the object is the 
same; only, from the nature of the question, the terms are so 
transposed, that the 4th No. sought, must bear the same ratio to the 
2nd, as the 3rd does to the 1st: so that, putting the 3rd No. in the 
place of the 1st, the process becomes the same. The intent of the Double 
Rule of Three Direct, is to find a 6th No. which shall bear the same 
ratio to the product of the 4th and 5th, as the 3rd does to the product 
of the 1st and 2nd: make those products therefore, and proceed as in the 
Single Rule of Three Direct. The intent of the Double Rule of Three 
Inverse, is to find a 6th No. which shall bear the same ratio to the 
quotient of the 4th divided by the 5th, as the 3rd does to the quotient 
of the 1st-divided by the 2nd: form these quotients therefore, and 
proceed as before.—Such are the processes which common sense prescribes 
for the attainment of these ends: but, as in practice it is more 
convenient to multiply first and then divide, we have adopted 
accordingly an inverted method, leading precisely to the same result, 
but obscuring the principle on which the proceeding is founded.

OCT. the 26th

Finished the 1st Vol. of Sir George Staunton's Account of Lord 
Macartney's Embassy to China. There is an ostentatious prolixity in the 
explanation of common events, and a solemn pomp of phraseology in the 
narration of trifling occurrences (particularly exemplified in the 
opening of the 3rd chap.), which cast an air of ridicule on what, had it 
been touched with naiveté, (for I love detail), would have been 
sufficiently interesting: but the author seems to have considered it as 
a necessary point of duty, to swell himself out to a bulk suitable to 
the proposed amplitude and magnificence of his publication. The first 
Volume only just conducts us, after a De Istitutione Oratoria long (I 
will not say, a tedious) passage, to the promised land,—the object of 
our eager curiosity,—China.

OCT. the 29th

Finished the 1st Book of Quintilian "De Institutione Oratoria." The 
first three chapters evince, that good sense is the same in every age 
and country:—the greater part of his observations are of as perfect 
application now, as they could have been at the time they were written. 
The four succeeding ones are occupied with matters of grammar and 
philology in the Latin language, of little present use. In the 8th and 
9th judicious directions are given respecting the first reading and 
elocution of the infant orator: and in the three last, he enforces the 
subsidiary aid of various collateral studies, particularly geometry and 
music, to the attainment of perfect eloquence. That the more the mind is 
stored with knowledge, the more materials it must possess for thinking 
and for speaking, is sufficiently obvious; but I have never been 
satisfied with the particular directions which rhetoricians have 
prescribed on this subject: heated by the intense and exclusive 
consideration of their favourite theme, the qualifications they require 
in a consummate orator, are usually extravagant and absurd; and they are 
too apt to neglect enforcing, with due earnestness, matters of more 
essential practical import, in the vain pursuit of unattainable 
perfection.

NOVEMBER the 2nd

Began the 2nd Vol. of Sir George Staunton's Embassy to China. The 
account of the stupendous wall of China, probably the greatest work of 
man, is highly interesting; and the narrative of the first audience with 
the Emperor, in whose court art seems to have exhausted all its powers 
in investing the royal personage with awful dignity, is impressively 
worked up. I confess, on this solemn and august occasion, I felt 
tremblingly for the honour of my country.

Read Burke's Letter to Elliot on the D. of N.'s Speech in the House of 
Lords: a most animated, festive, and poignant philippic, against those 
leaders of the aristocracy, who, by their own conduct, precipitated that 
cause, which with little personal interest in it, he had been struggling 
to uphold in their favour, in despite of themselves. This piece exhibits 
Burke in somewhat a new light-frolicsome in satire; with a mind, 
unbroken by disappointment though stung with indignation, and sportive 
though afflicted; mingling contempt and scorn and laughter, at the 
defection of those, on whose policy, if not their virtue, he had relied 
for support, in the great question now at issue between the advocates 
for Ancient order and sweeping innovation, on which his whole soul seems 
suspended.—The latter part, where he exhorts his young correspondent not 
to despair; and animates him to take an active part in the contest, is 
prodigiously spirited and fine.

NOV. the 7th

Finished Sir George Staunton's Account of the Embassy to China. The 
disquisition on the Chinese language in the 6th chapter, is highly 
curious. By this it appears, that the Chinese words are all 
monosyllables; that they have no inflections to express contingent 
circumstances, as time, plurality, &c.; that the characters, expressing 
words, amount to 80,000, to which there are assigned only 1500 distinct 
sounds; that the characters are originally hieroglyphical; that upwards 
of 200 of these characters are radical, and denote a radical idea, and 
as such are arranged at the beginning of their dictionaries; that the 
species under each genus, are formed by additional strokes; that there 
are no auxiliary articles expressive of relations, but that the 
qualities arising out of such relation, become frequently the foundation 
of the names by which the relations themselves are denoted; and, that to 
study the language (such is its peculiar structure), is, in effect, to 
study the Encyclopaedia of the country. In all this, there is an 
artificial contrivance, which indicates a system, rather struck out in 
the maturity of reason for the purposes of communication, than gradually 
growing up, as in other languages, with our exigencies and our means: 
but when could such a system have been organised; and by what power 
could it have been imposed on the swarming population of this extensive 
empire?

NOV the 16th

Began the 2nd Book of Quintilian's Institutes. Having taken his pupil 
from the nurse, instructed him in grammar, elocution and composition, 
and imbued him with the elements of subsidiary knowledge, in the 
preceding Book, he in this delivers him over directly to the 
rhetorician. The two first chapters contain some excellent observations 
on the morals, temper, and manners, to be wished for in a rhetorical 
preceptor, which may still be very usefully consulted with this view. In 
the 3rd he judiciously recommends, with much earnestness, the choice of 
the ablest and the best, in the first instance, quoting the well-known 
anecdote of Timotheus, who always required double fees from a pupil who 
had been previously instructed. The 4th delivers much sensible advice on 
the subject of preliminary exercises, such as historical narratives, 
historical disquisitions, commonplace arguments on general questions, 
&c.; and he here takes occasion to display, with the happiest fertility 
of imagery on his own part, the advantage of that exuberance in youth, 
which may be pruned, over that sterility which can never be fecundated. 
In the 5th he recommends, in a way that cannot be sufficiently praised, 
the reading over together the most celebrated oratorical and rhetorical 
compositions; the master commenting on their nature, their structure, 
their excellencies and defects: and he closes his observations on this 
subject, with noting two opposite faults to be guarded against—the 
passion for antiquity, which leads, through imitation, to a hardness of 
manner—and a love for the flowery and ephemerous productions of the day; 
exhorting us to give our first attention to those compositions, on which 
time has set his seal of approbation, without defacing their beauties. 
In the 11th and 12th chapters, the casual advantages of untutored genius 
in declamation, over a mind refined by culture, and the final ascendancy 
of the latter from the equalization of its powers, are happily stated. 
The 13th shows very forcibly the subordination of precepts to their end, 
which may sometimes supersede their observance. The remaining chapters 
are consumed in frivolous and idle discussions on the etymology and 
definition of rhetoric, its utility, morality, &c. The Ancients often 
trifle in this way. Who can bear, with temper and patience, to be 
detained on the threshold of the art of eloquence, while it is formally 
debated, whether a good orator must necessarily be a good man?—Parr in 
his Preface to Bellendenus, has evidently borrowed a sentence from the 
12th c. "verum illis, quidem, gratulemur, sine labore, sine ratione, 
sine disciplina, disertis,"<33> says Quintilian: "gratulemur illis, 
quidem, sine litteris, et sine disciplina, disertis," says Parr.

NOV the 22nd


Read, by a rapid perusal, Burke's Third Letter on a Regicide Peace. I am 
overpowered with this stupendous effort of Burke's mind; whose genius 
never flamed so fiercely, as in this expiring conflagration. He seems to 
gambol, at his ease, in a multitudinous ocean of matter, obedient to his 
will; and to sport with a pressure, under which Atlantean shoulders 
would have groaned. The passage in which he exposes the impolicy of Lord 
Malmsbury's first humiliating mission, has irresistible force; and that 
in which he arrays what he should have supposed would have been the 
Minister's conduct, on this scornful repulse of Britannia's humble suit, 
is most awfully and transcendent ly sublime. Really, compared with this 
astonishing effusion, all the most celebrated specimens of Ancient or 
modern eloquence, appear like child's play.—The hiatus in that part in 
which he has drawn a cheering picture of our resources, is well supplied 
by the Editors:—I confess I cannot exactly trace it. It was a very 
delicate task.

Looked over the Beggar's Opera. The slang of low iniquity, is happily 
given in this strange drama; divested of its repulsive coarseness, and 
brightened with appropriate wit. It must have been of most difficult 
execution.

DECEMBER the 6th

Read the 3rd Book of Quintilian's Institutes. The first chapter gives a 
succinct history of the art of rhetoric: the greater part of the 
remainder, are consumed in a vain endeavour to reduce to precise limits, 
what is of too vague and arbitrary a nature to be accurately defined,—
the constituent parts, and different kinds, of declamation: he involves 
himself, accordingly, and his reader, in the entangling intricacies of 
multifarious divisions, which only darken what they were designed to 
illustrate; and perplexes the subject still more, by giving an account 
of the attempts of others in this way.

Was much pleased with Burke's Letter to Murphy, inserted in the last 
European Magazine, in which he strongly inculcates, the adopting that 
easy natural style in writing, which we pursue in conversation; in 
opposition to the prevailing affectation of modern authors. His own 
example powerfully strengthens this recommendation.

DEC. the 17th

Read the 4th Book of Quintilian's Institutes; in which, mingled with 
other less instructive matter, are some excellent observations on the 
opening, the narrative, and the distribution, in speeches on judicial 
causes. After all, however, precept on this subject is of little 
efficacy; and Quintilian is never more judicious, than when he leaves 
the practice, to good sense guided by the circumstances of the case.

Looked over Brown's Essays on Satire, prefixed to Pope's Moral Poems; in 
which the nature and end of satire is happily portrayed; and its history 
deduced from the earliest ages to its consummation in Pope, with 
uncommon spirit and correctness. These essays contain some of the best 
verses I ever met with—but their excellence is of one kind. Dipped 
afterwards into Pope's Essays: his manner is infinitely more 
diversified, and delights with a thousand varied charms.

I have been for some time amusing myself with the Arabian Nights 
Entertainments, to whose fascinating influence I am quite ductile. 
Nothing can be happier than the leading plan of these tales; the stories 
themselves, though physically extravagant, are such, to which we yield 
without scruple, what smooths, without effort, all physical 
difficulties—a willing fancy; and their variety keeps expectation 
perpetually alive.

DEC. the 22nd

Read the 5th Book of Quintilian's Institutes; in which he discusses the 
management of proofs and arguments. His incidental remarks are often 
excellent; but, here again, he loses himself and perplexes his readers, 
in endeavouring to distribute into some sort of classification, a 
multifarious subject which seems to disdain such chains.—I was much 
pleased with the close of the 10th chapter, in which he derives precept 
from the observation of excellence, and places the perfection of its 
power in its unobserved operation; and of the 14th in which he 
strenuously defends the combining eloquence with logic.

Read some of Addison's translations from Ovid, which I thought but cold 
and stiff; his notes on these pieces, which are neat and just; and his 
Essay on the Georgics, a very exquisite piece of criticism. Addison's 
style is incomparably limpid.

DEC. the 24th

Read the 6th Book of Quintilian's Institutes; on the peroration, and the 
moving of the passions. The Prooemium is pathetic, and reminds one of 
Burke's complaints on the loss of his only surviving son; but I cannot 
help thinking it affectedly prefixed to this part of his subject. With 
regard to moving the passions, I was much pleased with what he earnestly 
urges as his own peculiar advice—to kindle them first in ourselves, 
before we hope to transfuse them into others: but Horace had said nearly 
the same thing before; of which he takes no notice. From the 3rd 
chapter, "de risu", I expected some entertainment; but was disappointed: 
the Ancients do not appear to have understood the practice, much less 
the theory, of wit and humour—a subject perhaps, after all, too aerial 
and volatile to be submitted to rigid analysis.





1798
JANUARY the 7th

Read the 7th Book of Quintilian's Institutes, in which he treats of the 
arrangement of the materials which he presumes to be provided; and loses 
himself in endless subtleties, in endeavouring to establish general 
rules a priori, for what in every instance must be governed by the 
particular circumstances of the case: but he vindicates his judgment by 
confessing this, by citing examples, and by repeatedly recommending 
"ducem naturam."<35> I was particularly pleased with the close of the 
last chapter, in which, after strenuously inculcating a reliance on our 
own enlightened sagacity, rather than on any positive precepts, he gives 
to good sense the first, the second, the third place; and describes' its 
happy effect in melting the various materials of composition into one 
uniform and consistent mass. The whole passage is exquisitely conceived 
and delightfully expressed.—His examples by way of illustration, are 
often rendered obscure, by their particular reference to the Roman Law.

Attended Church in the afternoon. Mr. S. endeavoured to make faith a 
matter of duty; and deprecated licentious, with a salvo (exacted by the 
spirit of the times) in favour of free enquiry. In the way he took it, 
it was a distinction without a difference. The defenders of religious 
dogmas, where there is a contrariety of persuasions on the subject, are 
placed in an awkward dilemma. They cannot shut the door upon enquiry, 
without affording an impregnable asylum to adverse tenets; and they 
cannot open it, without letting in the common enemy and endangering 
their own. To stop at a certain point of enquiry, would be convenient to 
all parties; but this limit would vary in different sects; and for 
stopping at all, there is nothing but convenience to plead.

JAN. the 8th

Read the 8th Book of Quintilian's Institutes. I was much pleased with 
that part of the Proemium (confirmed by various subsequent passages) in 
which he condemns an overweening attention to the style, to the neglect 
of the sentiment; inducing the vices of affectation, tumour, unnatural 
contortions, and obscurity. He seems, in the 3rd chapter, to dwell, with 
a sort of prurient pleasure, on that particular ambiguity of language 
which equivocates obscenely. His strictures, in the 5th, on the 
sententious style, composed of luminous points, without coherence or 
continuity; perpetually sparkling, without breadth of shade or of 
effulgence; rough, without grandeur of inequality, and level without 
easy smoothness, are admirable.

JAN the 9th

Began, and read the first section of, Wollaston's Religion of Nature. He 
here propounds and maintains his hypothesis, "That moral rectitude 
consists in a conformity between our actions and truth;" and evinces, 
how much may be advanced by learning and ingenuity, in favour of the 
most fantastical notion.

Read the 9th Book of Quintilian's Institutes, in which he treats, with 
great judgment and refined taste, of figures of style and sentiment: 
though he condescends sometimes to needless and perplexing divisions; 
and does not sufficiently discriminate between these two species of 
figures—which perhaps ought not to be distinguished at all, the whole 
being referable to sentiment, without which language is "vox et preterea 
nihil."<36>

JAN. the 13th

Read the 10th Book of Quintilian's Institutes. The 1st chapter, in 
which, in recommending authors to the perusal of the young orator, he 
takes occasion to perstringe, with consummate skill and exquisite taste, 
all the most celebrated works of Greece and Rome, is above measure 
delightful. It is quite enchanting to hear an Ancient thus discussing 
the merits of the Ancients. The remaining chapters contain many 
judicious and excellent remarks—coming home directly to the bosoms of 
men—on the use and abuse of imitation, the formation of style, 
correction, composition, and extemporary speaking.—"Cito scribendo, non 
fit, ut bene scribatur: bene scribendo, fit, ut cito,"<37> says 
Quintilian; directly contrary to the advice of Johnson, who recommends 
rapid, as preparatory to correct, composition.—"Vix enim bona fidei viro 
convenit, auxilium in publicum polliceri, quod in prasentissimis 
quibusque periculis desit,"<38> is the reflection which induced me to 
relinquish my profession.—"Qui stultis videri eruditi volunt, stulti 
eruditis videntur,"<39> reminds one of "a wit among Lords and a Lord 
among wits."—Parr, in his Preface, has been busy with the first chapter: 
one imitation is very striking, "ille se profecisse sciat, cui Cicero 
valde placebit,"<40> says Quintilian: "In litteris ipsi se sciant 
plurimum profecisse, quibus Burkius valde placuerit,"<41> says Parr.

JAN. the 14th

Read the 11th Book of Quintilian's Institutes, on the adaptation of 
eloquence to the cause, the parties, and the audience; on memory; and on 
pronunciation and gesture—the last of which topics he discusses with 
surprising minuteness.

Ld. C. called in. Had much conversation on Fox; some passages of whose 
late conduct we deeply deplored: "If I may venture to say it," his 
Lordship exclaimed with much earnestness, "of so great a man, he appears 
sometimes strangely defective in judgment." But for the alarm which his 
excessive candour and occasional indiscretion had excited, we must, he 
thought, ere this, have seen him Minister. He feared he was sometimes 
overborne by Grey.

JAN. the 15th

Read the 12th and last Book of Quintilian's Institutes, in which, in 
giving the supreme finish to the accomplished orator, he insists 
essentially on his knowledge and observance of moral duty; recommends an 
intimate acquaintance with civil law and history; delivers various 
directions with regard to the practice of his profession; discusses the 
different kinds of eloquence—the sublime, the temperate, and the grand; 
advises a seasonable retirement, before a decay of power; and concludes 
with an animating exhortation to the young aspirant, not to sink under 
the prospect of the difficulties he has to surmount.—Thus closes a work 
which establishes Quintilian's character as one of the ablest Critics, 
at least, of his own, or of any age. A Translation of the best and most 
applicable parts of these Institutes, enriched with modern 
illustrations, judiciously and ably executed (for it is a task which 
could be trusted to no vulgar artist), would form a most useful and 
valuable publication.—The Preface to Bellendenus, so far as it relates 
to Burke (for I have attended, on a particular account, to that part 
alone), is much indebted to the 10th chapter of this last Book: one 
imitated sentence is very glaring, "melius de hoc nomine sentiant, 
credantque, Attice dicere, esse optime dicere,"<42> is Quintilian's 
expression; "sed melius de hoc nomine sentiant * * * *: Burkium si quis 
imitetur, eum credant et Attice dicturum et optime,"<43> is Parr's.—I am 
not aware on what principle Parr sometimes gives, and sometimes 
withholds, his authorities for sentences and expressions; nor am I 
competent to decide on the propriety of this style of composing in a 
dead language. The effect which it would have upon a Roman eye or ear, 
might easily be tried, by forming an English composition from shreds of 
Addison, Johnson, Swift, Bolingbroke, and Gibbon:—I suspect the texture 
would resemble a Harlequin's jacket.

JAN. the 17th

Read the 2nd, 3rd, 4th, and 5th sections of Wollaston's Religion of 
Nature. In the two former he endeavours to demonstrate, with great 
parade, that happiness, and following the dictates of right reason, 
coincide with his own grand principle, of acting conformably to truth. 
In the 4th, conformably with his system, he makes the extent of moral 
obligation commensurate with the knowledge a truth. In the last, he 
proves the existence, the perfection, and the superintending providence, 
of a First Cause; and deduces our peculiar duties toward& that wise, 
very ingeniously, from our true relations to each other.

Finished the Baviad and Maeviad; an exquisite satire on the loathsome 
affectations of the Della Crusca school of poetry. The Pursuits of 
Literature, though bearing some marks of resemblance, is however, of a 
much higher cast; and I think clearly not from the same pen.

JAN. the 18th

Finished the four remaining sections of Wollaston's Religion. of Nature; 
in which, he deduces, sometimes from his leading principle indeed, but 
often, too, from right reason, general utility, and the passions and 
affections of our common nature, the rights and, duties of man, 
considered as a rational animal, as a member of community, as a member 
of a family, and, lastly, as a private individual: concluding, with 
proofs of the immortality of the soul, from its immateriality, the 
necessity of a future life, to execute the ends of retributive justice, 
and the general prepossession in favour of such a belief: to which he 
subjoins some curious speculations on the nature of our state hereafter, 
with a view of the advantages attending a belief in it; and, closes with 
a final reference to his fundamental principle, as the great guide of 
human conduct in all its relations.—The passage in the 9th section, in 
which, though he admits and enforces, that the tendency of virtue is to 
happiness, and of vice to misery, he shows that this is only a tendency, 
which external circumstances, may counteract, or, if they do not 
counteract, may otherwise overbalance, struck, me as perfectly just; and 
another, in which he describes the wretchedness and impotence of the 
present life, if that is the "be all and the end all," as extremely 
eloquent.

Looked over, afterwards, a Supplement to Wollaston, by a French 
translator of his work. It consists of three Parts; in the two first of 
which, he defends the principle and scheme advanced by his original; and 
in the third, sets in a fog, in endeavouring to reconcile what he calls 
"premotion physique," with the liberty of man. He seems a weak 
superstitious character, and I am surprised at his hardihood in adopting 
Wollaston's Hypothesis.

JAN the 21st

Finished Barrington's Observations on the Ancient Statutes: a well 
conceived and elaborate work, containing much valuable antiquarian lore, 
and many amusing anecdotes and allusions; but through which the old 
woman occasionally peeps out. In page 489 he mentions, that a particular 
rock is shown in Merionethshire, between Dolgellau and Tal-y-lyn, called 
Craig-y-llam, from which, by the laws of Athelstan, thieves were 
formerly precipitated. This Tarpeian height is the awful crag which 
impends over the eastern side of the Pool Of Three Grains: and I can 
attest that it is admirably adapted to give these laws the fullest 
effect.

Read Jasper Wilson's celebrated Letter: a temperate; liberal, well 
informed, and eloquent address; deficient in nothing, I think, but an 
adequate consideration of the spirit militant in France.

JAN. the 24th

Finished Warton's Life of Pope prefixed to his edition of Pope's Works; 
and compared Wakefield's Preface to his Observations On Pope. These two 
critics differ essentially in their judgement of Pope: Wakefield 
ascribes to him, in a transcendent, and, it should seem, an equal 
degree, all the superior qualities of a consummate poet; while Warton 
regards him as deficient in the characteristic one—imagination.—The 
latter sometimes takes great liberties with his Principal; as where he 
compares Pope's version of the Iliad, to Townley's bust of Homer in a 
bag-wig.— A quotation from Cicero's Orator, which Warton applies, with 
some justice but more severity, to Johnson, " * * qui nihil potest 
tranquille; nihil leniter, nihil definite, distincte potest dicere; is * 
* furere apud sanos, et quasi inter sobrios bacchari temulentus 
videtur,"<44> reminds me of a corresponding passage in the Preface to 
Bellendenus, "qui nihil solet leniter, nihil explicate, nihil definite 
dicere, is stomacho plus dare, quam consilio videtur, et prope abesse a 
quadam orationis insania."<45> Were this Preface stripped of its 
borrowed plumage, might I judge from the slender part to which I have 
attended, it would be bald indeed; but I am not sure of the right we 
have, to pluck it in this way.

JAN. the 26th

Looked over Warton's notes on the two first Volumes of Pope's Works, 
comparing occasionally Wakefield's Observations. Warton's character of 
Johnson, as posessed of strong judgment, and keen discrimination of 
whatever regards life and manners (his favourite quarry), but deficient 
in a true taste and relish for poetry, is, I think, just.—
Notwithstanding Johnson's decision, backed by Warton, there is surely a 
striking echo to the sense in Pope's line, in the Essay on Criticism,

"When Ajax strives some rock's vast weight to throw."

—"One of the best musicians of the age," who informs Mr. Warton, that 
Mr. Pope's remark (Essay on Criticism, v. 144.) "that there are nameless 
graces in music which no methods teach," is unfounded, I should suppose, 
is Dr. Burney; yet I can hardly believe him so "correctly dull." There 
are occasional repetitions in Warton's notes, indicating slovenly 
execution; as in the quotation from Quintilian appended both to the 
213th, and 570th, vv. of the Essay on Criticism.

The peculiarities I have observed in these notes, tending to develope 
Warton's character and sentiments, are, his repeated and warm 
expressions of admiration at Milton's Lycidas, and Gray's Poems in 
general; his high praise of Aristotle; his quotations, with applause, 
from Harris and Beattie; his compliment to Lord Monboddo; his exaltation 
of Dionysius, and depreciation of Longinus; and his frequent censure of 
Johnson's critical decrees. With Wakefield he sometimes exactly 
coincides; but cautiously abstains from anything like allusion to his 
labours in the same vineyard. Warton has one felicitous expression with 
which even the exuberant luxuriance of Mr. Wakefield's style would have 
been enriched—"prose fringed with rhyme."

JAN. the 27th

Looked over some of Gray's Poems. I am almost tempted to agree in 
Johnson's character of these compositions. There is an encumbered 
heaviness in them, an over-laboured obscurity, and vehement straining—
even where he affects to trifle, very revolting to my taste.

Read Dryden's Dedication of his Fables to the Duke of Ormond. One is 
amazed that such undisguised, overwrought, extravagant and fulsome 
flattery, could ever have been endured: the most voracious appetite for 
praise must surely have been gorged by such a dose.

JAN. the 31st

Read Boileau's Preface to his Works. Pope's sentiment in his Essay on 
Criticism,

"True wit is nature to advantage dress'd;
What oft was thought, but ne'er so well express'd:
Something, whose truth convinc'd at sight we find,
That gives us back the image of our mind." (v. 297.)

is evidently borrowed from an incomparable passage in this Preface. 
"Qu'est-ce qu'une pensée neuve, brilliante, extraordinaire? Ce n'est 
point, somme se le persuadent les ignorans, une penséee que personne n'a 
jamais euë, ni dû avoir: c'est, au contraire, une pensée qui a dû venir 
a tout le monde, et que quelqu'un s'avise le premier d'exprimer. Un bon 
mot n'est bon mot qu'en ce qu'il dit une chose que chacun pensoit, et 
qui la dit d'une maniere vive, fine et nouvelle."<46> This Preface was 
written in 1700: the Essay, I think, in 1710.

Pursued Warton's Pope. I am disappointed in the critical information and 
entertainment I expected from such an editor of such a work. Innumerable 
slips attest how carelessly he has executed the task; and he has taken 
such unconscionable liberties in stealing from himself, that a reader 
well versed in the Essay on the Genius and Writings of Pope, will find 
little of novelty to glean, from the apparently abundant harvest of 
anecdote and criticism with which he is here presented in the form of 
scattered annotations.

FEBRUARY the 1st

Read several of Dryden's original Poems. The sudden transition from his 
Funeral Lines on Oliver Cromwell, to his Astraea Redux on the 
Restoration, the two first pieces in the collection, has a curious 
effect: one grieves to see genius thus prostituted. In his Political 
Poems (where he sometimes becomes impotent from rage) may be found most 
of the arguments which have furnished out the party pamphlets of the 
present day.—His Hind demonstrates, what I have often thought, but 
tremble to express, that the first step of separation from the Church of 
Rome, was the first step to infidelity.—The Religio Laici, is the most 
finished and equally sustained, of any of these pieces; and, as an 
argumentative poem, has infinite merit. For disputing in rhyme, Dryden 
has certainly no equal: his spirit is inextinguishable.

Began Boileau's Satires: compositions of exquisite wit and urbanity; and 
surpassed by nothing but Pope's productions in the same way. His 5th 
Satire, on Hereditary Rank, might now be recited with applause at Paris; 
and shows how the same thing may differ, when urged as a corrective, and 
when adopted as a principle. The10th, on Woman, is inferior in spirit to 
Pope's Satire on the same subject. In the 11th and 12th he is evidently 
out of his depth.

Was much pleased, in the European Magazine for last month, with Sir 
Joshua Reynolds' masterly character of Reubens' style. The comparison of 
his pictures to. "bunches of flowers," struck me as eminently happy.

FEB. the 4th

Pursued Warton's Pope. On v. 408. of the Prologue to the Satires, Warton 
has feelingly described the delightful transition, from the austerities 
of acrimonous censure,, to the melting scenes of domestic tenderness.—On 
v. 31. of Pope's Imitation of the 1st Epistle of Horace, he expresses a 
surprise, that Pope should have omitted the strong sentiment,

"Et mihi res, non me rebus, subjungere conor:" v.19.<28>

I conceive that Pope has endeavoured, and not unsuccessfully, to render 
it by the line

"And win my way, by yielding to the tide."

The original indeed is more pointedly significant; for Horace (if we may 
be allowed to dilute his spirit so unmercifully) intimates, that 
revolting from the Stoic doctrine; which in effect renders its votaries 
slaves to external circumstances by exacting an incessant and vain 
struggle against them, he found himself insensibly sliding back to the 
system of Aristippus, which, by a full admission of their influence on 
our happiness, pursued the only course to reduce these stubborn 
principles into a subjection to our pleasure:—See August 18th 1797.—It 
is amazing that Warton should have passed, without censure, and even 
with some sort of retrospective approbation, the flattest line Pope ever 
published. v. 49., 6th Epis. of Horace, B. 1.:

"So known, so honoured, at the House of Lords."

To make amends, he violently reprobates as coarse and vulgar, an 
expression, which, in its place, is felicitous enough. v. 13 I., 2nd 
Epis. of Horace, B. 2.

"Each had a gravity would make you spit."

The colloquial form of the phrase, here adds greatly to' its spirit.

FEB. the 7th

Read Boileau's Epistles. The 3rd, on False Shame, is eminently happy; 
and the 6th, in which he describes his mode of life, above measure 
interesting. His advice to Racine in the 7th, to convert the efforts of 
malevolence into instruments of good, by extracting improvement from the 
carpings of his envious critics, is at once neat and judicious. The 9th 
is an excellent lecture against affectationn: the 10th exhibits an 
engaging portrait of the writer: the 11th displays the pains of literary 
labour, and the pangs of idleness, with the easiest and most felicitous 
address: while the l2th, though dexterously managed; and treating on a 
fruitful subject, is polluted with the rancour, and clouded by the 
darkness, of polemical theology. Had Boileau written nothing but this 
latter piece, as he declares that he sometimes wished in good earnest 
had been the case, where would have been the remembrance of him now? His 
addresses to the King, however neatly turned, are necessarily fulsome: 
the leading idea in them all, is, that the Monarch conquered faster than 
the Muse could celebrate.

Read Pope's Preface to the Iliad, and Postscript to the Odyssey; both 
pieces, but particularly the latter, replete with most judicious 
critical observations, and illuminated with some of the happiest and 
most striking similes I ever met with. I doubt whether his Epic Poem of 
Brutus, though ingeniously, conceived, would, under any management, have 
succeeded: the consummation of the plot, is to destroy those illusions 
from which the fable must have derived its principal interest.

FEB. the 8th

Beta Boileau's Art Poetique, and Lutrin. In the former, he has copied 
too closely the desultory manner of Horace; though to much better 
purpose. The latter is, I think, superior as a mock heroic poem, to the 
Rape of the Lock; excepting always the conclusion, which is extremely 
lame and impotent.

Pursued Wakefield's Observations on Pope. I exactly agree with him in 
the species of preference which he gives to Pope's over Boileau's 
Imitation of Horace, in the account of the Visionary, (v. 192., Epis. 
2., B. 2., and Sat. 4., v. 103.); but do not see how he mends the matter 
in his proposed, improvement of vv. 74. and 75., in the 2nd Dialogue by 
way of Epilogue to the Satires.—Wakefield possesses exquisite taste, and 
a most luxuriant fancy, as a critic; and one grieves that he should, 
ever have misapplied his powers to politics and religion.

FEB the 11th

Read the Dunciad, with. Warton's and Wakefield's Annotations. Lord 
Orford's stricture on Swift and Cervantes, mentioned by Warton, with 
such high respect, in his note on v. 21. of the Dunciad, Book. 1st, 
strikes me as tasteless and groundless. Supposing the vices and follies 
satirised to be precisely the same (a gratuitous concession), in the 
Voyage to Lilliput they are rendered ridiculous and odious, by being 
placed in so diminutive and contemptible an animal; and in the Voyage to 
Brobdingnag this animal is, by an opposite contrast, distinctly and 
forcibly shown to be ourselves: while, with respect to Don Quixote, 
though the general character of his madness is sufficiently inhibited 
at. the Wind-mill and the Inn, its peculiar turns and qualifications 
(putting all the entertainment derived from it out of the question) are 
finely wrought out by the subsequent adventures.—Warton has one very 
happy, and one very forced, image, in his critique between the 3rd and 
4th Books:—one happy, in comparing the subjects of the Dunciad, to 
monsters preserved in the most costly spirits; and one forced, in 
resembling the violence of its satire to "that marvellous column of 
boiling water near Mount Hecla, in Iceland, thrown upwards, above ninety 
feet, by the force of subterranean fire."—Wakefield's attempts at 
humour, under the character of Scriblerus to the Dunciad, are very 
frigid and uncouth: he seems to have caught the grossness of Pope 
without his spirit; and occasionally displays the bigot.—The expression 
of Pope's Scriblerus, on v. 6., B. 4., that "they have chosen rather to 
turn the dark lanthorn of Lycophron,<47> than to trim the everlasting 
lamp of Homer," is forcible and fine.—In a note on v. 150. Warton treats 
Locke very disrespectfully—another of his characteristics. Swift he 
calls "a true whig," who was certainly a very high churchman, and in his 
zenith strictly connected with the tories: I reckon him a very moderate 
whig indeed.—The Dunciad was undoubtedly more perfect as a Poem, in its 
first form of three Books; but one cannot marvel at Pope's yielding to 
the temptation of enlarging this Limbo for his enemies.

FEB. the 14th

Read Garth's Dispensary;<48> a lively and pleasing poem, sparkling with 
considerable wit, but defrauded of its just fame by the Dunciad, so much 
its superior in correctness, conduct, spirit, and lustre.

Finished the Memoirs of Scriblerus; an exquisite piece of satire, of 
which the separate parts of Swift, Pope, and Arbuthnot, are sometimes 
very distinguishable. I am not surprised that the 13th chapter was 
suppressed in the 2nd edition:—it is grossly indecent, and does no 
credit to Warton in the republication. Had Burke's Sublime and Beautiful 
been in existence at the time of these Memoirs, I should have been fully 
assured that the 10th chapter was a burlesque upon some parts of it.—
Warton's application of Horace's "Sublimi feriam Sidera vertice," 
"striking his head against the Stars," to Johnson's

Should the fierce North, upon his frozen wings 
Bear him aloft above the wond'ring clouds, 
And seat him in the Pleiad's golden chariot: 
Irene

in a note on Scriblerus' Art of Sinking, c. 9., is very happy, but very 
contemptuous.

FEB. the 24th

Read Macfarlane's History of George the III.: a strange amalgam of 
vulgarity, impudence, and scurrility, compounded into a specious and 
showy mass, by a morbid vigour of intellect, which rather scares from 
its ferocity, than impresses with admiration by its force. Though 
ostentatiously the advocate of the present ministry, the author ill 
disguises strong traits of the unprincipled and dangerous political 
desperado. Who can he be?

Perused Johnson's London, and Vanity of Human Wishes. His numbers are 
strong in sense, and smooth in flow; but want that varied grace, and 
inextinguishable spirit, which constitute the essential charm of Pope's.

MARCH the 1st

How deceptive are titles. I finished, this morning, Campbell's Journey 
to India "partly by a route never gone before by any European." The 
whole of this unexplored route consists, in our Traveller's own words, 
of an eighteen days ride of 1400 miles (from Aleppo to Baghdad) through 
"a tract of country distinguished by nothing that could serve even as a 
circumstance to mark and remember our daily journeys." The whole volume 
contains nothing interesting but the narrative of the author's shipwreck 
and imprisonment at Bedanore.

Began Pope's Letters, Vol.7 Warton's Edition.—Wycherley appears a 
conceited old coxcomb. Pope's 24th Letter to him, in which the young 
censor gravely complains, that the repetitions in his poems, which 
Wycherley had desired him to cancel, grew so fast, and increased beyond 
expectation, upon him, each perusal, that he scarce knew what they would 
leave, is truly ludicrous. One would like to have seen the old 
gentleman's countenance on the perusal of this paragraph.—Dean 
Berkeley's Letter, giving an account of the island of Inarime, in the 
Bay of Naples, p. 330., is beautifully descriptive:—what an inviting 
picture does he exhibit of that Elysian spot.—A taint of affectation, 
more or less strong, runs through the whole of Pope's Letters: those to 
the ladies, particularly, are stuffed with miserable and frigid attempts 
to be gallant and gay.

MARCH the 3rd

Concluded a second reading of Roscoe's Lorenzo de' Medici, which fades 
considerably on a reperusal. The author, as is natural, partakes of the 
general debility of his subject; and, for want of better matter, is 
sometimes led to trifle most elaborately. In the 2nd chapter, he expends 
more serious and solemn pains in settling the period of a tournament, 
than would be allowable to an historian of the Roman Empire in 
ascertaining the date of the sack of Rome by the Goths.—We feel, after 
all, no interest in the life of his hero, but as it is connected with 
the literature of the period; we can conceive no other motive, but what 
this connection presents, which could have led to the selection of his 
Life as a subject of biography: why not, therefore, have made that 
literature at once the theme; and written a History of the Revival of 
Learning in Italy?

MARCH the 9th

Finished the first volume of Tooke's ΕΠΕΑ ΠΤΕΡΟΕΝΤΑ (Epea Pteroenta, or 
the Diversions of Purley), 4to. edition. The purpose of language is to 
communicate thought: it is not however by singly contemplating this 
purpose, that we can account for the various contrivances in language, 
any more than we can explain the various conveniences of a chariot, its 
springs, its glasses, its blinds, &c. from regarding it merely as a 
vehicle to transport us from one place to another. For the purpose of 
communicating thought, the noun and the verb would alone be sufficient; 
but we wish to communicate it with despatch, and with this view employ 
three kinds or abbreviations: 1st in terms, 2nd in sorts of words; and 
3rdly in construction. To the first of these descriptions of 
abbreviations, Mr. Tooke considers Locke's Essay on the Human 
Understanding, as the best guide; what is there called the composition 
and abstraction of ideas, being merely a contrivance of language, and 
relating solely to terms: he himself undertakes the investigation of the 
second. It being impossible to have a particular term for every 
individual idea, the use and operation of the ARTICLE consists, in 
limiting a general term to some particular idea; or, in other words, 
particularising a general term. In the same way, as it is impossible to 
have a distinct complex term for every different collection of ideas, 
the use and operation of the PREPOSITION consists, in denoting the 
adding or subtracting one or more ideas to or from that collection which 
the complex term embraces. Lastly, what the preposition effects with 
respect to single words, the CONJUNCTION, as it is termed, performs with 
respect to many; adding or subtracting whole sentences. Each of these 
Parts of Speech, as they are called, is neither without meaning, as some 
have supposed, nor possesses the various meanings which others (misled 
by imputing to them some part of the meaning of the terms with which 
they stand connected) have ascribed to them; but has a distinct and 
constant signification of its own, and may be traced to some original 
noun or verb in the language from which this signification is derived.—
Such, as far as I can collect, is the sum and substance of this 
celebrated volume: in which, combined, with much address in insinuating 
and impressing his doctrine, Mr. Tooke has evinced considerable skill in 
the art of awakening admiration, irritating curiosity, and inflaming 
appetite, by partial concealments, intricate evolution, and coy 
reserves. For one, I. am very impatient for him to go on. He expressly 
states his object to be, the laying a foundation for a new theory of 
language: and from various passages in the work, expressive of a supreme 
contempt for all the systems of metaphysics which are, or which ever 
have been, in the world, and for all the controversies respecting them, 
as founded on the grossest ignorance of words and the nature of speech, 
we are led to expect, from the complete development of his scheme, a new 
theory of philosophy, too.—One grieves to find the same memorials of 
personal and political altercation which disgraced the former edition, 
retained in this; and even more of the same dross added. They exhibit 
strong and disgusting indications of a perverse, acrimonious, and 
vindictive spirit: yet in private life, I am told, Mr. Tooke is amiable 
and bland; and I can attest that he is a most entertaining and agreeable 
companion.

MARCH the 10th

Began Campbell's Rhetoric. I doubt whether his quadruple division of the 
ends of eloquence, 1st to enlighten the understanding, 2ndly to please 
the imagination, 3rdly. to move the passions, and 4thly to influence the 
will, can be supported as separate and distinct purposes. The last, at 
any rate, embraces the other three as means.

Looked into Young's Night Thoughts: debased throughout with many poor 
and puerile conceits; such as making, "the night weep dew over extinct 
nature;" the revolving spheres, "a horologe machinery divine:" "each 
circumstance armed with an aspic, and all a hydra woe;" "each tear mourn 
its own distinct distress, and each distress heightened by the whole." 
Frigidity and tumour, obscurity and glare, are the two apparently 
opposite but striking faults of this popular and imposing poem: yet 
parts are in good taste: he glows with a natural and genial warmth in 
describing the charms of social intercourse and the blessings of 
friendship, towards the close of the 2nd Night; and the passage in the 
4th, beginning, "O my coevals, remnants of yourselves," is animated and 
sublime. Johnson perhaps caught his, "panting time toiled after him in 
vain," from Young's, "and leave praise panting in the distant vale."

MARCH the 12th

Read Watson's Address and Wakefield's Answer. The bishop is certainly 
wrong in supposing that an equal depression of all ranks would be a 
matter of no concern, as each individual would preserve his relative 
place in society; since, though the rich would in consequence suffer 
only a positive privation of superfluities, this privation, with the 
poor, would extend to the necessaries of life: he is equally wrong in 
supposing it possible to discharge the national debt by deducting a 
proportionate quantum of property from each individual, since a vast 
class of individuals have no property besides their annual, monthly, 
weekly, or even daily income: but I cannot forgive Wakefield's attempt, 
in his reply, to depreciate the national character; nor his ill-
concealed complacency at our subjugation by France. I have no opinion of 
the man who has lost the love of his country in more remote regards.

MARCH the 13th

Pursued Campbell's Rhetoric. In the 5th chapter, B. 1., he distributes 
the sources of Evidence into, 1st Intuitive, and 2ndly Deductive. Under 
the former he includes, 1st Mathematical Axioms, 2ndly Consciousness, 
3rdly. Common Sense. The latter (the Deductive) he divides into, 1st the 
Scientific, 2ndly the Moral; comprehending under the latter, 1st 
Experience, 2ndly Analogy, 3rdly. Testimony, and 4thly Calculation of 
Chances.—In the 6th chapter he spews the futility of syllogistic 
reasoning:—nothing farther seems necessary to expose the impotence of 
this instrument of reason in the advancement of truth, whatever may be 
its use in the detection of error, than to observe, that the premises, 
in a correct syllogism, must always comprise the conclusion.

MARCH the 14th

Finished the 9th and last volume of Warton's Pope. Swift, in the 11th 
Letter, opens the true motives of his Gulliver's Travels: after 
mentioning that work, he says, "—but the chief end I propose in all my 
labours, is to vex the world, rather than divert it;" and again, "when 
you think of the world, give it one lash more on my account;" and, 
afterwards, "but principally I hate and detest that animal called man, 
although I heartily love John, Peter, Thomas, &c." Pope's rebuke of this 
misanthropy, in the next Letter, is forcible and dignified.—Bolingbroke 
has a noble thought in the 40th Letter: "Fame is the wise man's means—
his ends, are his own good and the good of society:" Burke, I think, has 
somewhere borrowed this sentiment.

MARCH the 18th

Finished the Memoirs of Grammont; which exhibit, with less wit and 
spirit than I expected, a shameful picture of the voluptuousness, 
intrigues, and abandoned profligacy, of the Court of Charles the II.; 
and exalt, in a comparative estimate, the purity of modern manners: yet 
perhaps it would be as wrong to form a judgment of the morals of the 
nation at large at that time, by this Work, as it would be to appreciate 
the present by the Newgate Calendar.

Began Colley Cibber's Life; and was much delighted with his minute yet 
masterly account of the principal actors who figured previously to the 
Revolution:—their characters are really very finely drawn.—Cibber's 
vanity and easy good humour promise to be highly amusing. He reminds one 
of Boswell. I hope he will not ramble too wide in his wild and eccentric 
excursions; and perplex, by their means, the narrative they were 
designed to enliven.

Read Hurd's Dialogue between Cowley and Sprat, on Retirement. Cowley, 
who is an advocate for retirement, has manifestly the advantage 
throughout; and Sprat makes but a very sorry figure in defence of 
mingling with the world. After all, there is something offensive to 
correct feeling, and just taste, in thus imputing fictitious 
conversations to real personages; and though Mr. Hurd has executed his 
task with delicacy and address, I cannot help thinking that he has set a 
mischievous example.

MARCH the 23rd

Read Adam Smith's Disquisition on the Imitative Arts, in his Posthumous 
Works. He observes, That a production of art seldom derives any merit 
from its resemblance to another object of the same kind, except where it 
promotes uniformity in corresponding parts; That the pleasure derived 
from imitation, is greater, in proportion to the disparity between the 
imitating and the imitated object; That on this account the 
representation of indifferent or even offensive objects, is allowable in 
painting, but not in sculpture; and that painted statues, artificial 
fruits, &c. where this disparity disappears, immediately disgust after 
they have surprised, while very inferior representations in tapestry and 
needle work continue to delight; That the idea of expense, enhances the 
value of imitation, as in tapestry; and that of cheapness depreciates, 
as in cut trees; That the pleasure arising from imitation in statuary 
and painting, is incompatible with deception, since it is founded on a 
self-evident perception of the disparity between the representing and 
the represented object; That, for this reason, a slight imitation in 
vocal, and a still slighter in instrumental, music, is gratifying; That 
the chief power of vocal music, as an imitative art, consists in its 
imitation of those repetitions in which passion so much delights to 
indulge; That the principal delight of instrumental music (independently 
of the proper and peculiar charms of all music—melody and harmony) 
arises, not from its power of imitation, but of exciting different 
tempers and dispositions of mind; and its principal aid in dramatic 
exhibitions, from its exciting such tempers and dispositions as are 
congenial to the scene; and, That, in dancing, as the disparity of the 
imitation is less, its merit is less, than that of statuary and 
painting; though, from its power of representing a continued history, it 
may featly affect us more.—These remarks are as just, as they are 
ingenious and new.

MARCH the 25th

Read Adam Smith's Account of the External Senses. He seems to think, 
that the sense of Touch, is the only one which primarily and necessarily 
excites the idea of external substance, by pressure from without; though 
he appears disposed to believe, that the other senses suggest some vague 
idea of this kind, by an instinct subservient to other purposes. I do 
not exactly apprehend the distinction; and suspect that he was not very 
clear and firm in it, himself.—Smith has a pretty remark, in his History 
of Astronomy, on Philosophical Systems. These, says he, in many 
respects, resemble machines: a machine, is a little system, created to 
perform, as well as to connect together in reality, those different 
movements and effects which the artist has occasion for; a system, is an 
imaginary machine, invented to connect together, in the fancy, those 
different movements and effects which are already performed. How happy 
an illustration!

Pursued Hurd's Dialogues. A note in the 4th, ridiculing the reduction of 
the Church of Christ to its pure and primitive state of indigence and 
suffering, strongly reminded me of a corresponding passage in Burke's 
2nd Letter on the Revolution in France, addressed to a Member of the 
National Assembly, where he reprobates, with cutting severity, the 
entrusting the concerns of the Gallican Church to Mirabeau.

MARCH the 27th

Finished Hurd's Dialogues. In the 7th and 8th, in disfavour of foreign 
travel, the parts of Shaftsbury and Locke, but particularly of the 
latter, are sustained with incomparable spirit. In the twelve Letters on 
Chivalry and Romance, the origin of the spirit of chivalry (the 
distinguishing spirit of modern times), as it exhibits itself in the 
characteristics of prowess, generosity, gallantry, and religion, is 
satisfactorily traced to feudal institutions; the heroic and gothic 
manners arc ably compared; and the superiority of the latter, in a 
poetical view, successfully asserted.—Parr's imputation on Hurd, given 
on the authority of a friend, who, by the description, must be Porson, 
"that he had softened the aspect of certain uncourtly opinions, in the 
different successive editions of these dialogues," I can affirm, from a 
minute collation, to be unfounded. Alterations have indeed been made: 
but they are chiefly such, either as were necessary when the writer 
exchanged the character of Editor for that of Author; or which evince 
his good taste and discernment in removing the blemishes of first 
composition. Those which respect the strictures on Hume's History, are 
the most material and the most curious.

APRIL the 11th

Looked over King's Origin of Evil. He divides Evil into, 1st Evil of 
defect, of the want of those perfections which exist elsewhere; 2ndly 
natural Evil, or the pains and incommodities arising from physical 
causes; 3rdly. moral Evil, which he places in the vicious election of 
natural good and evil: and endeavours to show, that infinite wisdom, 
power, and goodness, could not have constructed the best possible system 
without them, or with less of them than appears; on the principle, that 
not one of these evils could have been prevented or diminished, without 
incurring a greater evil than that which was removed. Pope has evidently 
borrowed his doctrine of "whatever is, is best," from this work.

APRIL the 15th

Mr. L. breakfasted and spent the day with me. Had a long and interesting 
conversation on the subject of Rousseau. He had brought a volume of the 
Nouvelle Héloise in his pocket; and spoke of its author, notwithstanding 
his known partiality for classic literature, as, without any exception, 
the greatest genius and the finest writer that ever lived. I can impute 
this only to a temporary fascination—to a fervid but transient glow of 
feeling, which of all men, his favourite is the most calculated to 
impart, and himself to catch.

Rousseau is a character who has by turns transported me with the most 
violent and opposite emotions, of delight and disgust, admiration and 
contempt, indignation and pity: but my ultimate opinion of him, drawn as 
it is from a pretty attentive consideration of his writings and his 
actions, will not, I think, easily be changed.

This extraordinary man, it is evident, was constitutionally of an ardent 
spirit, vivid imagination, and most acute feeling. A mind thus 
attempered, is naturally prone to brood over its own visions; to hang, 
with fond complacency, upon a scene where everything is arrayed at the 
disposition of the will and in the tint of fancy; and to turn aside with 
soreness and disgust from the spectacle of real life, in which good and 
ill are so intimately and stubbornly mingled; where apathy succeeds 
enjoyment; interest and self-will dissolve the charm of social 
intercourse; avarice and pride disturb the dreams (the endearing dreams) 
of sentiment and passion; and even the sweet sympathies of pity itself, 
are chafed and exasperated into anguish, by the coarse manners, squalid 
rags, and loathsome horrors, that too often accompany the wretched. 
Expelled at a tender age from those domestic habitudes which mitigate 
the natural fierceness of man; a sort of outcast from his family, his 
country, and almost from his species; a wild and needy adventurer, 
cursed with a fastidious delicacy, and exposed to that scorn and 
contumely and insolent neglect, which the pride of genius most 
impatiently endures; he contracted a distempered sensibility, which 
forms the distinguishing feature of his character, and animates almost 
every passage in his writings. He wrote from the heart; but from a heart 
excoriated by real or imputed wrongs, stung with a maddening sense of 
the depravity and sufferings of his species, and inflamed with an 
implacable indignation at the causes of these evils, as he viewed them, 
through his perturbed imagination, in the civil social and domestic 
institutions, the received opinions, and prevailing practices of 
mankind. Upon these accordingly he pours out, in consuming fire, the 
vials of his wrath; while he arrays in all the glowing hues of 
impassioned eloquence, romantic modes of being, dear indeed, and 
delightful to the fancy, but utterly incompatible with the real and 
unalterable condition of our nature.

His maiden essay was an attack upon civilized society. It was an 
attempt, by exposing and aggravating the follies the vices and the 
sufferings which plague us in refinement, and by deepening the horrors 
of this gloomy spectacle with the glowing contrast of a visionary state 
of unlettered innocence and freedom, to make us loathe ourselves and 
everything around us, and to look for no amendment in our unhappy 
condition, but through the entire dissolution of the social system we 
live in. Had Rousseau written nothing but this piece, or had he written 
afterwards in a different strain, we might have ascribed the 
extravagance of its doctrines to a sportive sally of the imagination, or 
an eager ambition of distinction; but from the whole tenor of his 
subsequent compositions, from the solemn confessions of his own mouth, 
these doctrines were the serious and settled conviction of his mind. Let 
us look at his Nouvelle Hèloise.

Of all the modes of inculcating opinion, that which brings before us a 
vivid representation of real life, where everything lives and moves and 
breathes at the disposition of the fancy; which indirectly enforces its 
sentiments by the energy of character and action, and impressively 
stamps them on the mind by the interest and fascination of 
circumstantial narrative,—has unquestionably the fairest chance for 
rapid and popular effect. Feeble and impotent is the most animated 
exhortation, lifeless and inert are the most authoritative precepts, 
compared with the powerful and seductive influence of a well-conceived 
and well conducted novel; which, while it awakens breathless curiosity 
and enchains expectant attention by the magic of its fable, while it 
agitates at pleasure and in modes most conducive to its purpose all the 
varieties of passion, silently liquefies and moulds to its will, the 
taste, the turn of thought, the moral sentiments, and the moral 
character of its reader. Of compositions like these, I shall always take 
the liberty to collect the aim, from the final and predominant 
impression which they leave upon the mind. If their tendency is, upon 
the whole, to relax the obligations to virtue and smooth the declivities 
to vice, by means which it is so entirely in the power of the writer to 
employ and to conceal, it is not any declaration on his part, nor any 
corrective he may put in his own mouth, or in those of the personages he 
brings forward, no, nor any lenient qualification he may deem it prudent 
to introduce in the moral government of his drama, which shall soothe my 
unguarded unsuspecting simplicity into a persuasion of the innocent 
spirit of the work, or the virtuous views of the author. The effect it 
is impossible to mistake; the intention, at best, is equivocal. With 
what impressions, then, do we rise from the perusal of Julia? With a 
considerable abatement, I think, in our exquisite sense and high 
estimation (to say no more) of three most important regulations in life: 
regulations, which engrafted as they are, upon the dearest of our 
personal and bosom interests, strike deep into the composition of our 
several characters, mingle with the whole texture of our domestic 
economy, and affect, remotely indeed, but powerfully, the entire fabric 
of civil society;—those, I mean, which enjoin the purest chastity in 
females before marriage; a deference to parental authority, in the 
disposal of their affections and their persons; and a sacred horror to 
whatever may tend, after marriage, to alienate their conjugal regards. 
Love, which it is the object of these, regulations to check from 
diffusion or perversion, and to conduct into its regular fructifying 
channels, has so universal and absolute an influence, enters into our 
composition at so green an age, and agitates the tender germ with such 
an impetuous and fervid impulse, that in the cultivation of the human 
mind, it cannot be to vigilantly watched, or sedulously trained. This 
imperious passion, from which we derive our being and transmit it, and 
in a great degree our characters too, it has been the endeavour of 
Rousseau to exasperate into an impatience of all control; and to convert 
into an engine for overwhelming its natural guardians and protectors, as 
tyrannical usurpers over the rights of nature. What is the story he 
brings before us? A young lady, the only and darling child of a man of 
rank, and proud of that rank, conceives a passionate attachment for a 
youth entrusted with the delicate charge of her education; a clandestine 
intercourse is carried on; the impossibility of union reverberates the 
flame, and kindles intolerable ardour; the youth is modest and reserved; 
the enamoured maid invites him to her bed, and rewards his passion with 
the last favour a virgin can bestow: an improper sympathy is suspected 
by the father; he proposes and presses an equal match on which he had 
long set his heart; she reluctantly consents; she dismisses her lover; 
she marries; she resumes her old correspondence with her favourite 
paramour; she admits him, with her husband's permission, an inmate in 
the house; she is indulged with opportunities of renewing with him the 
passionate scenes, and reviving the harrowing remembrances, of former 
days; and expires in this unnatural intercourse. When these things are 
fairly set before us, in all their naked deformity, we want no monitor 
to prompt our aversion and disgust. We see by an intuitive glance, we 
feel by an instinctive thrill, all the pestilent disorders which would 
flow in upon us, from our encouragement, from our toleration, of such 
practices; from our not driving them, as we do, by common consent, from 
society, with shame and scorn and detestation. It requires no logic to 
convince us, that if the settled restrictions on these subjects were 
once removed, and nothing substituted but loose personal discretion 
swayed by every gust of appetite and passion, that all domestic security 
and comfort, all parental care, all filial duty, all pure and hallowed 
affection, all conjugal confidence and endearment, would be overwhelmed 
under a flood of gross adulterous lust and corrupted sentiment. What 
shall we think then of a writer, who, by the fascination of his fable, 
the melting fervour of his sentiments, and the vivid force of his 
thrilling descriptions, induces us, not to palliate as venial errors, 
not to approve as amiable failings, but to enter into and adopt as our 
own, to cherish as consolatory expedients, and embrace as a sort of 
sanctuary and refuge from despair, these flagrant violations of 
delicacy, decency, and chastity? Is it enough to say, that the actors in 
this scene, are beings of a peculiar order: that in the present depraved 
condition of human manners, such practices might not be perfectly 
prudent; but that when the same purity of sentiment is found, and the 
same difficulties occur, the same pastoral freedoms may innocently be 
indulged? Love, to which these edifying lectures are addressed, is, to 
be sure, a most distinguishing passion, and extremely cautious and 
deliberative in all its proceedings. No boarding-school young lady, 
after such an admonition, can be giddy enough to fancy herself a Julia; 
nor her dancing master, a St. Preux; nor her barbarous father, who may, 
from groveling prejudice, oppose the dear scheme Of Arcadian felicity, a 
Baron D 'Etange; nor her future husband, should he prove not quite so 
indulgent as M. Wolmar, a narrow-minded, hard-hearted, illiberal tyrant

His professed plan of education, is just in the same strain. It is an 
ingenious scheme to rear up a sort of enlightened savage; a being, who, 
in the midst of social habitudes, is to act upon the strength of his own 
judgment, in the pursuit of his own pleasure, with a perfect contempt 
for all the opinions and all the practices of the world he lives in. 
"Voulant former l'homme de la nature, il ne s'agit pas pour cela d'en 
faire un sauvage, et de le réléguer an fond des bois; mais qu'enfermé 
dans le tourbillon social, il suffit ne s'y laisse entrainer, ni par les 
passions, ni par les opinions des hommes; qu'il voye par ses yeux, sente 
par son cœuur, qu'aucune autorité ne le gouverne hors celle de sa propre 
raison."<49> It is an insane attempt to inflame that generous warmth of 
feeling, which inspires an ingenuous frankness of temper and erect 
independence of spirit, into a devouring conflagration against the 
system which these qualities seem peculiarly destined to purify and to 
adorn. Without entering into a direct refutation of paradoxes which 
their warmest admirers have never ventured to adopt, it is sufficient to 
remark, that supposing beings attempered to our wishes, constituted and 
trained up just as we would have them, such a plan of culture would be 
miserably defective, as forcing each individual to subsist on his own 
separate stock or observation and experience, instead of resorting to 
the common accumulating fund derived from the observation and experience 
of ages: but, taking human nature as we really find it, and as it ever 
has been found; assuming that mankind are subject to excesses and 
defects of passion, which it is the object Of laws, morality, and 
manners, to restrain, supply, and regulate; it requires no powers of 
prophecy to foresee, and common prudence has ever felt, into what 
horrible confusion and mischief the abrogation of all this discipline 
from without, by encouraging each individual, on the principle of taking 
nothing upon trust, "to be the only law unto himself," must, whilst man 
continues man, inevitably lead. It is the spirit of the writer, which I 
have chiefly in view.

That keen and morbid sensibility which may be regarded as the root of 
all these seductive but pernicious visions, produced in the unhappy 
writer himself, amidst much specious and hyperbolical virtue, many of 
the worst effects of a malignant and depraved disposition. To man, as he 
would have had him, Rousseau overflowed with tender, generous, and 
endearing emotions; to man, as he is, he was above measure querulous, 
captious, sour, perverse, and discontented: as a friend, he was clouded 
with dark and preposterous suspicions; and, as a lover, he quenched the 
fervours of a delirious fancy in the most coarse and revolting 
sensuality. The rubs, the insults, the acrimonious attacks, and petty 
persecutions, to which the singularity of his opinions and practices of 
course exposed him, though borne apparently with sufficient vexation by 
his irritable spirit, became, in time, the only element in which he 
could satisfactorily subsist: they not only fed the cravings of an 
insatiable vanity, and fanned a zeal which might otherwise have 
languished in support of his favourite paradoxes, but seem, by degrees, 
to have acquired the force of an habitual stimulative, eagerly sought by 
the unhappy victim to irritate a distempered sensibility into 
pleasurable action; till, disqualified at length for all the regular 
quiet enjoyments of life, and utterly alien, abhorrent, and ferocious, 
to the whole system of its manners and habits, by the united operation 
of these causes, if it was not at the bottom of them all, he exhibited 
in his latter days, and particularly, I think, on his visit to this 
country, the most unequivocal symptoms of a disordered intellect.

I have thrown together these thoughts on Rousseau, while my mind is 
still warm with our conversation respecting him: but I did not venture 
to bring forward to Mr. L. all that I have stated, since everything is 
frequently lost by endeavouring to accomplish too much.

We agreed far better in our opinion of Richardson and his Works. He 
admitted that the character of Sir Charles Grandison was by no means of 
such unnatural excellence, as not to furnish a very captivating and most 
instructive example. However consummately accomplished this moral hero 
is represented, he appears, on all occasions, actuated by the real 
passions, corrected by the genuine sympathies of our nature. What must 
be deemed romantic, I fear, are the effects ascribed to his conduct. 
Were virtue of such sure efficacy in actual life, who (we are tempted to 
exclaim) would not be virtuous? It is the perpetual and vexatious 
disappointment to which our good intentions are exposed, from the 
perverse and intractable nature of the system on which they are doomed 
to act, which really forms the great discouragement to virtuous 
exertion;-a discouragement far more operative, than any exacted conflict 
(of which we hear so much) with our appetites and passions. Other 
difficulties may brace our moral resolution, even when they overpower 
it; this relaxes, by despondency, the virtuous principle itself: nor am 
I surprised or offended, if, in the anguish of a soul overwhelmed by 
this intolerable affliction—the more discomfiting, the more generous the 
nature which it visits—Brutus should have exclaimed, as he is said to 
have done, in his last moments, That the virtue he had so long adored, 
was but an empty name! In fiction, these untoward obstructions may be 
either entirely suppressed, or if brought forward, so managed as only to 
irritate our sensibility to a keen relish of their triumphant 
demolition; and it is here, accordingly, where a departure from truth is 
at once the least perceptible and the most efficacious, that a well 
written novel usually deviates the most widely from real life. The 
endowments, moral and intellectual, of Sir Charles Grandison, however 
transcendent, present a fair field for generous emulation: but sanguine 
indeed must be his temper, who, with a competent knowledge of the world, 
should expect from them the same prosperous issues in practice, which 
they produce, with so much plausibility, in fiction; and which, if they 
were found to obtain in real life as they do in fable, would soon, by 
the congenial encouragement thus held out to beneficence, reduce the 
market price of the virtues far below the standard which they at present 
so justly maintain in the estimation of mankind.—Our duties limit each 
other. It was impossible to exhibit the perfect pattern of an 
accomplished gentleman, without appearing to stint some of those 
qualifications which the world is most disposed to admire; and it is 
curious to observe the pains which Richardson has taken to palliate this 
inevitable difficulty, by seizing every opportunity to bring out and set 
off, as much as he consistently could, Sir Charles' gallantry and 
spirit: he evidently felt where the popular objection to such a 
character would lie; but, after all, I am afraid he has not satisfied 
the ladies.—L., very acutely and perhaps justly, ascribed the superior 
popularity of this work over the Clarissa (which he regarded as much the 
more masterly performance), to its enforcing rather the lesser manners, 
which form the charm and safeguard of civilized life, than the higher 
morals, engrafted on the fiercer passions.

Finished the 2nd Vol. of Russell's History of Modern Europe. I agree 
with this sensible writer, that the spirit of persecution did not 
spring, as many have endeavoured to represent, from a decay of Christian 
piety; and that the first preachers of Christianity would have been 
persecutors if they could. Nothing, to be sure, can be more adverse to 
persecution, than the suavity and benignity of soul which Christianity 
inculcates: but the peculiar and exclusive character of its doctrines, 
acting on such a creature as man, has a natural and invincible tendency, 
I fear, to generate intolerance. If we see, in modern times, but little 
of this spirit, it arises from the general languor and indifference 
which prevails on all religious subjects: the pertinacity and zeal, 
however, with which the distinguishing tenets of their creed are still 
maintained among sectaries, strikingly evince, what sort of temper and 
disposition precise articles of faith, not loosely professed in 
compliance with general opinion, but fervently embraced as the essential 
conditions of salvation, will infallibly engender in the human mind.—
This is an extremely useful and well written work.

APRIL the 16th

Read the first Book of Locke's Essay on the Human Understanding,—in 
refutation of the doctrine of innate principles. One now wonders, how it 
could ever have been thought necessary to say so much, on so very plain 
a point. The main argument lies in a narrow compass:—general principles 
must be conversant with general ideas; but particular ideas must enter 
the mind before general ideas, and consequently general principles, can 
be formed.

Finished the Novel of Nourjahad in the evening. Nothing, I think, can be 
more happily conceived for its purpose, than the plan of this little 
romance; and it is very prettily executed. It goes much farther than 
Swift's Struldbrugs; since they only perpetuated the infirmities of age, 
while Nourjahad possessed, in fancy, immortal vigour.

APRIL the 22nd

Read the 34th and last Letter of the 2nd Part of the History of Modern 
Europe,—on the progress of society in Europe during the present 
century:—the work of a superior mind, very intimately conversant with 
the literature and elegant arts of that period. The account of the 
contest between the King and Clergy and Parliaments of France, opens, in 
a very striking manner, the germ of the subsequent Revolution: we see 
that event distinctly in its first movements.

Lieut. G. P. of the 49th Regt. of Foot, very unexpectedly came in. He 
stated, that he had as a private in his Company, the late usurper 
captain of the Lancaster. Admiral Paisley, he said, assured him, that 
they had not been able to trace the naval mutiny to any correspondence 
with shore; but that the prime instigators of it, there was every reason 
to believe, had escaped under the general pardon.

MAY the 9th

Finished Bertrand De Moleville's Memoirs of the Last Year of the Reign 
of Louis the 16th. They contain much curious, and I presume, authentic 
information relative to the crisis of the Revolution; and clearly show, 
that the King, though certainly not attached by affection to the New 
Constitution which he had accepted, was conscientiously determined to 
maintain it: but that a spirit had gone forth, hostile to all monarchy; 
and that his contest with this spirit (an unequal struggle), furnished 
the grounds of all the charges against him. Even before the meeting of 
the States, it appears, that the people at Rennes in Brittany, and 
probably in other towns, were quite ripe for the Revolution in its 
fullest extent.—The King's character is placed by this work, upon the 
whole, in a very amiable light; and there appears, in general, to have 
been a far greater ease, graciousness, and condescension, in the French 
Court, than, our own.—Some of the facts developed in this tract, are 
very surprising. Who would have supposed that Danton, and some of the 
fiercest Jacobins, were actually at one time in the pay of the Court, 
for the purpose of giving, even in their most outrageous speeches and 
addresses, a desirable turn to the public mind! I do not see how the 
King could honestly deny all knowledge of such corruption.

MAY the 13th

Began Dalrymple's Memoirs of Great Britain and Ireland; and read the two 
introductory sections; containing a masterly review of our political 
affairs, from the commencement of the Monarchy to the Restoration; and 
thence to the dissolution of the last Parliament of Charles II.—the 
period when the Memoirs immediately commence. There seems much 
originality of thought and expression, and (what I like still better) a 
true Whig spirit, in this work. One passage in the first Sect. struck me 
as pointedly applicable to the present times;—"Men forgot, in their 
danger from foreign invasions, the precedents which were established at 
home against the liberties of their posterity."

Looked over the Correspondence between the American Envoys and the 
French Directory; which exhibits the latter—those chosen representatives 
of stern republican virtue—in a new character,—as the unprincipled and 
grovelling votaries of the most low and sordid corruption. I suppose 
such a scene of Old Bailey diplomacy, in which common honesty is denied 
the decent homage of hypocrisy, was never before presented to the world. 

MAY the 17th

Finished the 1st Vol., comprising the two first Parts, of Dalrymple's 
Memoirs. In the structure and turn of the sentences; in the close and 
laboured compression of the matter; in vivid delineation of character 
and scene; in deep, original, and sagacious remarks on human passions 
and sentiments, generally just and happy, but sometimes far-fetched and 
misplaced, and often abruptly urged in the shape of pithy sententious 
declarations,—these Memoirs bear a striking resemblance to the 
compositions of Tacitus; of whose beauties and blemishes, but (as in all 
imitations) chiefly of the latter, they strongly partake. The character 
of the Scottish Clans, at the close of B. 2., P. 2., is drawn with 
uncommon force and spirit; and may fairly be opposed, I think, to any 
descriptive painting which Tacitus has given.—But whatever may be 
thought of the manner of this Work, the matter, which may be considered 
as embracing the immediate causes and effects of the Revolution in 1688, 
is unquestionably of the deepest importance to every lover of the 
constitution; and it is treated in a way, I apprehend, adapted to give a 
very just impression of this interesting portion of our history.—So 
strong, it is observable, is our sympathy with the great, that 
notwithstanding the obstinate bigotry, arbitrary spirit, and infatuated 
perverseness, of James the II., and our full assurance that his 
deposition was absolutely necessary for the preservation of our 
liberties, we still cannot help commiserating his fallen fortunes, when 
distinctly brought before us: nor is the cold petrific character of our 
deliverer, William, at all calculated to diminish this interest. The 
traits of national spirit in the former, in spite of his strict 
connections with France; particularly at the battle of La Hogue, so 
fatal to his hopes, where he could not resist exclaiming "none but my 
brave English could have done this",—are very touching.—Some of the 
Whigs at the Revolution, appear to have leaned more towards 
republicanism, than I had supposed.—The Appendix, forming the 2nd Vol., 
contains many interesting documents, which exhibit several points in our 
history in a very different light from that in which the speculations of 
our historians had previously placed them. What a different tale would 
history tell, had we always access to such materials as these!

JUNE the 3rd

Attended Queen-Square Chapel in the morning. The Sermon was an 
undisguised, but declamatory, defence of the doctrine of the Trinity; 
founded, as its text, upon the exploded passage in John, of the "Three 
that bear record in Heaven;"<50> respecting the authenticity of which, 
not a suspicion was hinted. Was this ignorance, or pious fraud, or 
merely a total want of candour?

Looked afterwards into the Roman Catholic Chapel, in Duke-Street. The 
thrilling tinkle of the little bell at the elevation of the Host, is 
perhaps the finest example that can be given, of the sublime by 
association:—nothing, so poor and trivial in itself; nothing So 
transcendently awful, as indicating the sudden change of the consecrated 
Elements, and the instant presence of the Redeemer.

JUNE the 5th

Read Haslam on Insanity. This dreadful visitation he ascribes, not to a 
false perception, or morbid intensity, but to a wrong association, of 
ideas. There surely, however, must be more in it than this.—I once asked 
a professional gentleman, who had particular opportunities of experience 
on the subject, whether he always found the brain of maniacs in a 
preternatural or disordered state. He said that he frequently, perhaps 
generally, did; but that in many cases where the faculties were most 
completely deranged, that organ had every appearance of being in a 
perfectly sound and healthy condition.

Looked over Godwin's Memoirs of Mrs. Woolstonecraft; which strikingly 
evince that love, even in a modern philosopher, "emollit mores, nec 
sinet esse feros."<51> This austere moralist, from whose forbidding 
frown we should expect that Cupid would shrink away abashed, becomes 
quite bland, obsequious, and gallant, under his fascinating influence.

Attended the Opera in the evening:—Il Barbiere di Seviglia.<52> Morelli 
was admirable throughout: but in a cadenza introduced in a Trio at the 
close of the first Act, surpassed in clearness, depth, and volume of 
tone, and facility, brilliancy, and correctness of execution, what I had 
supposed possible for the human voice; especially, so far as execution 
is concerned, a voice of that calibre. The general charge alleged 
against him by the cognoscenti, that he is sometimes out of tune, I 
confess escaped my observation; and I listened to him very attentively.—
After all, the continued, and (as for the greater part it necessarily 
must be) unmeaning, recitative of the Italian Opera, by degrees wearies 
the patience: the sudden transition, on the other hand, from dialogue to 
song, in the English Opera, is, I allow, too abrupt: might not a 
compromise take place; and the airs in the latter be introduced by an 
accompanied recitative of an impassioned sentence leading to the song, 
with good effect? I should like, at any rate, to have the effect tried.

JUNE the 10th

Detained at Kingston, on our way to Portsmouth, by finding every vehicle 
and' every horse engaged in the forwarding troops to Ireland at this 
exigent crisis.<52> The Duke of Clarence actively and intently occupied 
in superintending the requisite arrangements.—Escaped out of the crowd 
and bustle and strolled to Richmond.

Passed on our way, by Ham Common, an extraordinary Elm, called Ham 
Church: two-thirds of its enormous trunk decayed away; the remainder 
pierced through; but the top still exuberant. Ascended Richmond Terrace, 
and enjoyed perhaps the most richly variegated scene in English 
landscape. Returned by the Thames, and paused, with much interest, 
opposite Pope's villa and garden: his favourite willow on the lawn 
propped up by stakes; and exhibiting, abstractedly considered, an 
unsightly spectacle.—Great men should plant trees of longer duration: we 
might still wider the broad and majestic shade of Shakespeare's Oak.

JUNE the 11th

Reached Portsmouth. Between the 40th and 42nd mile from Town, climbed, 
by a long ascent, having a vast hollow called the Devil's Punch Bowl on 
our right, to the top of Hindhead Hill, commanding a glorious retrospect 
of the country we had traversed. A bleak and dreary heath around: its 
wildness heightened by a gibbet with the remains of three bodies on it; 
and a stone, memorialising the spot of "barbarous murder" committed by 
these wretches on an unknown sailor.—Between Petersfield and Horndean, 
pursued a devious course round the bases of smooth and lofty downs, 
rising steeply above on both sides, and, producing, a singular effect on 
an eve habituated to a level and enclosed country. Beyond Horndean, 
entered a luxuriant sylvan scene, rendered agreeably wild, simply by 
there being no separations of fence or hedgerow between the woodlands 
and the road;—a circumstance not common in English landscape; and on 
this account, Perhaps as well as from its intrinsic recommendations, 
particularly pleasing.—Grand burst from the brow of Portsdown hill, over 
an intervening level, of Portsmouth and its harbour; the straights 
beyond, sprinkled with men of war and shipping of all kinds; and the 
Isle of Wight, stretching away, finely in the distance.

JUNE the 13th

Rowed over to Cowes in a small open skiff:—the sea calm, still, and 
smooth as a mill-pond, "looking tranquillity." Singular and picturesque 
effect of the town of West Cowes; hanging on a steep acclivity at the 
mouth of the Medina; the houses and streets rising one above another in 
rapid succession.—Strolled to the poor remains of the Castle, and along 
a sweetly sequestered lane, opening occasionally; on the Inner Passage, 
sweeping like a mighty river, to the right; till we caught a grand view 
of it, extending in a long vista, and bounded by the opposite projecting 
points of Cary Sconce and Hurst Castle—the Western Downs rising in huge 
ridges to the left.

JUNE the 14th

Ferried over the river to some agreeable shady walks upon its banks; and 
climbed the opposite heights; exhibiting beautiful retrospect of the 
town, the harbour, and the shipping; inlaid below in bright enamel. 
Pursued the road to Alverstone till we attained an expansive view of the 
rich and diversified vale of Newport, spreading as far as. Sir Richard 
Worsley's Obelisk at Appuldurcombe;—the naked ridge of Arreton Downs 
extending about midway to the left. Returned round by Barton, an antique 
stone mansion; and at the back of Osborne House, to the highest point of 
ground in this direction: from whence a magnificent prospect of the 
Straights, and the English coast; tis far as the aching sight could 
carry.

JUNE the 15th

Had an agreeable sail to Newport, about five miles up the river Medina. 
Visited Carisbrook Castle, proudly crowning the summit of an eminence; 
but deficient in effect, from the want of picturesque accompaniments. 
Missed my friend Ogden, the old soldier; who: on a previous excursion 
acted as Cicerone to the place; and was accustomed, at the conclusion, 
to exhibit himself as the greatest curiosity there, being the person in 
whose arms the immortal Wolfe expired. Found, on enquiry of his son, who 
has succeeded him in the office of guide, and who still preserves with 
religious veneration the General's cane, that the gallant veteran was 
gone to the grand and final muster, at which, sooner or later, we must 
all appear. On my former visit, I was of course solicitous to enquire 
respecting the last moments of a hero, on whose fall, the arts of 
painting, poetry, and sculpture, have contrived to. Throw so bright a 
blaze of glory. The old fellow assured me, that far from displaying the 
lively interest ascribed to him, in the fate of the day, he appeared 
absorbed in his own sufferings, oppressed with debility and languor, and 
nearly insensible to what was passing around him. It is not pleasant to 
have illusions of this kind destroyed: but as the natural propensity of 
my informant would be; rather to aggrandise, than depreciate, the fame 
of one with whom he must feel his own so nearly connected, there can be 
little reason to question the truth and accuracy of his representation.—
Ascended to the highest point of the Keep, commanding an extensive but 
uninteresting prospect over the whole interior of the Island. Viewed 
again the celebrated Well, 200 feet deep to the water; 30 of which are 
walled with stone, and 170 pierced through rock: and 70 feet more of 
water at the bottom. Its prodigious depth best shown by dropping down a 
lighted sheet of paper, which, as it whirls round and round, in its 
spiral descent, emits a sound like the roaring of a furnace; and, at 
length, when it touches the water, casts a transient gleam over its 
surface, which appears about the compass of a silver penny. A naval 
officer lately, in bravado, jumped across the well, and forgot the 
transverse spindle, round which the bucket winds:—he escaped; but the 
blood curdles at the imminent and horrible danger to which his rashness 
exposed him.

After dinner, strolled to the sequestered village of Arreton, lying 
snugly at the foot of the southern declivity of the Downs; and, climbing 
to their summit, pursued the extreme ridge, which runs transversely, 
East and West, about midway athwart this portion of the island, and 
sloping steeply and smoothly down on both sides, presents, in either 
direction, a prospect almost equally attractive: extending, to the 
South, over a rich and variegated hollow, tufted with trees, sparkling 
with streams, and enlivened with villages and spires, to the heights of 
Appuldurcombe; and, to the North, over the whole expanse of this 
division of the Island spread like a sylvan wilderness beneath, and 
across the vast arm of the Outer Passage distinctly studded with the men 
of war at Spithead, to a long line of the English Coast, on which, 
through a transparent atmosphere, Gosport, Portsmouth, Havant, even the 
city of Chichester, and headlands stretching far beyond on the Sussex 
Coast, were clearly discernible.

JUNE the 16th

Drove to Shanklin Chine, a perpendicular rift in a lofty cliff: formed 
probably by the rush of waters, a torrent still gurgling in hollow 
murmurs at the bottom. The sides of this tortuous cleft, richly 
feathered with trees and underwood; and an enchanting peep from the deep 
shades and secluded recesses of this romantic glen, on a brightly 
illumined segment of the ocean, caught, in distant perspective, through 
its aperture. From the top, a fine bird's eye view of the grand sweep of 
Sandown Bay, extending to the white cliffs of Culver. Dismissed our 
carriage at Luccombe; and, winding down under the steep sides of St. 
Boniface's Down, walked the whole extent of Undercliff—about six miles—
an extraordinary, and, as far as my observation extends, an unparalleled 
scene. A continued line of heights, towering precipitously not less than 
400 feet above, to the right, inhibits all access or egress in that 
direction; and effectually excludes the "tyrannous North" from the 
favoured region below: the strip of ground thus secluded and sheltered, 
and which receives its denomination of Undercliff on this account, 
varying from about a quarter to half a mile in breadth, tossed about in 
the happiest forms, and richly diversified with rock and wood and 
verdure, forms itself, the crown of another cliff; which breaks down 
boldly to the sea. Here are all the ingredients of romantic landscape; 
and they are most picturesquely combined, in every possible variety. 
Passed St. Boniface's cottage, lying snugly in a delicious recess under 
the shelving steeps to the right; and afterwards Mr. Tollemache's, 
luxuriantly embosomed in wood. Leaving Sir Richard Worsley's celebrated 
cottage and vineyard to the left, the scene gradually assumes a 
character of solitude and wildness:—the verdure becomes more scanty; 
foliage disappears; the heights to the right, break down in rugged 
masses of bare rock; nor is anything heard, in this sequestered region, 
but the deep murmur of the sea, and the hoarse cawing of innumerable 
ravens that nestle in the Cliff. Struck to the right, through a pass in 
the Cliff, and resumed our carriage at Niton.

JUNE the 18th

Had an uninteresting drive yesterday to Yarmouth,<54> passing under the 
dreary foot of Shalcombe Down. This morning crossed the Yar, and leaving 
Mr. Binstead's beautiful cottage, embowered in trees, to our left, 
turned the point of Cary Sconce, and pursued the shore to the narrowest 
part of the channel between Hurst Castle and the Island—scarce a mile 
over: had a fine prospect, from an adjoining cliff; of the Freshwater 
Downs terminated, by the Needles, to the left; the Hampshire Coast 
receding towards Christ Church, to the right; and the open sea spreading 
between them. Pleasing views, on our return, of the whole length of the 
Inner Passage, stretching as far as the headland by West Cowes; and of 
the luxuriant scenery up the Yar, bounded by Afton and Freshwater Downs, 
wrapped in shade—a sullen, but fine background.

In the evening perambulated Yarmouth; which has a neat and quiet, but 
antiquated and rather melancholy air. Many of the houses, the worst of 
which seem far from wretched, are formed of blocks of unsquared grey 
stone;—much more grateful to the picturesque eye (so little does beauty 
depend on convenience) than the mean squares, and harsh dingy colouring, 
of brick. The prison, a singular insulated little building; not 
calculated, apparently, for more than half a dozen tenants; and at 
present, I believe, not occupied by one.—The cottages in the Island, 
which are mostly built of stone, have in general a very comfortable 
aspect; and the peasantry and small farmers, we incline to think, appear 
better dressed, and in better condition, than the same class with us.

JUNE the 19th

Took boat up the Yar. About a mile and half from the town, passed, by 
permission, through Mr. Rushworth's pleasure grounds;—richly wooded, and 
forming a most sequestered retreat: myrtles flourishing luxuriantly in 
them, as ordinary shrubs, quite unprotected. Proceeded up the river to 
Freshwater; where its source is separated only by a narrow strip of 
pebbles from the sea, so that the two waters, I believe, are sometimes 
mingled. Sat down and enjoyed the rocky scenery of Freshwater Gate, 
animated by a brisk gale. Ascended by a long and steep slope to the 
summit of Freshwater Downs, 685 feet above the level of the sea; the 
Light-House Downs, separated by an intervening hollow, rising beyond. 
All to the North obscured by storms but a grand retrospect of the 
Southern shores, extending as far as St. Catharine's Hill, at the 
Western extremity of Undercliff,—the highest ground in the Island, being 
752 feet above the level of the sea.—Struck, by a steep descent, down 
the Northern slope of the Downs; and returning through a rich and 
luxuriant country, finely relieved by the naked ridge we had traversed, 
resumed our boat at Freshwater. Observed, on our voyage back, a 
remarkably well-defined double rainbow; and that the sky around the 
interior curve, was considerably and uniformly darker than that within 
it:—a phaenomenon which I have noticed before, but do not remember to 
have seen explained.

JUNE the 24th

Walked at the back of Mr. Rushworth's grounds to the foot of Freshwater 
Downs, near the point to which we had descended on the 19th; and 
ascended, by a long acclivity, to the summit of the Light-House Downs, 
about twenty or thirty feet lower than the former;—accurately, it is 
said, by a late measurement, 685 feet above the level of the sea. 
Gloriously expansive prospect from the Light-House, embracing the whole 
western division of the Island, with its indented bays and winding 
shores; and an immense diffusion of the English coast, from the spires 
of Southampton, to St. Alban's Head; and even, faint in the distance, as 
we were told, the Isle of Portland, Hurst Castle, at the extremity of 
its narrow, curving spit of sand, and the contracted mouth of the Inner 
Passage, spread apparently close under our feet. A boundless extent of 
ocean to the South.—Cautiously ascended, by a shelving slope, to the 
brink of the cliff at the western extremity of the Downs, dropping 
plumb-down into the sea, which laves its base:—a far more giddy height 
than that of Shakespeare's Cliff at Dover. The Needles shooting out 
beneath, in a line of white pyramidal wedge-like rocks; the clear blue 
waves boiling round their bases, and curling up their sides. Listened 
fearfully, in this scene of solitude and wildness, to the hoarse murmur 
of the surges, raging under us in the depths below; and the dismal, 
piercing screams of the sea fowl, hovering around;—sounds finely 
accordant with the genius of the place.—Descended, through a cleft, to 
the beach of Allum Bay; and enjoyed, for an hour, the singular and 
beautiful scenery of its fantastic cliffs, trickling with rills, and 
stained, by their mineral depositions, with every variety of vivid hue.—
Returned to Yarmouth by an intricate course across the common.

JUNE the 26th

Had a remarkably quick passage, to Lymington,—a distance of seven miles, 
in less than fifty minutes. Crossing the river by a causeway, pursued 
its course by an agreeable walk along its banks, up to Boldre; and 
returning by the upper mad, struck clown into a woody dell at the back 
of Vicar's Hill, Mr. Gilpin's parsonage, the object of our pilgrimage; 
shrouded, together with its gardens, in thick foliage. Contemplated with 
much interest the residence of a gentleman, by whose pen and whose 
pencil I have been almost equally delighted; and who, with an 
originality that always accompanies true genius, may be considered as 
having opened a new source of enjoyment in surveying the Works of 
Nature.—In the evening strolled down to the Salt Works; amidst dreary 
and melancholy marshes, with teasing views of the Isle of Wight, 
extending from Gurneys Bay to the Needles, but not a single eminence 
from which the whole could be satisfactorily enjoyed. Felt deeply the 
sad exchange of wretched clay hovels, for the comfortable cottages of 
the Island.

JUNE the 29th

Reached Salisbury yesterday. This morning visited the Cathedral for the 
second time, and was again struck with the magical effect of its 
architecture; though light and elegant, above measure solemn and 
impressive. Whatever may be the questionable superiority of the more 
regular Orders over the Gothic, in religious buildings, seen from 
without, all doubts are hushed when they are contemplated within; nor 
can the majestic simplicity of the former be compared, for architectural 
pathos, with the intricacy, variety, and awful grandeur of the latter. 
The spire of the Cathedral, which beautifully tapers to a greater height 
than the Cross of St. Paul's, appears to have declined from its original 
perpendicularity, about seven inches to the NE by E. A magnificent, 
showy monument to a Duke of Somerset,—but in wretched taste: allegorical 
figures are bad on canvas; but detestable, stuck up in stone.—The Close, 
spacious and handsome; and most happily adapted for the abode of 
reverend ease, and learned leisure.—The town itself, chiefly remarkable 
for the straightness of its streets; and the singular luxury of a 
salubrious stream of pure water, running with a brisk current through 
each of them.

JUNE the 30th

Visited Wilton House. Noble cedars of Lebanon adorning the approach. The 
Palladian bridge (an absurdity in architecture) under repair. In front 
of the grand entrance, a beautiful column, the shaft of which was 
transported to the Temple of Venus by Julius Caesar;—one side of it 
manifestly worn by the weather. The house, of stone; built, according to 
the sullen taste of our ancestors, round a quadrangular area, dark, 
damp, and cheerless. Gorgeous display of antique magnificence within. 
The hall spacious and grand, and most appropriately decorated with 
ancient armour: a curule chair<55> in it; which, if genuine, is indeed a 
curiosity. The great drawing-room, a double cube, sixty feet by thirty; 
another, exactly cubical,—a most incommodious and unsightly shape. Much 
struck with a copy of the Apollo Belvidere, in an attitude, and with an 
air, of grace, dignity, and spirit, more than mortal:—a bust of Pompey; 
the face distinctly and thickly pitted, as if with the small-pox:—the 
Dying Gladiator, wonderfully and touchingly expressive, in position and 
countenance, of the languor of approaching death:—Vandyke's Pembroke 
Family, and Charles the I.; the colouring not warm, indeed, with the 
mellow hues of Titian, nor dazzling with the resplendent glow of Rubens, 
but true to the chaste and sober tints of ordinary nature:—and an 
inimitable head of the Virgin by Carlo Dolce, encircled with flowers; in 
every part most elaborately and exquisitely finished, but the flesh 
rather inclining, from excessive polish and lubricity, to what Sir 
Joshua Reynolds calls, an ivory hardness.

JULY the 2nd

Reached Winchester, twenty-four miles, by Stockbridge, fifteen, 
yesterday evening:—an uninteresting drive through a dreary country 
destitute of houses and trees, till we reached a wood of ancient yews, 
producing a very solemn and pleasing effect, about three miles from 
Winchester. Visited the Cathedral: very defective on the outside, for 
want of a spire to give a relief and finish to the pile: the interior, 
massy Saxon; contrasting strikingly with the airy lightness of that of 
Salisbury. Interesting monuments of William of Wyckham, Bishops 
Gardiner, Fox, and Hoadley; and the recumbent skeleton effigies of a 
nameless prelate, who perished in attempting to imitate our Saviour's 
fast of forty days;—the last of his order, I suspect, who will be guilty 
of this species of Lenten extravagance. To the East of the choir, an 
ancient chapel, paved with roman bricks, in which Philip and Mary were 
married. Saw, in a side-aisle, the vaults of the Saxon kings; and 
chests, on an opposite screen, in which their bones are reposited. The 
font, very ancient, with rude sculpture:—the whole hewn out of one block 
of dark-coloured stone. The altar piece, the resurrection of Lazarus, by 
West;—a fine subject, but feebly treated. The screen to the choir, most 
exquisitely carved in stone.

Viewed, on the brow of a hill to the West of the city, the unfinished 
palace of Charles the II.-an immense pile, presenting a double row of 
twenty-seven large windows in the grand front, and seventeen in depth:—
now converted into barracks, holding 4000 troops. The ditch, and some 
remains of the ancient walls of the city, visible at the bottom of the 
hill, in this direction. The streets of the present town, very narrow 
and incommodious.

JULY the 2nd

Reached Farnham, twenty-seven miles, by Alresford eight, and Alton ten.—
Ascended to the castle, now the bishop's palace, and walked the extent 
of the grand avenue of the park; commanding a variegated and delightful 
prospect over Farnham, and a luxuriant country richly intermingled, with 
hill and dale, to distant heights towards the South: Moor-Park House, 
the favourite residence of Sir William Temple, and near which his heart 
lies buried,—a spot rendered still more interesting by having been the 
frequent abode of Swift when visiting his patron,—peeping sweetly out of 
its wood-screened vale.—Pursued our way to the heath behind the Park; 
and gained, by a long but gentle ascent, the top of Brigsbury Hill, a 
projecting headland to the North; enclosed on every side but that (where 
the steepness of the descent made such a defence unnecessary), with the 
remains of an ancient fortification, consisting of a double ditch and 
ramparts. Expansive view from hence in every direction but to the West: 
Hindhead Hill bounding the prospect to the South; but high ranges, far 
more remote, to the South-West: an immense plain extending towards 
London; faintly marked on its extreme verge by St. Paul's Cupola which 
cannot be less than thirty-five miles distant in a straight line. Struck 
across the heath to the left, and upon its western edge had a glorious 
burst in that direction, over a boundless expanse of rich and level 
country, shooting in capes of enclosure and cultivation, into the bleak 
and barren moor below,—marked by Fleet Pond, and intersected by the 
Basingstoke. Canal.

JULY the 6th

Viewed an exhibition of Italian pictures, near Leicester-Square. 
Principally struck with a St. Catharine, by Carlo Dolce; her head 
encircled with a wreath of flowers, and attended by a cherub displaying 
wings brilliantly be-dropt with every vivid hue, yet the "purpureum 
lumen"<56> of her countenance still triumphant:—a Lucretia, by Guercino, 
finely drawn and coloured, without any of his usual coarseness of 
manner:—a Fortune and Cupid, by Guido; with his accustomed grace, and 
sweetness of tone: and a Pope, by Titian; a noble portrait, full of 
life, character, and simple unaffected dignity. Not much delighted with 
several saffron-coloured paintings, by Raphael, in his first hard, 
laboured, stiff manner; something after the style of the figures we meet 
with, in illuminated missals.—Examined the tints of Dolce and Guercino. 
Five very distinguishable;—the bloom of flesh,—a. bright highlight,—a 
warm transparent reflex light,—a clear brown shadow,-and a soft 
greenish-blue middle tint;—exquisitely blended with, each other. These 
colours are all perceptible in nature, critically viewed; but seem not 
sufficiently attended to by modern artists, when they paint from life.

JULY the 11th

Viewed Miss Linwood's exhibition of needle work; which might be mistaken 
for painting, but for the excessive deadness of the surface, and the 
stiffness and harshness of some of the contours. The Woodman, from 
Barker, struck me as the best piece. The Madonna, from Raphael, is, I 
dare say, exact; but, with all his excellencies, Raphael must, in this 
case, have retained something of the hardness of manner of the first 
artists.—After all, this is a species of ingenious imitation which one 
does not wish to see prevail. The principal delight it affords, arises 
from the difficulty surmounted: the needle, though it may laboriously 
copy the effects, can never emulate the free, spirited, and masterly 
execution, of the pencil; and its productions are most grievously 
exposed to the molestation of moth and dust.


JULY the 12th

Finished Bissett's Life of Burke. He has a right view and just 
estimation of this wonderful man; and his work derives an additional 
interest, from the contemporary characters introduced: but it by no 
means precludes, what I have sometimes meditated, "A Dissertation on the 
Genius and Character of Edmund Burke,"—a subject rich in interest, but 
for which the public mind, agitated as it has been by recent events, is 
yet far from prepared.

Met Mr. I. Pleased with an anecdote he gave me of Lord Kenyon. A friend 
of his, sometime since, had sold his Lordship a cottage at Richmond; 
and, going down there lately, wished to take a view of the premises: an 
old housekeeper admitted him: on the table he saw three books; the 
Bible—Epictetus—and the Whole Duty of Man: "does my Lord read this," 
said the Gentleman, taking up the Bible? "No," said the woman, "he is 
always poring upon this little book," pointing to Epictetus, "I don't 
know what it is; my lady reads the two others: they come down here of a 
Saturday evening, with a leg or shoulder of mutton; this serves them the 
Sunday; and they leave me the remains." A Chief Justice of England, thus 
severely simple in his taste and habits, is at least a curiosity.

AUGUST the 4th

Ld. C. dined with me. Solemnly and deliberately affirmed, that he knew 
no character in British History, which stood so high in his estimation 
as that of Mr. Fox; and strenuously denied that he had ever discovered 
in him, any leaning towards the democratic party. I know no man less 
likely than his Lordship, to suffer his enthusiasm to overpower his 
judgment: yet, firmly and solidly established as is my esteem for Mr. 
Fox, it staggers, I confess, under the measure of praise conveyed in the 
first part of this declaration; nor can I think that the circumstances 
under which it has been the fortune of this illustrious character to be 
placed, and by which his virtues and his talents have been tried, are 
sufficient (highly as I think of them both), to justify so prodigious an 
encomium. On the extent of the sacrifices and sufferings necessary to 
canonise a patriot, it were invidious to dwell:—ardently do I hope, not 
out of apprehension for the result, but of veneration for the person, 
that in the present instance they may never be required:-but I may 
remark, I trust, without offence, since cordially do I wish for the 
experiment here, that it is by the actual exercise of political power, 
and not by a course of censure upon it, however meritorious, that 
political ability,—as ("magna componere parvis")<5 it is by original 
composition, and not by critical strictures upon it, however sagacious, 
that literary talent, most severely proved, and can alone perhaps be 
satisfactorily attested.—Of the imputation alluded to, and denied; in 
the latter part of this opinion, I do most fully and honourably, from 
the bottom of my soul, acquit Mr. Fox; but, at the same time, I must 
deeply regret, that he has not, in his place, more distinctly 
recognized, and fairly met, that portentous spirit which has broken 
loose during the late Revolution in France, and against whose present 
influence on the moral and political condition of mankind (whatever may 
be thought of its ulterior destination), it should seem almost 
impossible to shut the eyes: nor am I able to discern, in the most 
explicit avowal on this subject, anything which should "impede the march 
of his abilities" in that career of usefulness and glory, on which he so 
justly claims the gratitude and affection of his country; while it would 
infallibly secure the confidence of many, whom this strange and marked 
neglect fills with uneasiness and apprehension.—With respect to Mr. 
Fox's Eloquence (another topic of discussion this evening) there are few 
circumstances, I confess, which render me so justly diffident of my own 
taste, as the not feeling for it "horresco referens" that keen relish 
which the world tells me that fought to do. Its admirable adaptation to 
the purposes of debate in an English House of Commons, I distinctly 
perceive and eagerly acknowledge; but while it assails at once our 
judgment and our passions, in this character, with matchless dexterity 
and force, it certainly furnishes little of that aliment to the 
imagination, which is so delectable, and, to my intellectual cravings, 
so indispensible, in works on which we wish to revel in the closet. That 
this ground of dissatisfaction, is no just cause of complaint, against 
compositions intended for other purposes, and which perform those 
purposes with such incomparable, success, I feel while I am assigning 
it: but—it operates: and with the deepest sense of their transcendent 
merit as effusions addressed, on the exigency of the occasion, to the 
business and bosoms of men, I turn, in the hour of literary recreation, 
whatever be the shame, with delight, from the vehement harangues of Fox, 
to the "variegated and expanded eloquence" of Burke; which, if it does 
not hurry us along, like the other, by its impetuous and reiterated 
assaults, directly to the goal, yet, by the ample stores of moral and 
political wisdom which it unfolds, the radiant imagery with which it 
illuminates these treasures, and the powerful appeals to our best 
affections, by which it seconds their operation,—enlarges the 
understanding, replenishes the fancy, dilates the heart, and generously 
aims to effectuate the purpose of the speaker, rather by elevating us to 
his own standard in contemplating the subject which he treats, than by 
accommodating itself to the contracted views and dispositions which we 
may bring to its discussion.—On the question of Parliamentary Reform, 
which was next agitated, his Lordship professed himself quite neutral, 
as he saw neither good from it nor harm: the evil which it was designed 
to remove, he thought, lay deeper than the remedy would reach:—he 
regards the great mass of the people as corrupt.

AUGUST the 11th

Finished the 1st Vol. of Miss Williams' Tour through Switzerland. She 
paints, the giddy frivolity and capricious versatility of French 
manners, in very vivid colours; and exhibits the moral mischiefs of the 
Revolution acting on this character, in a more glaring and offensive 
light, than perhaps she intended.

Looked over Sir Joshua Reynolds' papers in the Idler: curious, as 
containing the seeds of those doctrines, which he has more fully 
expanded in his subsequent Discourses. In the third he maintains (what 
Burke has controverted) that Beauty is that invariable general form in 
every species, which nature always seems to intend, to which she is 
perpetually approaching, and which she more frequently produces than any 
particular description of deviation or deformity. He seems, with Plato, 
to ascribe a real independent existence to these mental abstractions.—In 
his Journey to Flanders, he speaks of Rubens just as I could wish; and 
liberally ascribes to him those powers, whose effects, in ignorance, I 
had long and ardently admired.

AUGUST the 18th

Read Shaftesbury's Enquiry concerning Virtue. His ideas are not very 
distinctly stated: but he seems, to place Virtue in a proper management 
of the affections; its recommendation to others, in its congeniality to 
our moral taste; and its obligation on ourselves, in the advantages it 
procures us: and he very happily describes the influence of true 
religion, of superstition, and of atheism, on its operation.—He 
evidently spews himself to be a Deist.

Looked into D'Alembert's Elémens de Musique. His evolution of harmony; 
at the opening (L. 1. c. 1.), from the harmonical sounds inseparably 
combined with every musical note, however apparently simple; and which, 
though so intimately blended with the principal and generative tone as 
to escape ordinary observation, may clearly be detected and 
distinguished from it by a delicate ear,—is to me quite new, and very 
satisfactory. This natural and inherent affinity between concordant 
sounds, evinced (where we should least expect to find it) in the 
elements themselves out of which all artificial concords are composed, 
seems to place the principles of modern harmony on a very solid basis; 
and enables us to advance a step farther in accounting for the 
gratification arising from musical composition, than is allowed to our 
curiosity in investigating the sources of most of the other pleasures of 
taste.

Read Burke's Memorial on the Conduct of the Minority—a powerful 
composition, purely argumentative, and, I believe, without a single 
metaphor.

AUGUST the 25th

Finished Sir Joshua Reynolds' Discourses, with an eye to a peculiar and 
distinguishing doctrine which runs through the whole, and is manifestly 
a particular favourite with the author. He begins to dilate upon it in 
the 3rd Discourse, stating, That the higher excellency of the art, 
consists, not in imitating individual nature, but in exhibiting the 
general forms of things, abstracted from natural and accidental 
deformities and discriminations of whatever kind, and of course more 
perfect and beautiful than any one original.—In the 4th he applies what 
he had said of the forms of things, to, 1., Historical Invention, which 
should neglect the minute peculiarities of dress, furniture, scene, and 
even the personal peculiarities of the actors, if injurious to grandeur; 
2., to the Expression, which should be such as the supposed occasion 
operating on the supposed characters, generally produces; and 3., to the 
colouring, which should be severely simple, either by reducing the hues 
to little more than chiaro oscuro, like the Bolognian School, or making 
them very distinct and forcible, like the Schools of Rome and Florence. 
On the same principle, landscape painting should be a representation of 
general nature, selected from various views of it, not an exhibition of 
any individual scene; and, even in portraits, he is of opinion, the 
grace, nay the likeness, consists more in taking the general air, than 
in exactly copying each particular feature. The works, whether of poets, 
painters, moralists, or historians, he observes in conclusion, which are 
built on general nature, live for ever; while those which depend on 
particular customs and habits, a partial view of nature, or the 
fluctuations of fashion, perish with their archetypes.—In the 7th he 
very elaborately maintains, That the general idea of nature, purified 
from all peculiarities, and which in reality is alone nature, 
constitutes the great object of true taste; That we are materially 
assisted in attaining to such an idea of nature, by attending to the 
selections which others have made in the works they have produced; and, 
That those works are most deserving our attention, which have been most 
generally approved under the influence of different prejudices operating 
in different countries and ages.—In the 9th he affirms the object of 
painting, to be beauty; but a beauty general and intellectual; an idea 
subsisting only in the mind; towards the expression of which we may 
advance, but to which we can never perfectly attain: and be ascribes the 
beneficial effects of the art upon our habits, to its abstracting the 
mind from the objects of sense, and directing it to the contemplation of 
this intellectual excellence.—In the 10th he defines the object of 
Sculpture, to be the imparting that delight which results from the 
perfect beauty of abstract form; an intellectual pleasure, incompatible 
with that which is merely addressed to the senses, and of course to 
colour, &c.—In the 11th he regards the essence of genius in painting, as 
consisting in the power of expressing the general effect of a whole 
(whether of form, colour, light and shadow, or whatever may become the 
separate object of a painter), not by a detail of particulars, but by 
seizing those characteristic circumstances which distinguish it in real 
existence to the spectator; and thus exhibiting a greater quantity of 
truth by a few lines or touches, than by the most laborious finishing of 
parts; and delighting by the inadequacy of the means to the end.—In the 
13th he contends, That of arts addressed to the imagination and its 
sensibility, the affection produced, is the sole test; That all theories 
which attempt to regulate such arts by principles falsely called 
rational, formed on a supposition of what ought to be, in reason, the 
end or means of such arts, independently of the effects in fact produced 
by them, must be delusive; That the theory which places the perfection 
of painting simply in imitating nature, is of this kind; That its end 
is, to produce a pleasing effect upon the mind; That sometimes, it is 
true, it accomplishes this end by imitation alone; but that often, too, 
and whenever it produces its grandest effects, it deviates from an exact 
imitation of nature for this purpose.—Lastly, in his 15th Discourse, he 
closes his labours with enforcing the same doctrine: earnestly exhorting 
his auditory, "to distinguish the greater truth from the less; the 
larger and more liberal idea of nature, from the more narrow and 
confined; that which addresses itself to the imagination, from that 
which is solely directed to the eye."

The doctrine thus imposingly delivered by its amiable author, in all the 
pomp of Platonic mysticism, when fully developed and fairly exhibited, 
appears as just, as it is obvious and simple.

The qualities by which any object, or class of objects, engages our 
attention, or interests our feelings, are only some out of various 
others of which it is composed. In any attempt therefore at the 
representation, even of a particular theme, whether the design be simply 
to imitate, or, through imitation, to communicate the feelings which the 
object itself is adapted to inspire, the perfection of the art will 
consist, in seizing and bringing forward those peculiar qualities by 
which it strikes, or by which it touches us, and in throwing the rest, 
as much as may be, into shade. By thus removing from the view whatever 
may tend to distract or pervert the mind, and presenting to the 
undivided attention those qualities only upon which the recognition or 
interest of the object depends, these qualities, it is evident, will 
exert their fullest effect upon the spectator; and the copy may thus be 
made very far to surpass the original itself, in force and pathos. If 
this holds true in the portraiture even of a specific subject, the same 
doctrine, it is manifest, will obtain, with still greater force, in the 
representation of imaginary scenes; where a far ampler scope is given to 
genius, in drawing, from a multitude of particular examples, the most 
characteristic and touching traits of whatever strikes or whatever 
affects us, and not only in suppressing all that may tend to disturb or 
counteract the impression, but in adding, from the rich stores of a 
happy invention, whatever accompaniments are best adapted to relieve and 
heighten their effect. Compositions, it will readily be conceived, may 
thus be produced, which shall far transcend, in force of character and 
vivacity of interest, any particular scenes which real existence 
presents: but we must ever bear in mind, that this will be accomplished, 
not by soaring, with Plato and Sir Joshua, "extra * * * flammantia 
moenia mundi"—"beyond the flaming bounds of Place and Time," in pursuit 
of those pure primaeval archetypes, from which enthusiasts have vainly 
dreamed, that the gross concrete substances here below are mere 
imperfect transcripts; but by a judicious selection and management of 
those materials, which, however widely dispersed in different gradations 
of perfection, and however intermingled with other and baser elements, 
are alone to be sought, where all true knowledge begins and ends,—in 
real nature as it actually subsists around us.

AUGUST the 29th

Finished the 3rd Vol. of Dalrymple's Memoirs; published at a long 
interval from the two former.—The opening to Part III., on the plan of 
French ambition on the continent, which has since been realized by the 
Republic; and the conclusion of the same Part, in which he foresees the 
advancement of France to liberty and power, and endeavours to provide 
against it, are now become very interesting.—There is an original and 
bold cast of thought in this work, which pleases me: but his project, in 
the Appendix, No. 2., of a federal union between this country and 
America, through the appointment of a Resident on our part, appears 
perfectly extravagant.—In reading many passages of this volume, we are 
tempted to exclaim, that, whatever may be the venality of the present 
times, they are pure to the past: but corruption has only worn its 
channels more smooth: the stream itself is much enlarged; its 
ramifications are infinitely multiplied and extended; and the great 
spring-bead is now engrossed entirely by the Crown.

AUGUST the 30th

Read Mandeville's Fable of the Bees, and his Enquiry into the Origin of 
Virtue. In the latter, he ascribes entirely to the policy of Lawgivers, 
the infusion of that controlling principle which results from the 
constitution of our nature; and nicknames its operation, Pride and 
Shame. With respect to his capital and offensive paradox, that private 
vices are public benefits, Mandeville's whole art consists, in 
denominating our passions by the appellation assigned to their vicious 
excess; and then proving them, under this denomination, useful to 
society. There is a lively force, and caustic though coarse wit, in his 
performance, which occasionally reminds one of Paine. The conclusion of 
note P. (on v. 201) is powerful and pathetic: and the Parable at the end 
of note T. (on v. 367) is of the happiest humour.—I was surprised to 
find Sir Joshua Reynolds' doctrine, of rejecting the representation of 
individual nature in painting, recommended, sneeringly I believe, with 
an illustration from the Opera, towards the beginning of the 1st 
Dialogue in the 2nd Part of the Fable of the Bees; and a reference 
given, by way of authority, to "Graham's Preface to his Art of 
Painting."

AUGUST the 31st

Read Mandeville's Essay on Charity and Charity Schools, and his Search 
into the Nature of Society. He places Virtue in what it does not 
consist—an extinction of all personal feeling; and then, by misnaming 
the principle from which it does spring, and expatiating largely on the 
motives which operate to produce its semblance, endeavours to show, that 
there is little or nothing of it in the world. In the first piece, he 
denies that any real charity exists; and maintains that the schools 
pretended to be formed on this principle, tend only to disqualify their 
objects for the duties of their station; in the second, he labours to 
prove, that social intercourse results, not from social affections on 
which Lord Shaftesbury insists, but from our hard situation and bad 
passions,—from physical and moral evil. The scene, in the latter, 
between the mercer and his customer, is happily worked up.

SEPTEMBER the 5th

Looked over Johnson's vigorous defence of Shakespeare against the charge 
of violating, whether from neglect or disdain, the unities of time and 
place in his dramas. His argument for the inutility of their observance, 
is, that the drama moves, not as these laws of criticism suppose, by 
imposing on the spectator as the reality itself, but by suggesting 
realities to the mind—as history and painting move—as a just picture of 
an interesting original. He is undoubtedly right; but in the elation of 
his triumph over false science, he has, as certainly, been, led to push 
the career of his victory a little too far. A drama is something more 
than a poem recited: it is the representation of a theme by actors and 
by scenery; and, as such, is subject to certain restrictions respecting 
place and time, arising out of the difficulty of indicating in this mode 
of exhibition, without offence to the feelings, the shifting of the 
former when changed, and the effects of the latter when protracted, from 
which, though far less rigorous than those which the law of unity 
exacts, the historian and the epic poet, it is obvious, may be regarded 
as exempt.

Finished Coxe's Memoirs of Sir Robert Walpole.-The character of 
Bolingbroke's Political Writings is, I think, justly, though clumsily, 
given, at the close of the 26th Chapter: yet these compositions must 
possess considerable merit of some kind, to have maintained their 
popularity in despite of his own unprincipled conduct. Should all 
memorials of Bolingbroke perish, but his own works, what a false opinion 
will posterity form of his character!—Either Sir Robert Walpole's Speech 
on the Triennial Bill is ill reported, or his language was miserably 
vulgar, perplexed, and obscure: it is, I think, very inferior to his 
Speech on the Excise Bill; but his eloquence, on no occasion, seems to 
have been very powerful.—The Speeches of Geo. the II. from the Throne, 
as far as they are reported in this work, appear to breathe a very 
liberal spirit.—How accurately and justly has Burke appreciated, only in 
a side-glance (Appeal from the New to the Old Whigs), the merits of Sir 
Robert Walpole's character and administration! And what a change has 
been effected in the relative weight and ascendancy of the landed and 
moneyed interests of this country, since the period of that 
administration!—On what grounds were Pope and Swift the mortal enemies 
of Walpole? As the patron of corruption, or the opponent of the House of 
Stuart?—The Memoirs themselves (which are comprised in the 1st Vol.) are 
heavily and clumsily written, and the author shuffles backward and 
forward unpardonably in his narrative, instead of pursuing steadily the 
stream of time and events; but they interest, from the interesting 
period which they treat. The most striking passage, perhaps, in the 
whole volume, is the last paragraph but one, in which the author 
accounts for Sir Robert's listlessness, and indifference to all ordinary 
enjoyments, when retired from public life. The two succeeding volumes, 
of ponderous bulk, are merely supplementary; containing many very useful 
documents, certainly, to whoever should undertake a history of the times 
to which they relate, but with which one sees no absolute necessity that 
the purchaser of the Memoirs themselves, should have been oppressed.

SEPT. the 12th

Dipped into Bacon's Essays; so pregnant with just, original, and 
striking observations on every topic which is touched, that I cannot 
select what pleases me most. For reach of thought, variety and extent of 
view, sheer solid and powerful sense, and admirable sagacity, what works 
of man can be placed in competition with these wonderful effusions.

Looked into that period of the History of Modern Europe, which closes 
with the inglorious Peace of Paris, in 1763. How auspiciously did the 
present reign open, under the transcendent genius of Chatham; and how 
soon was it gloomed over, under the malignant influence of Bute. There 
is something in the original force and independence of mind that 
accompanies true genius, so peculiarly repugnant to the petty intrigues, 
minute attentions, and frivolous etiquette, which form the business and 
the pleasure of courts, that it is rarely received in that quarter, I 
suspect, with cordial good will; and among other blessings, we are 
greatly indebted to the popular part of our Constitution, for the 
ascendancy which pre-eminent talent usually gains in the direction of 
our national councils.

SEPT. the 13th

Read Brown's Estimate of the Manners and Principles of the Times. The 
2nd Vol. is merely a supplementary comment on the 1st; and in that, 
after allowing us a spirit of liberty, of humanity, and of equity, he 
maintains, that a vain luxurious and selfish effeminacy, introduced by 
exorbitant trade and wealth, has sapped our principles of religion, 
honour and public spirit, weakened our national capacity, our national 
spirit of defence, and our national spirit of union, and left us a 
helpless prey to foreign invasion;—a condition beyond the reach of cure 
or palliation, and from which nothing can relieve us, but the 
regenerative force of dire necessity.—Burke has alluded to this Tract in 
his 1st Letter on a Regicide Peace, with a perfect recollection of its 
spirit and tendency: and he has borrowed from the last section of the 
1st Vol., that refutation of the popular analogy between the body 
politic and natural, which he first started in his Letter occasioned by 
the Duke of Norfolk's Speech, and which he afterwards transplanted into 
his 1st Regicide Letter. Brown talks the cant first introduced by 
Bolingbroke, of an Administration purified from all party attachments:—a 
thing impossible under our present system of government; and not 
desirable, could it be obtained.

SEPT. the 17th

Looked over "Serious Reflections by a rational Christian, from 1788 to 
1797" written by the Duke of G—<59>. As composed for the private 
instruction of his own Family, they must be serious and sincere: they 
indeed evince much earnestness: but though the opinions may be regarded 
as bold in themselves, they are offered with all the caution and 
deference of an old statesman. The noble Author believes in the unity of 
the God-head; strongly inclines against the pre-existence of Christ; 
rejects the doctrines of original sin and satisfaction; and considers 
the object of the Messiah's mission, to be merely the annunciation to 
mankind of the glad tidings of immortal life and happiness on the 
condition of a thorough repentance of our sins.—Had this been simply the 
design of Christianity, nothing could have been easier than thus to have 
represented it;—nor anything more necessary, than to have guarded, in 
its promulgation, against those perversions to which all religious 
doctrines are so peculiarly exposed. We have in our hands the original 
documents of the founders of this religion: do these documents naturally 
suggest, will they warrant, can they without torture and mutilation be 
compelled to yield, such an interpretation? Is it possible to read the 
Epistles of St. Paul, and believe that these were the doctrines he 
designed to preach?—Few moral phaenomena more strikingly illustrate the 
triumph of the inclination over the judgment, on points purely 
speculative, than the faith of those who denominate themselves rational 
Christians.

SEPT the 21st

Looked over Lord Chesterfield's Characters: all of which are neatly, and 
some very finely, drawn;—particularly those of Scarborough and 
Bolingbroke. The flowing exuberance of Burke, and the violent 
exgurgitations of Grattan, in the supplementary notices appended to the 
character of Chatham, strikingly exemplify the different manners of 
these two distinguished orators.

Read Bolingbroke's Letter to Wyndham;—in my opinion, incomparably the 
ablest of his works. It contains a masterly exposition of his conduct 
while in connection with the Pretender, undebased by any of his 
political theories. Nothing can be more free, vigorous, and 
spontaneously noble, than his style in this piece.

SEPT. the 23rd

Finished the 2nd Vol. of Bolingbroke's Correspondence. He carries 
wonderfully the private man into his public Despatches, which are the 
best Letters of business I ever read.—Torcy's Letter, dated June 22, 
1712, in which he objects to a convocation of the States, for the 
purpose of ratifying the King of Spain's renunciation of the Crown of 
France, as an incompetent and hazardous expedient, is now become 
interesting.

Mr. E. P. called in the evening. He is preparing Remarks on the Theory 
of Morals, which brought on the discussion of that subject. We differ 
fundamentally; and could only agree in thinking it very extraordinary, 
that though there must be some strong disposing cause which determines 
those who differ most in their theories on this subject, exactly to 
coalesce in their practical conclusions, mankind should still be 
unsettled as to what that cause is—the knowledge of which would 
instantly decide the theory!

SEPT. the 25th

Finished the 1st Volume and Part of Du Bos sur la Poesie et Peinture. In 
the first sections, he derives all pleasure from a previous want of body 
or mind; and the pleasure we receive from sympathising with the 
sufferings or joys of others, but more particularly with the former as 
the emotion is stronger, from the grand want of the mind—occupation. 
Poetry and Painting, he maintains, chiefly please, as the 
representations of objects which would thus have touched our sympathy; 
and serious, in a higher degree than comic representations, as they 
affect us more powerfully, at the same time that they do not leave those 
durable and painful impressions which the view of actual sufferings 
occasions. He allows, indeed, a subordinate charm to painting, merely as 
it is an imitation; but no mechanical excellence, he observes, will 
render a poem tolerable.—These doctrines he proceeds in the subsequent 
sections to apply and illustrate, very ingeniously, but not without some 
mixture of French frippery.—In the 43rd section, he maintains, with 
Johnson, that dramatic representation does not delight through delusion; 
and in the 44th he explains the power ascribed to dramatic poetry, of 
purging the passions, as Johnson does, by its setting before our eyes 
the mischievous consequences of their vicious excess.—In the 45th he 
ascribes the power of music, to its imitation, either of the sounds of 
physical nature, or the tone of the passions: and in the 46th he derives 
Italian music (proh pudor!)<60> from France and the Netherlands.

SEPT. the 28th

Finished the 2nd Vol. of Du Bos. In the first section, he defines 
genius—an aptitude for any particular employment, determining the 
possessor to embrace it; and ascribes this aptitude, in the second, to 
our physical conformation. From the 12th to the 21st sections, he 
endeavours to show, that certain countries and ages are more favourable 
to the production of genius than others; that this arises rather from 
physical than moral causes; and that the main physical cause, consists 
in the temperament of the air as influenced by the exhalations of the 
earth:—a doctrine, which, however absurd, he maintains and defends very 
ingeniously.—In the 22nd and 23rd sections he contends, that we do, and 
that we ought to, judge of the merit of poems and pictures, by sentiment 
and not by reason—from the impression actually produced, and not from a 
critical estimate of perfections or defects founded on a reference to 
the rules of art; that reason may explore the causes why we are or are 
not pleased, but cannot and ought not to influence our determination, 
whether we are pleased or not; and that reason (as he quaintly expresses 
it) requires we should not reason on such a question, except to justify 
the previous sentiment. Mankind, he observes, as they advance in life, 
give less credit to the conclusions of theoretical speculation, and more 
to the decisions of sentiment and practice. Even on subjects susceptible 
of mathematical demonstration, such as mechanics, fortification, &c., he 
shows that mere theory frequently misleads: and that on poetry and 
painting the judgment of artists is perpetually wrong, as their 
sensibility is exhausted, as they decide by rule and not from immediate 
impression, and as their whole attention is usually absorbed in some 
particular department of their art; while that of the public, who judge 
from unperverted feeling, is constantly right.—In the 33rd and 34th 
sections, he maintains, in defiance of the philosophy of the present 
age, which leads us to suppose ourselves the first rational beings, and, 
by bringing the experience of the past into contempt, threatens to 
replunge Europe into barbarism,—that we do not reason better than our 
ancestors; that discoveries due, not to our speculations, but to time 
and accident, have enlarged our knowledge of facts, but not our 
intellects; and, that though systems of philosophy may rise and perish, 
the chefs d'oeuvres of poetry and painting which have charmed our 
forefathers, will continue to delight our latest posterity.

SEPT. the 30th

Read Burke's Vindication of Natural Society. Except in parts (as in the 
opening and ending) I cannot think that this piece has much of 
Bolingbroke's style and manner:—there is, throughout, an air of 
constraint, most abhorrent in its nature, to the bold and rapid flow of 
Bolingbroke's declamation.—Burke certainly began and ended his labours 
in the same cause.

Finished the perusal of St. Matthew's Gospel in Griesbach's Edition of 
the New Testament.<61>—Christ's strange temptation in the wilderness (c. 
4.) has all the insulated air of an interpolation: its texture is 
peculiar to itself, and it coheres with the main narrative at neither 
extremity.—One cannot be surprised that the people were powerfully 
struck with the Discourse from the Mount (c. 5, 6, 7.):—it is still 
surpassingly impressive: what must it have been at the time it was 
delivered!—Matthew evidently applies the passage from Isaiah "He took 
our infirmities, and bare our sicknesses", (c. 8., v. 17.), not to 
Christ's vicarious sufferings, but his miraculous cures;—and he is 
usually astute enough in spying out the completion of a prophecy.—Surely 
the Destruction of the Temple and the Day of Judgment—events rather 
differing in the degree of their importance—are strangely confounded in 
the prophetic denunciations (c. 24.), as this Evangelist reports them —I 
have ventured, in this review, to consider the Gospels, however sacred 
the subject which they treat, as mere human compositions: they pretend 
to nothing more; and with such perplexing difficulties is the hypothesis 
of their inspiration clogged, that I suppose nobody, at this time of 
day, regards them in any other light.—The various readings, collected 
with such diligence by Griesbach, however numerous, are fewer than we 
should expect to find in writings so frequently transcribed and 
reprinted; and they rarely, if ever, affect the sense in any important 
particular.

OCTOBER the 3rd

Finished a cursory perusal of Johnson's Lives of the Poets, with a view 
to the principles on which his critical decisions are founded.—Under 
Cowley, he defines genius, "a mind of large general powers, accidentally 
determined to some particular direction:" and wit, "a combination of 
dissimilar images; or discovery of occult resemblances in things 
apparently unlike." The object of the poets of the metaphysical race, he 
states to be, to excite surprise, and not delight; and to exercise the 
understanding, not to move the affections.—In his remarks on Milton, he 
defines Poetry, "the art of uniting pleasure with truth, by calling 
imagination to the help of reason." Epic Poetry, he says, "undertakes to 
teach the most important truths by the most pleasing precepts, and 
therefore relates some great event in the most affecting manner." In 
treating of the Paradise Lost, he considers 1st, the Moral, 2ndly, the 
Fable, 3rdly, the Characters, 4thly, the Probable and Marvellous, 5thly, 
the Machinery, 6thly, the Integrity or Unity, 7thly, the Sentiments, 
8thly, the Images, 9thly, the Similes, 10thly, the Diction, and 11thly, 
the Versification. Here was an inviting opportunity to open the 
fountains of criticism; but it is unhappily passed over: the end of 
Poetry, he observes indeed, is pleasure; but in what that pleasure 
consists, from whence it is derived, and by what eternal and immutable 
laws its communication is restricted, he is absolutely silent.—Of 
Dryden, he remarks, that he seems unacquainted with the human passions 
in their pure and elemental state; and, on this account, is rarely 
pathetic.—To Pope he gives, "in proportions very nicely adjusted, all 
the qualities that constitute genius—Invention, Imagination, and 
Judgment:" and to Thomson, "that poetical eye, which distinguishes, in 
everything presented to its view, whatever there is on which imagination 
delights to be detained."—Of Akenside's Pleasures of the Imagination, he 
observes, that the subject includes all images that can strike or 
please, and thus comprises every species of poetical delight.—These are 
slender gleanings: yet I cannot discover that Johnson has farther 
unfolded his principles of criticism. He had probably digested them into 
no very exact scheme in his own mind; but trusted, to what he knew would 
rarely fail him—his immediate sagacity whenever an occasion for critical 
exertion occurred.

OCT. the 4th

Examined, with a view to these principles, Addison's Eleven Papers in 
the Spectator; beginning at No. 409, and, with the omission of the 
410th, ending with the 421st In the first and preparatory Paper, he 
defines Taste, "that faculty of the soul, which discerns the beauties of 
an author with pleasure, and his imperfections with dislike." He then 
proceeds to consider at large the Pleasures of Imagination; which he 
restricts to those originally derived from Sight; and derives from the 
three sources of Grandeur, Novelty, and Beauty. The proximate cause of 
the pleasures thus derived, he passes over as undiscoverable: but the 
final cause, of Grandeur, he assigns to the promotion of piety; of 
Novelty, to the acquisition of knowledge; and of Beauty, to the 
propagation of the species.—The primary pleasures of the imagination, he 
considers as those which arise immediately from the object itself; the 
secondary, from its representation.—Representations, such as statuary, 
painting, description, &c. delight, he observes, not merely as they 
suggest pleasing realities, but, independently of this, simply as they 
are imitations—from a comparison of the copy with the original. The 
proximate cause of this pleasure, he holds it impossible to discover; 
but regards its final cause to be, the quickening and encouraging our 
searches after truth.—Representations, he afterwards remarks, delight, 
too, when they excite the passions of pity and terror, by suggesting the 
consideration of our own security and happiness; whereas the reality, in 
such a case, would affect us too strongly to admit of such a 
reflection.—The Pleasures of Imagination, thus reviewed, he places 
between those of the Sense and of the Understanding;—less gross than the 
former, and less refined than the latter.—Addison expressly calls his 
undertaking entirely new; and by appending a Table of Contents, he, no 
doubt, thought it important. It was unquestionably a very vigorous 
advance towards a philosophical consideration of this interesting and 
engaging topic.

OCT. the 6th

Read Burke's Disquisition on Taste prefixed to his Sublime and 
Beautiful. He seems to consider the object of Reason, to be Truth and 
Falsehood; and of Taste, Sentiment; but without drawing a determined 
line between their respective provinces: and his object is to prove, 
that the standard of both is the same in all human creatures. Taste, he 
defines "that faculty or those faculties in the mind, which are affected 
with, or which form a judgment of, the works of imagination and the 
elegant arts." He first examines the natural pleasures of SENSE; which 
he chews to be the same in all, and that our acquired relishes are 
distinguishable from them to the last. He next considers the pleasures 
of IMAGINATION. These, so far as that faculty is concerned in 
representing the objects of Sense, must, like those of Sense, be common 
to all. But in works of the Imagination, a new pleasure is derived from 
discerning the resemblance which the imitation bears to the original: 
this pleasure must of course depend on a knowledge of the object 
represented; but, where this knowledge is the same, seems nearly the 
same in all. In exercising our Taste on the objects of sense, or the 
representations of these objects, or the representations of the 
passions, which, acting, and acting upon certain principles, on all, 
leave a standard in every breast, little more than the sensibility seems 
concerned; which may be assumed to differ only in degree: but where the 
representation embraces the character, manners, actions, and designs of 
men, their relations, their virtues and vices, here, he thinks, 
attention and reasoning are required, and Taste becomes no other than a 
refined judgment, differing as judgments differ. Taste is thus composed 
of sensibility and judgment: from a defect of sensibility, arises a want 
of Taste; and from a defect of judgment, a wrong or bad Taste.—I am not 
sure that I have represented his ideas very exactly; indeed they do not 
seem, especially with regard to a leading point I have in view, very 
distinctly enunciated: as far however as I am qualified to form an 
opinion, it appears to me, that in attempting to withdraw a certain 
class of objects from the proper jurisdiction of Taste, and to place 
them under that of the Judgment, he yields at last, after an earnest of 
better things, to a delusion which has misled, in a still greater 
degree, most writers who have treated the same subject. That an exercise 
of the Judgment is often necessary to put us in possession (if I may be 
allowed to say so) of the ease on which the Taste is to be exerted, 
admits of no dispute. Mr. Burke had before observed, that when the 
subject submitted to our Taste is the imitation of any natural object, a 
competent knowledge of the original, is necessary to determine the 
justness of the copy and, I would add, a competent acquaintance with 
other imitations in the same way, to ascertain its comparative 
excellence, and to form a complete decision on its merits: intelligence 
of a higher order and more difficult acquirement, no doubt, is necessary 
to enable us to judge of the truth and accuracy of any representation of 
the human character, modified by its manners, its habits, its passions, 
its virtues and its vices: but in neither case, surely, should this 
information, or the capacity to gain it, though indispensable as 
preliminary qualifications for the exercise of Taste, be confounded with 
that faculty itself;-incorporated with it as an integrant part, or 
(still less) allowed to supersede it altogether. By Taste we 
emphatically mean, a quick and just perception of beauty and deformity 
in the works of nature or of art; and it is only by making it a distinct 
subject of consideration in this character, and separating (mm it those 
talents and attainments, which however requisite to enlarge the sphere 
of its action, are at least equally subservient to other and totally 
different purposes in our moral economy, that we can reasonably expect 
to obtain a clear and just conception of this peculiar part of our 
constitution, and of the laws which regulate its exercise.

OCT. the 8th

Read the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd Parts of Burke on the Sublime and Beautiful. 
In the 1st, he considers Novelty as the object of our first and simplest 
passion—curiosity: and, next to Novelty, and the sources of all our 
other passions, he places Pain and Pleasure. Pain and Pleasure he 
regards as totally independent of each other; and he carefully 
distinguishes the delight consequent on a cessation of pain, and which 
is always accompanied with a certain horror, from positive pleasure; and 
the uneasiness consequent on the cessation of pleasure, which is always 
accompanied with an attractive sensation, from positive pain. Our 
sensations of pain are stronger than those of pleasure; and of course 
the passions which turn on pain, will be stronger than those that turn 
on pleasure. Our passions he divides, from their destination, into those 
which conduce to self-preservation, and those which conduce to society. 
Those which belong to self-preservation, turn on pain and danger;—
passions which are simply disagreeable when their causes immediately 
affect us, but which become delightful when we have an idea of pain or 
danger without being actually in such circumstances:—whatever excites 
this delight, is SUBLIME. Those which concern society, whether of the 
sex, or society at large, turn on pleasure: the passion excited, is 
love, or a sense of tenderness and affection; and the quality which 
decides our preference and excites this passion, is BEAUTY.—Having thus 
determined the distinguishing character of the Sublime and the 
Beautiful, by ascertaining the different species of emotion which they 
produce in the mind, he proceeds, in the two succeeding Parts, to point 
out the peculiar properties in objects by which these different emotions 
are excited: in neither instance does he confine himself, with Addison, 
to the Sight, but runs through all the senses: and he concludes with 
enforcing, as a fundamental and unalterable distinction between the two 
species of affection and their causes, that the one is founded in 
pleasure and the other in pain.

Burke powerfully exposes, on various occasions, the error to which we 
are prone, of ascribing feelings and affections which result from the 
mechanical structure of our bodies, to conclusions of our reason on the 
objects presented to us.—of deducing beauty, for instance, from 
proportion or fitness, qualities with which it may be accompanied, but 
which are in themselves mere objects of the understanding, and touch 
neither the imagination nor the passions; yet he condemns (P. 3, c.11) 
the opposite fault in morals, the deducing moral distinction from 
feeling, (instancing, it is true, only the application of beauty to 
virtue, but in spirit going as far as I have stated), as a practice 
which tends to remove the science of our duties from their proper basis—
our reason, our relations, and our necessities, to rest it upon 
foundations altogether visionary and unsubstantial. There is here a 
similar inconsistency to that which I remarked, the evening before last, 
in the same Author, on the extent of the province of Taste; and arising, 
like that, from a partial view of the subject. The same reasoning surely 
is applicable in both cases—to the origin of Moral Distinction, as well 
as the distinctions of Taste.—Whenever we are prompted to distinguish 
between objects, in consequence of the different impressions which they 
make on our sensibility, we must search for the cause of this 
distinction, in some quality or relation of those objects adapted to 
produce that particular species of effect; and must never rest satisfied 
with the discovery of any correspondent mark of discrimination (however 
exactly it may coincide with the division we have in view) that is not 
expressly competent to such a result. Distinctions in matters of Taste, 
and Moral Distinctions, are both precisely of this description. We do 
not discriminate beauty from deformity, or virtue from vice, as we do a 
square from a triangle, blue from red, heavy from light, or dense from 
rare,—by certain manifest differences in the objects themselves, with 
respect to which the mind stands absolutely neutral and indifferent we 
are attracted with delight or repelled by disgust, in the first case; we 
glow with applauding rapture or throb with indignant anguish, in the 
other; and it is because we are thus affected, and (as the various and 
inconsistent hypotheses which have been offered to account for these 
feelings incontestably evince) solely because we are thus affected, that 
we are determined to make the received distinctions we do, in the 
objects by which we have been thus differently impressed. There is no 
pretence for separating Moral distinction from the distinctions of 
Taste, in this particular: they stand exactly on the same ground; and 
precisely the same fallacy misleads our speculations in both cases. In 
either instance we are prompted to make a distinction between objects in 
consequence of their different action on our sensibility: this 
distinction, by the frequent recurrence of such an impression, becomes 
habitually established and recognized in our thoughts and communications 
as a fixed and permanent difference in the objects themselves; but the 
impression out of which it arises, is by no means of this permanent and 
immutable nature: it is only when the mind is excited by the immediate 
presence and action of some interesting case, that it is vividly felt; 
in moments of calmness its influence is slight and feeble; and the bare 
attempt to submit the subject to the rigours of philosophical analysis, 
puts it to flight altogether. Thus circumstanced, the speculative 
enquirer, whose great aim it will of course be, to assign some 
hypothesis which furnishes a clear and ready criterion of the 
distinction he undertakes to resolve, instead of resorting for this 
purpose to anything so fluctuating and evanescent as the feeling out of 
which it arises, or the exciting cause of such a fugitive effect, will 
naturally turn his attention to the permanent and distinguishing 
properties and relations of the objects in which it obtains; and should 
he be so fortunate as to find, among these, any one which pretty nearly 
coincides with the received division of whose explanation he is in 
quest, he will eagerly adopt it as the solution sought, and will readily 
be followed by many to whom the discovery will carry all the marks of 
plausibility and truth. If this be the specious but false track which 
speculation is likely to take in exploring the principles of Taste, it 
is that into which it is still more likely to be seduced in 
investigating the principles of Morality; where, from the deep and 
general importance of the subject, it will appear a still more incumbent 
duty, to ascertain some clear and broad distinction in the nature of 
things, correspondent to that which our moral sentiments suggest: and we 
find accordingly that the delusion in question has prevailed in a still 
greater degree on this subject than the other; and that Mr. Burke, who 
has rejected and exposed it in the former instance, still retains and 
defends it in the latter. But surely the least reflection must satisfy 
us, that moral distinction can be nothing but what has ever been felt 
and recognized as such in the general sentiments and conduct of mankind; 
that it is a distinction, not of reason, convincing the understanding 
and determining merely the belief, but of feeling, touching the passions 
and influencing the will; that its efficient cause, therefore, must not 
be sought in any properties or relations of objects possessing no power 
over the affections, nor even in any unobvious qualities which do; and, 
that though in a system constructed by one supreme Disposer, and of 
which all the parts will of course bear a correspondence to each other,. 
divisions of objects coinciding with that which our moral sentiments 
suggest, may no doubt be derived from other sources, some of which, as 
their congruity or incongruity with truth and the fitness of things, may 
imprint the distinction itself more forcibly and deeply on the mind, and 
others; as their conducement or repugnance to the general good, and 
their conformity or opposition to the divine will, may furnish 
additional incentives to its observance—still, that moral distinction, 
as it springs up in the hearts of men, must be explored, and can alone 
be found, where Mr. Burke has so successfully investigated the 
principles of Taste—in the immediate action of the objects to which it 
refers, on our sensibility. It is here accordingly that Adam Smith, in 
his Theory of the Moral Sentiments, has directed his enquiries:—and the 
more I meditate on his hypothesis, and compare it with others, the more 
satisfied I am that the solution he has offered is the true one.

OCT. the 9th

Read the 4th Part of Burke's Sublime and Beautiful—on the efficient 
causes of the affections excited by these qualities: in which he 
endeavours to make out, that whatever produces a similar mechanical 
effect upon the body, though arising from different causes, and though 
in one instance the mind affects the body and in another external 
matter, still the effect produced by the body on the mind will be 
similar; That thus pain and fear, the primary engines of the sublime, 
produce a violent tension of the nerves, and that whatever produces this 
tension, though not in itself terrible; will operate as sublime; and, 
that love, in like manner, relaxes the nerves, and whatever effects such 
a relaxation will operate as beauty. The delight produced by the 
sublime, he accounts for, on the principle of its occasioning a tension, 
and affording an exercise necessary to brace and strengthen the finer 
organs; thus qualifying them to perform their functions properly, and 
obviating the convulsions consequent on over-relaxation.—I am afraid 
much of this is merely visionary.

OCT. the 10th

Read the 5th and last Part of Burke's Sublime and Beautiful; on the 
effect of words. He divides words into, 1st, aggregate, representing 
several simple ideas united by nature; 2ndly, simple abstract, 
representing one simple idea of this combination; and 3rdly, compound 
abstract, representing an arbitrary union of these. The effects of 
words, he divides into, 1st, the sound, 2ndly, the image exhibited, and 
3rdly, the affection of mind produced by either of these. He then 
maintains, that aggregate, and simple abstract, words, do only 
occasionally, and then usually by a particular effort, produce the 
second of these effects; that compound abstract words never produce this 
effect; and that poetry and rhetoric principally affect, not by 
exhibiting to the mind any distinct images, but by exciting immediately 
those feelings with which the words employed on the occasion have by 
habit been associated in our minds.—This is very ingenious, and I 
believe original.

OCT. the 10th.

Looked through Aristotle's Poetics. He derives Poetry from a natural 
love in man of imitating and beholding imitations. Like most of the 
ancient philosophers, he wastes himself in subtle distinctions on the 
surface of the art, instead of exploring the foundation of its laws in 
the constitution of things and of the human mind; yet he gives the 
elements of most of the rules of criticism which obtain at the present 
day. His definition of a conjunction and an article (chapter 20) seems 
pretty nearly to coalesce with Harris's; and Tooke might have sprung, at 
once, on the nobler game, of Aristotle.

OCT. the 14th

Finished the 4th Vol. of Bolingbroke's Correspondence while Secretary to 
Queen Anne. I can discover in this work no traces of his adherence to 
the cause of the Pretender, though strong traits of his dislike to the 
House of Hanover. How noble is his style, how masterly his manner, and 
how felicitously turned are his compliments and his rebukes! He 
transmutes whatever he touches, however base, to gold.

Finished the life of the Empress of Russia. Catharine's proclamation on 
the Death of Peter the III., in my opinion convicts her of his murder—
The last gorgeous fête of Prince Potemkin, in which all the elaborate 
contrivances of European refinement administered to the magnificent 
profusion of Oriental luxury, contrasted with the gloomy despondency and 
forebodings of its donor, is at on affecting and instructive!

Read Burke's Short Account of a Late Administration; a dear, calm, well-
digested and dexterous memorial; a perfect model for compositions of 
this nature:.-and, afterwards, his Observations on a Late state of the 
Nation; in which we see, in the germ, many of those principles which he 
afterwards more fully unfolded in his political career. One observation 
in the latter piece, particularly shows the depth of his reflection and 
the extent of his views:—"Politics ought to be adjusted, not to human 
reasonings, but human: nature; of which the reason is but a part, and by 
no means the greatest part." The account of the mode and the 
consequences of a dereliction of party and principle, towards the dose 
of this piece, is exquisitely given, and evinces a deep insight into 
human nature.—It is curious, that the main part of Burke's first, and of 
his last, political labour, should have been an exposition and defence 
of the resources of his country, against the croakings of despondency.
OCT. the 17th

Read Burke's Thoughts on the Present Discontents. He here assumes his 
proper and peculiar tone; and winding gracefully into his subject, opens 
the political grievances of the times with his characteristic plenitude 
of thought and vigour of exposition. It is usual with party writers, in 
the vehemence of their zeal and contraction of their views, to urge 
arguments, which, if a different course of conduct is required by any 
turn of affairs, must inevitably involve them in the charge of 
inconsistency: in this piece of Burke's, on the contrary, are 
registered, as if by a prophetic forecast, the rudiments of many of 
those principles which he has expanded and enforced in his latter 
productions; but which, at the time, must have appeared superfluously 
cautionary; and gave rise, probably, to those imputations of Jesuitism, 
with which, from my earliest remembrance, he was calumniated by his 
enemies, without much strenuous opposition from the zealots of his own 
party. He was never relished, I believe,—he was never formed to be 
relished,—as a party man.

OCT. the 19th
Read the first four Books of Montesquieu's Esprit des Loix. He makes the 
national characteristic requisite to the due support of a democratic 
government, Virtue; of a Monarchical, Honour; of Despotism, Fear: and 
evidently inclines to the popular side. There is an affectation of 
sententious smartness in his manner, very offensive to my taste.

Read Burke's Speech on American Taxation (1770); which from the 
beginning to the end, is strictly argumentative. He takes the subject up 
entirely as a question of expediency—Whether we should be content to 
derive advantage from our colonies through the old economy of commercial 
regulation, under which both parties had flourished; or persist in the 
new, and at the same time, odious and unprofitable scheme of drawing a 
direct revenue from them, began in the Grenville Administration by the 
Stamp Act of 1764, and revived, in the shape of duties, after its 
abolition by the Rockingham Administration in 1766. This masterly 
address, must, in its form at least, have been extemporary, as it takes 
the shape of a reply.—In his subsequent Speech, on Conciliation with 
America, he occupies pretty nearly the same ground, putting entirely 
aside the discussion of right: "The question with me, is," says he, "not 
what a lawyer tells me I may do, but what humanity, reason, and justice 
tell me I ought to do: not whether the spirit in America deserves praise 
or blame, but what we shall do with it." How strangely has Burke's 
conduct respecting America been misconceived, to be charged upon him as 
an inconsistency!—So far from his appearing ever to have been inclined 
to popular courses, in an election speech at Bristol, in 1780, he 
actually goes out of his way to combat the doctrine of instructing 
representatives.

OCT. the 24th

Read the 11th and 12th Books of Montesquieu's Esprit des Lois on 
Political Liberty; which he places, in the assured power of doing 
whatever the laws do not prohibit. Liberty, as it respects the 
constitution, he makes to depend on the proper distribution of the 
legislative, executive, and judicial powers; and, as it respects the 
individual citizen, on the favourableness of the laws to personal 
security. His ideas on the subject do not appear to me to have been very 
clear; and he has the weakness to say, (c. 6, L. 1 I) "Comme dans un 
etat libre tout homme qui est censé avoir une ame libre, doit etre 
gouverné par lui-même, il faudroit que le peuple en corps eut la 
puissance législative:"<62> as if all government, let it be placed where 
it may, was not, in its essence, a restraint on individual will; and the 
idea of the people's governing themselves, in the sense meant to be 
conveyed by it, and which has deluded multitudes, sheer nonsense, 
shrouded only in the generality of the terms. It is in this chapter that 
Montesquieu gives his elaborate and eulogistic description of the 
British Constitution; of which, however, he only sees the surface.

Read Burke's Letter to the Sheriffs of Bristol; in which he combats the 
decision of political questions on metaphysical and abstract principles 
then (1777) coming into vogue, and the specious cant of imputing 
corruption to all political parties—a weed of congenial growth,—with the 
spirit, and almost in the terms, of his latter productions. His two 
subsequent Letters to Gentlemen in Bristol, in defence of an unpopular 
concurrence on his part in the repeal of some restrictive Laws on Irish 
Trade, strikingly evince the liberality and extent, and at the same time 
the minute exactness, of his views on commercial subjects; nor can 
anything exceed the easy and happy mode in which his arguments are 
brought home to the feelings and understandings of his mercantile 
constituents.

OCT. the 25th

Read Burke's Speech on Economical Reform. This is, I think, the most 
magnificent of Burke's performances; and studiously of that character. 
It displays a mind most thoroughly purified from all party passions and 
party views; tender to personal interests, even where they interfere 
with national concerns; and, though ardently engaged in reform, most 
carefully guarded against the intemperate pursuit of it. It was on this 
Speech, I believe, somebody observed of Burke, that he seemed equally 
prepared to regenerate empires, or compose a Red Book.

Pursued Montesquieu's Esprit des Lois.—In the last chapter of the 19th 
Book is an elaborate portrait of the British genius and character, most 
flattering from a foreigner and a Frenchman.—In the 6th chapter of the 
20th Book, it is observed of us, that we regulate our commerce by 
internal laws, and not by treaties; and make our politics subservient to 
our commerce, and not, as other nations, our commerce to our politics. 
This, I think, is just.

OCT. the 28th

Pursued Burke's Works. His Address to the Electors at Bristol, previous 
to the election in 1780, I have always regarded as the most perfect of 
all his effusions; nor is it, perhaps, to be equalled by any composition 
of the same length in the English language.—His Speech on Fox's East 
India Bill, has something of an air of pomposity; owing, perhaps, to his 
necessary conversance at the time with Oriental topics:—it wields, it 
must be acknowledged, most ponderous interests.—The Representation on a 
Speech from the Throne, moved June 14th, 1784, strikes me as the 
heaviest, and the most tinctured with a party spirit, of any of his 
productions:—not that it does not contain a very just and weighty 
censure of the means, through court intrigue and popular delusion, by 
which the present Administration came into power.

OCT. the 30th

Looked into Mitford's History of Greece. The Athenian Democracy imparts 
no sort of relish for that sort of government, and justifies Aristotle 
in saying, Η Δημοχρατιχ η τελεζουος Τυζοννις εξι;<63>—and of the worst 
sort, we may add-The account of the expedition and retreat of the 
10,000, is above measure interesting. How more than men, do the Greeks 
appear, compared with the effeminate and pusillanimous Persians! one can 
hardly believe them of the same species!

Finished St. Mark's Gospel. Disdaining to conciliate where he undertakes 
to inform, this Evangelist appears to have made a brief collection of 
the most remarkable deeds and sayings of Christ; which, for the want of 
a more continued narrative to introduce and support them, must present a 
front "un peu herissé de merveilles"<64>, should suppose, to a mind not 
previously prepared to receive them with requisite submission.—a feature 
of our Lord's conduct particularly enforced in this Gospel, is the 
sedulity with which he shunned the obtrusive throng which his doctrines 
and his miracles gathered round him; and in perfect conformity with this 
reserve, are the repeated injunctions of secrecy he is stated to have 
delivered, respecting the wonders he performed; but was it possible to 
suppose that gratitude could be silent, or admiration dumb, at such 
benevolent and astonishing displays of supernatural power? and would not 
the strict observance of these commands have defeated, in a great 
measure, the very purpose for which such manifestations of divine 
authority were exhibited, not only by limiting their immediate effect, 
while the prohibition lasted, but by furnishing grounds for suspecting 
their authenticity, when it was removed?

NOVEMBER the 9th

Finished Montesquieu's Esprit des Loix. In chap. 15, Book 26, he 
maintains, that the proposition "Que le bien particulier doit ceder au 
bien public,"<65> is true with respect to the liberty, though false with 
respect to the property, of a citizen; but assigns no satisfactory 
reason for this distinction, nor am I able to discern one. An ambition 
to appear profound and sagacious by an air of dogmatism and reserve, is 
one of Montesquieu's predominant foibles.

Read Paley's Horae Pauline. His object is, to prove the genuineness of 
the Acts of the Apostles considered as Memoirs of St. Paul, and of St. 
Paul's Epistles. His method is this: if there is fabrication in the 
case, either the Memoirs are composed from the Letters, or the Letters 
are forged from and adapted to the Memoirs, or both the Memoirs and 
Letters are constructed out of traditional facts. On the first 
supposition, the intention may be honest; in the two others, it must be 
fraudulent: but in all three, the coincidences between the Letters and 
the Memoirs must be the effect of design; confessed in the first 
instance and apparent; and traceable in the last, since no less effort 
is necessary to produce coincidence between different parts of a man's 
own compositions, whether founded on tradition or fiction—(especially 
when they are made to assume the different shapes of History and 
original Letters), than is required to adjust them to circumstances 
found in any other writing. He proceeds accordingly, with infinite 
acuteness and ingenuity, to produce most striking instances of 
undesigned coincidence in the documents in question.—-Many of his 
sentiments and expressions are eminently happy: as when he says, No. 11, 
c. 4, "that a thread of truth winds through the whole, which preserves 
every circumstance in its place:" and No. 2, c. 5, "it is improbable 
that accident or fiction should draw a line which touched upon truth in 
so many points:" and No. 1 c. 14, "it is like comparing the two parts of 
a cloven tally; coincidence proves the authenticity of both."—I cannot 
think that St. Paul unequivocally asserts his performance of miracles in 
the passages quoted to establish that point.

NOV. the 14th

Read Burke's Reflections. They appear to me, on this review, far more 
temperate, than from my recollection of the first impressions they made, 
I expected to find them; and I really believe, had their publication 
been deferred till near the present period, they would have excited 
little of that amazement and indignation with which they were at first 
received. However overcharged his representations, might appear at the 
time, subsequent events have lowered them to truth and moderation.—His 
exposition of the character of our Revolution, is surely most sound and 
just.—He kindles much more fiercely, and speaks more unreservedly in his 
subsequent Letter to a Member of the National Assembly.—Paine has been 
guilty of a gross misrepresentation of a passage in the Reflections, 
which I have never seen detected and exposed. Ridiculing the love of 
liberty in the abstract, Burke observes, that government, too, as well 
as liberty, abstractedly speaking, is good; "yet could I", he 
indignantly asks (p.8) "in common sense, ten years ago, have felicitated 
France on her enjoyment of a government, without enquiry what the nature 
of that government was, or how it was administered?" This sentence Mr. 
Paine (Rights of Man, P. 1, p. 14), quotes as an affirmative 
proposition, directly in the contrary sense to that in which it is 
urged; and proceeds, after his fashion, to load his opponent with abuse, 
for maintaining so slavish a doctrine! It demands some degree of charity 
to believe that such a blunder was merely accidental.—In this passage, 
Mr. Burke has been scandalously misrepresented: in another, he has been 
generally misunderstood. It has been imputed to him, that he has spoken 
contemptuously (p. 117) of the lower orders, as a "swinish multitude." 
But of what multitude was he speaking? Of a people let loose from all 
restraint of government and manners—a collection, as he presently 
afterwards describes them, of "gross, stupid, ferocious, and at the same 
time, poor and sordid barbarians, destitute of religion, honour, and 
manly pride, possessing nothing at present, and hoping for nothing 
hereafter." Had he maddened his herd of swine with a legion of demons, 
as emblematical of the savage passions with which such a miserable 
assemblage would be torn and distracted and agitated to perdition, his 
image could hardly have been regarded as too strong.

Looked over Rennell's Memoirs of his Map of Hindoostan. The secluded 
Valley of Cashmere, forming, between the parallels of 34 and 35, an oval 
hollow 80 miles by 50; blooming with perennial spring, refreshed with 
cascades and streams and lakes, and encircled with mountainous ridges 
towering into the regions of eternal snow, was perhaps Johnson's 
prototype for the Happy Valley of Amhara in Rasselas.—Rennell allows 1 
mile in 11, for the winding of roads in England, in distances of about 
100 miles; and in great distances, as from London to Edinburgh, 1 in 7: 
in Hindoostan he allows 1 in 8, for distances of 100 miles, and 1 in 7, 
for greater: in the Carnatic he allows 1 in 9, for 100 miles.

NOV. the 25th

Read the first five chapters of Reid's Enquiry into the Human Mind: in 
which he examines the senses of Smell, Taste, Hearing, and Touch; and 
contends, that the sensations received through each of these senses, 
suggest to us, as natural signs, besides the conception and belief of a 
sentient mind to which they belong, the conception and belief of certain 
qualities in bodies, if known, denominated primary, if unknown, 
secondary; between which, and the sensations suggesting them, there is 
no more similitude, than between pain and the point of a sword. It is to 
the confounding these sensations with the objects they suggest, and 
regarding the former as images and representations of the latter, that 
he ascribes the rise and progress of a philosophy, originating with Des 
Cartes and perfected by Hume, which, inferring that nothing can be like 
sensations but sensations, expunges everything besides from the world of 
being. The sensation itself, he regards as the immediate object of 
memory, as well as of sense; but, in the former case; suggesting past, 
and, in the latter, present existence: and also of imagination, but, in 
this case, unconnected with any belief of existence past or present.

NOV. the 26th

Read the 6th and 7th (the two last) chapters of Reid's Enquiry: in which 
he follows up the same distinction with respect to sight, as the other 
senses; and maintains, that the sensation of colour, which perpetually 
varies with light, shade, distance, &c., suggests an unknown quality in 
objects called colour, which never varies: and that visible figure is 
suggested by the impression of light upon the retina, without any 
sensation; which visible figure becomes in time an acquired sign of the 
tangible figure of bodies, and is perpetually confounded with it, 
though, as he very ingeniously evinces in his geometry of visibles, they 
substantially differ from each other. He thus endeavours to draw a line, 
and enforce a distinction, between Sensation and Perception. The old 
Peripatetic philosophy, regarding principally the external qualities of 
objects, of which we have perceptions, concluded that the sensations in 
our minds were the images of these qualities: modern Philosophy, 
regarding principally the affections and operations of our own minds, 
and presuming that the sensations there must resemble the objects they 
represent, concluded, that, as a sensation can resemble nothing but a 
sensation, no such objects could exist.—In opposition to this 
Philosophy, which derives all our judgments and beliefs from reasoning—
from comparing the ideas transmitted by our senses, he contends, that 
our senses produce judgment and belief, not merely simple apprehension; 
that there are other original principles of belief—such as confidence in 
testimony, which, far from being produced, is limited and restrained by 
reason and experience; and that these original judgments make up the 
Common Sense of mankind.—He writes more philosophically and penetrates 
far deeper than Beattie, whom he notwithstanding preceded in this 
career; and the important distinction he labours to establish and 
enforce, between Sensation, which can exist only in the mind, and the 
External Quality indicated by that sensation, which can only exist out 
of it, seems very happily adapted to reconcile the invincible arguments 
of the Immaterialists with the irresistible dictates of instinct. Where 
I feel the greatest difficulty in admitting his doctrine on this 
subject, is with respect to Colour; which is so little felt as a 
sensation in the organ of sight, and is so distinctly referred and 
definitely applied to external objects as the universal integument of 
visible nature, that it demands a violent effort not to regard it as 
equally external with the objects which it apparently invests.

DECEMBER the 15th

Read the Introduction to Berkeley's Principles of Human Knowledge, in 
which he really seems to be serious and in earnest. He laments the 
difficulties and doubts which perplex Philosophy, and attacks, as the 
fruitful source of them all, the doctrine of abstract ideas: 
maintaining, that we cannot conceive separately, qualities which cannot 
separately exist; and tracing the opposite delusion to language, in 
which the frequent occurrence of general terms, has led to the 
supposition, that we must necessarily have determinate ideas answerable 
to those terms, or, in other words, abstract ideas: whereas he shows, 
that words do by no means always communicate determinate ideas, nor are 
intended to do so; that they frequently operate merely as general 
notations, like letters in Algebra; and that they are even capable of 
working on the passions without presenting any image whatever to the 
mind.—Burke has evidently borrowed from hence, what I conceived was an 
original notion on the influence of Words upon the mind, in the last 
Part of his Sublime and Beautiful. See Oct. 10th, 1798.—Berkeley allows 
that we may direct and restrict our attention to any one or more of an 
inseparable combination of qualities.

DEC. the 16th

Looked through the Principles of Human Knowledge. The whole of 
Berkeley's argument against the existence of matter, is comprised and 
taken for granted in the first sentence of his tract, assuming, that the 
only objects of human knowledge are ideas.—In the 22nd section, he says, 
"if you can conceive any one idea, or anything like an idea, to exist 
otherwise than in a mind perceiving it, I will readily give up the whole 
cause;" yet in the 4th section, he says, "it is an opinion strangely 
prevalent, that sensible objects have a real existence distinct from 
their being perceived:" now, I would turn the tables—how can we believe 
what we cannot conceive?—What he says from the 135th to the 142nd 
section, in favour of the existence of mind or spirit, is quite 
unsatisfactory:—if we can have a notion (see the 142nd section) of the 
existence of anything without an idea (and of mind or spirit he broadly 
states in the 27th section, we can have no idea), the fundamental 
principle on which his whole fabric rests, gives way.—His doctrine 
respecting abstraction, is jest as applicable and useful on the 
supposition of the existence, as the non-existence, of matter.—Is it 
possible that Berkeley could seriously suppose his scheme would prove 
such a sovereign remedy against scepticism and atheism as he pretends?

DEC. the 24th

Finished Voltaire's Siècle de Louis le 14me.<66>: a most entertaining 
and instructive wont; evincing that the author possessed in perfection 
the enviable art, "d'approfondir des choses, en paraissant les 
effleurer."<67> In the 20th chapter, Voltaire fairly confesses, that 
"l'esprit republicain est au fond aussi ambitieux que l'esprit 
monarchique; et qu'il y en est des vertus dans en etat monarchique, sans 
doute, tout autant que dans les republiques, avec moins d'enthousiasme, 
peut-être, mais avec plus de ce qu'on appelle honneur:"<68> and he 
treats ecclesiastical subjects—even the struggle between the Jansenists 
and Jesuits, the rise and decline of the Quietists, and the disputes in 
the Catholic Church respecting the allowing or proscribing certain 
Chinese ceremonies by the missionaries to that country—with a decency 
and propriety which we should little expect from him, and which we 
should scarcely find in any of his disciples. He reckons the population 
of France, at twenty millions; its ecclesiastical revenues, at four 
millions sterling; the ecclesiastics, secular and regular, at 250,000; 
and the emigrants in consequence of the revocation of the Edict of 
Nantes, at 150,000 persons.

DEC. the 25th

Read P's.—Sermons to — —. They are certainly ingenious: but he writes 
with too much sang-froid to secure even our reason; and, where he 
enforces moral duty, shows how weak an instrument reason is, to awaken 
and engage our moral feelings. From his cold view of moral distinction, 
as a discrimination of the intellect in reference to the general good, I 
think it likely, that, if he were not a Christian, he would be a 
Godwinite. The more I meditate on the subject, the more I am convinced, 
that the virtues must be engrafted on the passions.

Looked again over Burke's first Letter on a Regicide Peace:—a wonderful 
composition! He admits the perilous nature of our situation, but 
deprecates all overtures to peace; laments that the true state of the 
contest in which we are engaged, has never been fairly exposed to us by 
its conductors; exhibits it himself, with matchless force; and animates 
us to persist in it, by the most powerful appeals to our reason and our 
passions. Eager, unremitted earnestness, breathes its persuasive spirit 
through the whole effusion.

DEC. the 30th

Finished the Athenian Letters. The idea of opening the interior of 
Greece, through the supposed correspondence of an agent from the Persian 
Court residing at Athena during the Peloponnesian war, is most 
ingeniously and happily conceived; and, considering the difficulty of 
the task, it is admirably well supported.—The 147th and 148th Letters, 
in which the generous Cleander expresses the anguish of his soul at the 
base part which he had been compelled to act by his court, derive 
additional interest from the reflection, that they were written by the 
Hon. Charles Yorke, who in 1770 put a period to his existence from 
remorse at having been duped into a political delinquency.—In the 151st 
Letter, Socrates is made to maintain against Protagoras, "That morality 
is not a science to be learned or taught, by applying the reason to 
theoretical speculations; but, that its principles are implanted in our 
nature, and render the illiterate and learned equally qualified to 
practise and to judge of it."





1799

JANUARY the l0th

Read Frend's Principles of Taxation: an excellent satire, however 
unintended, on a tax upon capital instead of income; which, in plain 
terms, is the whole of his proposal. Deducting a certain sum as 
necessary to subsistence, his plan is, that what the man without capital 
gains in the course of the year, and what the capitalist gains by his 
capital together with the whole value of that capital, should be subject 
to an equal tax. Thus supposing one man gains £130 per annum by his 
personal industry, and another the same income from land worth thirty 
years purchase, deduct.£30 income from each for subsistence, and, by a 
tax of £10 per cent, the former will pay £10 and the latter (£130x30 
+100)/10 or £400 per annum—I beg pardon—only for the first year: his 
tax, together with his capital and income, will be considerably 
lightened, under such a sweating, each succeeding year.

Dr. R. informed me, that out of more than 40,000 cases which had fallen 
under his observation, he never met with one, in which a person with red 
or light flaxen hair had the small-pox to confluence.

JAN. the 13th

Finished St. Luke's Gospel. This is the history on which Mr. Evanson 
solely relies;—and it must be confessed, that it has more the air of an 
ordinary historical composition, than any of the other narratives on the 
subject.—The angelic annunciation to Zacharias and Mary (c. 1.), on 
which is founded the preternatural conception of John and Jesus, must, 
it is evident, entirely depend, for its direct evidence, on the credit 
of those two witnesses, attesting a transaction altogether private.—Why 
did not Christ (c. 4, v. v. 23, &c.) work a miracle in his own country, 
instead of provoking a natural indignation by denying so easy a 
manifestation of his divine mission, where, from the proverbial 
proneness to incredulity, it was so particularly wanted. Fifty reasons, 
I am aware, may be assigned from the comments and glosses of those who 
are resolved at any rate to find one; but what I wish, is a substantial 
and satisfactory answer.—Luke relates the perplexing story of 
transferring a legion of devils from a man into a herd of swine. What 
can be made of this, under the torture of any ingenuity? Those who 
refine possession by the devil, into derangement of intellect, must be 
gravelled here.

Lord C. called in the evening. He represents Fox as being in excellent 
spirits at St. Anne's Hill; busily and fervently occupied in attending 
to the minutiae of the Greek Language, and its different dialects. One 
should have thought, the different construction of the Greek republics, 
would have possessed more attractions for a mind like his.

JAN. the 23rd

Finished the perusal of Hardy's Trial for High Treason.—The Attorney 
General's (Scott's) opening, is strangely perplexed, involved, and 
obscure. He speaks (with the view, I presume, of giving a colour of 
propriety to the indictment then trying) of the whole legislative and 
executive authority, as vested in the crown; exercised in the former 
case with advice and consent, and in the latter with advice only:—a 
doctrine, which though primitively true, perhaps, sounds now most 
harshly to the ear.—Erskine, in opening his defence, very powerfully 
contends, that to constitute High Treason under the first branch of 25. 
Ed. 3., there must be a direct compassing of the King's death; and that 
to compass his deposition, though it may be offered as evidence of 
compassing his death, will not in itself constitute that crime; and is 
expressly one of the ensnaring treasons of the 21st of Rich. 2. repealed 
by the 1st of Henry 4.-Gibbs, at the outset, takes the same ground; but 
(like Mr. Erskine) afterwards abandons it—I suppose, as not sufficiently 
safe: he then proceeds to argue, as if an intention to depose, was the 
crime charged; and finally states the question at issue to be, whether 
Mr. Hardy, in concurring with others in calling a convention, personally 
meant that that convention should act by force of arms against 
government?—The Solicitor General (Mitford) in reply, contends, that a 
distinct intention to destroy the King, is not necessary to constitute 
treason; that any act which, in its consequences, leads, according to 
ordinary experience, to endanger the King's life, is high treason; that 
an attempt to depose the King, is an act of this nature; and that the 
forming any assembly or convention of the People, assuming that 
character and of consequence the sovereignty, or even a design, acted 
upon, of procuring any alteration in the constitution otherwise than by 
the constituted legislature, or through force on them, is an attempt to 
depose, and amounts to the crime of high treason.—Eyre is very able and 
perspicuous in summing up; exhibiting to the Jury a distinct and correct 
outline of the complicated history submitted to their judgment, and 
judiciously insisting on its leading and characteristic features. He 
lays it down as unquestionable law, that a conspiracy to depose the 
King, is such conclusive evidence of compassing his death, as to have 
become a presumption of law upon the subject; and that it is not 
necessary to establish a compassing the King's death, prior to the 
conception of deposing him, to constitute High Treason. He observes, 
that the argument of the prisoner's counsel on this head, broke down 
under the case.—I am quite satisfied with the verdict.

JAN. the 26th

Finished Horne Tooke's Trial. Tooke, from the beginning, appears 
perfectly collected; and soon discovers a confidence in his case. He 
displays wonderful acuteness, as well as perverseness, in arguing points 
and examining witnesses; and evidently awes the court into a 
forgetfulness of its own dignity: his play upon the simplicity of 
Sharpe, is exquisite: and when his captious asperity relents under the 
indulgence he receives, and seems to have little expected, the scene is 
quite affecting: Erskine maintains pretty nearly the same doctrine with 
respect to treason, as on Hardy's trial; and, as on Hardy's trial, he 
speedily loses sight of it. Gibbs waives discussing, whether an 
intention to depose, without compassing the death of the King, is 
treason, because it is a question which does not arise on this case; but 
if it ever, should arise, he leaves it to the Court to determine, 
between the decisions which affirm this to be law, and the express 
authority of the statute itself.—I admire his spirit.—Eyre expressly 
lays it down, as before, That to mean to depose the King, is to compass. 
his death, because it is a presumption of fact so conclusive, that the 
law has adopted it and made it a presumption of law; and, that what is 
the meaning of any statute, and what case of fact comes within that 
meaning, is always a question of law. He accordingly states the question 
for the consideration of the jury to be, whether the prisoner has been 
concerned in a plan to establish a national Convention which, should 
usurp the powers of government; for if he has done so, he has been 
concerned in a plan to depose the King, and is guilty of high treason.—
It does appear to me, that this is declaring that to be treason under 
25. Ed. 3, which is not made treason by that Statute; and that the 
principle upon which, this construction is founded "—that acts which may 
eventually endanger the Kings life, are evidence of conspiring his 
death, though that event should never have been in the contemplation of 
the party", tends to introduce the very uncertainty which that Statute 
was enacted to obviate.

Horne Tooke, I believe, truly describes his temper, when he says, "my 
mind, is much better formed to feel and to acknowledge kindness, than to 
solicit it". I cannot, any more than the Chief Justice, develop the 
political character of this extraordinary man; though I have enjoyed 
some favourable opportunities of probing him myself, and seeing him 
probed, upon the subject. At the very time he was giving the most marked 
encouragement to the "Rights of Man", I well remember his speaking to me 
of the author in these emphatical terms, "Paine's intentions I believe 
to be honest; but he is ignorant of almost everything, and he hates 
everything of which he is ignorant".

On the whole, the conduct of these Trials, is an honour to English 
Judicature.—	I much doubt whether Buller would have managed them so 
well; and Lord Kenyon would have made sad work of them.

FEBRUARY the 1st

Read Stone's Trial for Treason. The evidence for the Crown leaves a fair 
opening for defence, which his own case by no means makes out. Erskine's 
is a wretched speech, delivered apparently without any preparation; and 
his egotism, thus unsupported, is insufferable. Lord Kenyon in summing 
up, leans shamefully against the prisoner: he evidently labours to hinge 
the whole case on the simple fact, of Stone's design to communicate 
intelligence to France; and to sink all consideration of the question, 
whether he meant by that communication to benefit France or this 
country: and when one of the Jury asks if this question is to be 
considered, his Lordship gives an equivocal answer, and the whole Court 
is strangely discomposed.

FEB. the 11th

Finished the Travels of Anacharsis. This work is ably executed, and must 
have cost prodigious pains; but it still leaves us, as we must ever be 
left, extremely ignorant of the political constitutions, religious 
worship, and private manners of the Greeks. With respect to the precise 
theories of the Greek philosophers, I have ever felt myself much in the 
dark; nor am I a whit more enlightened by the laborious researches of 
the Abbé Barthelemy, who has wisely contented himself rather with 
extracting their particular opinions, than attempting to reduce them 
into a regular system. He represents Aristotle as maintaining, that the 
virtues are no other than the passions preserved by Prudence between the 
two opposite vices of excess and defect:-Aristotle himself, I think, is 
not quite so explicit.—Many anecdotes tend to raise very high our ideas 
of Grecian taste in the arts; but the much admired statue of Minerva by 
Phidias, composed of ivory and gold, with a coloured imitation of the 
iris of the eye, must surely tend to lower them considerably.—I wish, 
after all, that the result of the learned Abbé's researches had been 
embodied in some other form: there is something false and offensive in 
making fiction the basis of fact, which a just taste, I think, can never 
fully approve.

FEB. the 12th

Read Horace Walpole's Historic Doubts on the Life and Reign of Richard 
the 3rd.—doubts, which he has in some measure transfused into my mind; 
though in contending against the public opinion, he has probably been 
carried, by the momentum of the nisus, a little too far in his 
vindication of the character of Richard, as usually happens in such 
conflicts.—In some subsequent pieces in defence of this tract, he treats 
the objections of his opponents with infinite keenness, ridicule, and 
success: even the subtle philosophy of Hume, is no match for his playful 
acumen. Hume, whom he seems thoroughly to have understood, must have 
trembled at his boast, that he could loosen the artful contexture of his 
History, in a variety of places, with greater facility than he had 
unravelled the story of Richard the 3rd He points a keen remark at Hume—
"There is a good deal of difference in the kind of belief which a man 
entertains, before he has treated a subject, and after".

FEB. the 19th

Looked over Horace Walpole's Fugitive Pieces. His communications to the 
World are all, polished, easy, and elegant; but the 160th No. is the 
very flower of grace: it treats a most indelicate subject, with 
matchless refinement and felicity.

Began Grotius de Jure Belli et Pacis. I do not distinctly see on what he 
founds natural law; and his definition of it in the 10th section of the 
1st chapter, is complicated and obscure. In the 2nd chapter, he 
struggles hard to reconcile war with. Christianity;—but surely kicks 
against the pricks. In the 8th section of the 3rd chapter, Grotius 
contends against, and Gronovius, in his notes, for the supremacy of the 
People; but without fundamentally differing, I think. Grotius, I 
apprehend, is not for unlimited subjection in the people; and Gronovius 
qualifies his doctrine of their sovereignty, in such a way as must 
secure the approbation of every rational friend to liberty and order. In 
the succeeding chapter, however, Grotius labours earnestly (Gronovio 
reluctantly) to narrow as much as possible the right of resistance in 
the subject,—so that I am afraid we must give him up, at last, as a true 
friend to the liberties of mankind.

FEB. the 24th

Read Walpole's Account of his Transactions with Chatterton; in which he 
endeavours, and with some success, to exculpate himself from the charge 
of neglecting that miraculous but ill-starred youth. There is a vile 
sentiment in his first letter on this subject, which surely no sense of 
self-abasement could warrant; and to which, whatever might have been the 
momentary suggestions of spleen or perverseness, I am astonished that he 
should have given public and deliberate utterance: "what virtues we 
have, are the production of fear, prudence, experience, hypocrisy, and 
age."—Looked afterwards through his Hieroglyphic Tales; displaying a 
whimsical imagination running wild without any apparent drift:—His happy 
ridicule of Lord Chesterfield's Letters; which, however, he falsely 
denominates, as from the Author, "a System of Education":—His Criticism 
on Dr. Johnson's Writings; in which there is much truth very 
felicitously expressed:—His Detached Thoughts.; some of which are very 
exquisite and just:—and,. His Letters on his Travels; which are 
fatiguingly flippant, and fired with none of that enthusiasm which we 
should expect from an ingenuous and favoured Youth, at Paris, Rome, 
Naples, Florence, &c. That keen and ardent sensibility, which, tempered 
by other qualities, enters as an essential ingredient into the 
composition of very superior minds, unquestionably never formed any part 
of Walpole's character.

FEB. the 28th

Finished looking over Horace Walpole's Letters, in the last Volume of 
his Works. They are in general written with playful ease, enlivened by 
quaint turns and occasionally sparkling with bons mots; but betray a 
sickly fastidious delicacy, on the very verge of affectation: it is only 
when animated with indignation—a rare occurrence—that he assumes a tone 
of earnestness.—It appears from his 69th Letter to Conway, that he saw, 
so early as 1765, the seeds of the late Revolution, in the atheistic 
Philosophers of Paris, "who, avowing war against Popery, aim, many of 
them, at a subversion of all religion; and still many more, at the 
destruction of the Regal power": and in a Letter from Paris to Mr. 
Brand, dated Oct. the 19th, 1765, he observes of the people there, "they 
have no time to laugh: there is God and the King to be pulled down 
first; and men and women, one and all, are devoutly employed in the 
demolition". This is an early and strong scent; but Lord Chesterfield 
(See Oct. the 5th, 1796.) was still before him.—It is curious to hear 
Gray, in his 10th Letter, say "the same man's verses" (Johnson's) "at 
the opening of Garrick's Theatre, are far from bad"—of one, who was 
destined afterwards to sit in imperial judgment on him and all his 
tribe.—I observe that Walpole, although he repeatedly, and in strong 
terms, expresses his first impressions of disgust at the modes and 
customs of France, is always ultimately fascinated and subdued by the 
charms of the society he finds there; and to the enjoyment of which, he 
seems by nature and habit to have been peculiarly adapted.

MARCH the 1st

Finished the Paradise Regained. Milton has been most unhappy in the 
choice of his subject,—an inexplicable and suspicious legend; 
unconnected with the narrative where it appears; easily feigned; and 
incapable of contradiction:—but he has worked it up with wonderful 
ability; nor am I surprised at his partiality for an offspring, so 
naturally sickly in its constitution, and which he must have reared with 
such surpassing pains and assiduity.—Milton has been extolled for the 
exquisite delicacy of his ear; but what shall we say to such lines as 
these

"And made him bow to the Gods of his wives."	B. 2. v.171. 
"And with these words his temptation pursued"	B. 2. v.405. 
"From that placid aspect and meek regard."		B. 8. v.217. 
"No wonder, for though in thee be united."		B. 3. v.229.

How are they to be recited? To my ears "lay your knife and fork across 
your plate", sounds just as numerous:—Newton's note on v. 245. B. 4.

"The Attic bird trills her thick warbled notes",

Explains what, I have been asked, Gray means by the "Attic warbler", in 
his Ode on Spring. Philomela, the daughter of Pandion, King of Athens, 
was changed into a Nightingale; which was thence in Latin called 
Atthis.—Milton in 15 lines from v. 293 to 308. B. 4, gives a good 
summary of the systems of the different moral philosophers of Greece.

MARCH the 8th

Read Milton's Samson Agonistes;—a noble Poem, but a miserable Drama. 
Comus, though much earlier, is surely a much finer composition:—after 
all, however, give me the Gothic architecture of Shakespeare.—Lycidas, 
though highly poetical, I agree with Johnson, breathes little sincere 
sorrow, and is therefore essentially defective as a monody.

Perused, with delight and admiration, Mackintosh's Preliminary Discourse 
on the Study of the Law of Nature and Nations; exhibiting a most 
perspicuous and masterly view of this complicated subject, and imparting 
a most exalted idea of the future temple to which it forms the portico.—
Liberty he defines, judiciously perhaps, but rather from its effects 
than its essence; "security against wrong", whether from "fellow 
subjects" or "the magistrate"; but emphatically so with respect to the 
latter.—He speaks with the profoundest veneration of Burke; and his 
political opinions have evidently undergone an immense revolution since 
the publication of his Vindiciae Gallicae:—it was impossible, in a mind 
like his, that they should not have experienced a considerable change, 
after the popular ebullition, by which he was borne away, had a little 
subsided.

MARCH the 16th

Read Montesquieu's interesting portrait of himself, in the Monthly 
Magazine for this month. Two traits touched me so nearly, that I felt a 
responsive thrill as I read them. "It has given me no high opinion of 
myself to perceive, that there are very few offices in the state for 
which I am qualified.—I am lost when I come to ask of myself, what is 
the decision of the Law: yet I. have been anxious to make myself master 
of the intricacies of form; and am the more angry with myself, because I 
see men of mean understandings acquire what I could not attain".—"In the 
treating of topics at all profound or difficult, I am obliged to reflect 
much, as I proceed, to prevent my ideas from falling into confusion. If 
I perceive that I am listened to, the subject seems to vanish from me, 
or my thoughts rise in such hurry and disorder that nothing is distinct. 
But when difficult points are discussed in conversation where there are 
other speakers, I acquit myself infinitely better".—I feel while I am 
transcribing this, that I am exhibiting myself.

Looked over a Volume of "Lettres Choisies de Mesdames Sevigné et 
Maintenon". The former cloys one with excessive tenderness for her 
daughter; the latter gives some of the best advice to a young woman, I 
ever met with: the former talks amusingly of taking up devotion; the 
latter seems filled with its overpowering influence: the former trifles 
most engagingly; the latter exhibits herself as a most superior woman: 
the former wins our esteem; the latter commands our admiration.

MARCH the 22nd

Finished Tasso's Jerusalem, in Hooke's Translation; comparing it 
occasionally with the Original, and with Fairfax's version, which on 
many occasions is more just and spirited. The extravagant machinery of 
Enchantment, though it suggests some very beautiful scenery—though it 
gives birth to the voluptuous and entrancing loves of Armida and 
Rinaldo—is certainly an inexpiable blemish in this noble Poem; which 
might have been rendered a very fine, and a very interesting 
composition, without it.—Tasso often appears studiously to copy Homer, 
and Virgil, where he could well have done without them; and with an 
apparent intention that the imitation might, be remarked:—as if to throw 
a reflex splendour from their immortal labours on his own.

Read Burke's Heads for Consideration on the State of Affairs in 1792. 
His foresight, as a statesman, is astonishing:—he was pretty nearly 
then, where we are now.

MARCH the 24th

Began Burnet's Theory of the Earth. Nothing can exceed the dexterity, or 
liveliness, or picturesque force, of his reasoning. He powerfully 
illustrates, by his example, Paley's rule—of exciting a strong sense of 
a difficulty, before you attempt to remove it.—His imagination displayed 
in the construction, the illustration, and the defence of his Theory, is 
wonderfully luxuriant and fine: all nature seems obedient to his plastic 
powers, and to array itself with obsequious diligence at his bidding. To 
the leading feature of his Theory, however, there seems a capital and 
fatal objection: the exterior crust enveloping the waters, as formed 
from the subsidence of lighter particles floating in the air, must have 
been composed, one would imagine, 'of fine mould; how then are we to 
account for the stupendous masses of rock which we behold in its ruins—
for the Pyrenees, the Alps, and the Andes?

MARCH the 26th

Read with much interest, in a Collection of Fugitive Pieces, an 
Introduction to the Theory of the Human Mind by J. Usher, author of 
Clio. He maintains, That general terms do not represent any particular 
objects or ideas, but are mere creatures of the mind, formed for the 
classification of objects, and the convenience of communication; That 
pleasure and pain are terms of this nature; That we never feel any but 
particular pleasures and pains; That these do not differ as greater or 
less of one kind, but as being of totally different kinds; That the love 
of pleasure and aversion to pain, cannot therefore be principles of 
action in the mind, since these terms have no meaning but as general 
expressions for the particular pleasures and pains we have experienced; 
That we are actuated by particular appetites and passions, not only not 
deducible from any general love of pleasure and aversion to pain, but 
not originating even in any particular perceptions of pleasure or pain, 
since the passion often precedes the perception, and terminates in it; 
and, that these instinctive appetites and passions, though entirely 
neglected by Mr. Locke, who has attended only to the transitory 
impressions made upon the mind, are the principles which determine our 
feelings and actions, our character and conduct: he proposes accordingly 
to examine these instincts, as what can alone open the true nature of 
that great, miserable, and complicated creature, Man. I wish he had 
pursued his purpose, as he has got, I think, upon the right scent.—So 
far, he observes, as we make provision for our appetites and desires, we 
may be said to be actuated by self-interest; but this is a principle of 
a merely subordinate kind, and totally distinct from the self-love of 
that frigid system of Philosophy, which holds it to be the parent of all 
our passions, and resolves virtue and vice, right and wrong, good and 
evil, into mere expressions for a true or mistaken interest. This, on 
his ground, appears a very just distinction.

APRIL the 8th

Finished the Orlando Furioso; delighted with the wild fancy and 
ingenious contrivance of its author. Each Book is so happily broken off, 
that the reader is compelled to pursue the next; and the romantic tales 
which, interwoven, form the texture of this wonderful Poem, are so 
judiciously dropped and revived, that curiosity is never satiated: 
these, beyond all expectation, are made to converge and bear most 
dexterously on one point—the repulse of the Pagan forces attacking 
Charlemagne; and the whole concludes nobly with the single combat 
between Rogero and Rodemont, the latter of whom, however, Ariosto has 
exalted too highly for his purpose—the setting off his favourite 
Paladin.—The reading this Poem, it must be confessed, after all, gives 
additional spirit and force to the admirable ridicule of Knight-Errantry 
in Don Quixote.

APRIL the 10th

Read the Report of the Committee of Secrecy of the House of Commons, 
just published; in which the schemes for Jacobin fraternization in 
England, Scotland, Ireland, and Hamburg, are exposed, in a masterly 
manner, from their first origin in each place.—The Papers of this 
formidable confederacy, as given in the Appendix, uniformly display 
great energy and ability.—The first has a passage truly sublime "Man has 
reposed on ruins, and rested his head on some fragments of the Temple of 
Liberty, or at most amused himself with pacing the measurement of the 
edifice, and nicely limiting its proportions; not reflecting, that this 
Temple is truly Catholic, the ample earth its area, and the arch of 
heaven its dome."

Looked over Gibbon's Vindication: a dexterous and masterly defence, 
undoubtedly; but I like his style and manner less than I used to do. It 
is too elaborate; wants ease, spirit, and flexibility; and seems adapted 
solely to the grave and stately march of history. Yet it is difficult, 
perhaps impossible, to change any term, or its collocation, for a 
better; so that "proper words in proper places" does not seem a 
sufficient definition of a good style.

APRIL the 28th.

Looked over that part of Parr's Sequel in which he introduces, in a 
strange and desultory way, his observations on French Politics. He 
combats the position, that what is true in theory may be false in 
practice, by maintaining, That truth consists in the relation of our 
ideas to each other, or in the conformity of those ideas to external 
objects; and wherever that relation or conformity exists, the ideas 
belonging to either are unalterably just, and the proposition expressing 
those ideas, must ever be true: That therefore a proposition true in 
theory, must be true in practice, where the practice corresponds to the 
theory: and, That where they appear to clash, we are not always to 
maintain that, the theory is false, but that it does not apply to the 
particular case.—Of Burke's expression "metaphysically true, and morally 
and politically false," he observes, that "true and false" are 
expressions of the metaphysical, "proper and improper" "just or unjust" 
of the moral, and "useful or pernicious" of the political properties of 
objects: but this rather tends to complicate than clear up the question; 
and a wider and deeper view of the subject, I suspect, is required, to 
obtain a simple and satisfactory solution.—Parr's style of composition, 
with all its excellencies, has one capital defect—it wants light and 
shade: everything is sacrificed to force; each part appears to be 
uniformly and intensely laboured; and nothing has the air of being the 
natural and spontaneous effusion of a mind seriously and earnestly 
engaged in communicating its ideas and its feelings:—yet he writes, I am 
told, with fluency, and much in the same manner as he speaks.

APRIL the 29th

Read Mackintosh's Vindiciae Gallicae. His style and manner in this piece 
are magnificent; but uniformly cumbrous, and occasionally coarse. He has 
infinitely improved both, in his Preliminary Discourse; though some of 
the ponderosity still remains. There can hardly be a more express and 
full contradiction, than in two passages, p. 265 of the Vindiciae, and 
p. 49 of the Discourse. In the former, he says, "It is perhaps 
susceptible of proof, that these governments of balance and control, 
have never existed but in the vision of theorists": in the latter, he 
affirms, that "The result of such an examination will be, that no 
institution so detestable as an absolutely unbalanced government, 
perhaps ever existed; and that the simple governments are mere creatures 
of the imagination of theorists."—Page 215-16-17, he maintains, that 
morality is founded on expediency, and that utility alone constitutes 
its obligation; but that the moment the moral edifice is reared, its 
basis is hid from the eye for ever—the moment that general maxims, 
founded on an utility paramount and perpetual, are embodied and 
consecrated, they cease to yield to partial and subordinate expediency; 
and it then becomes the perfection of virtue, to consider, not whether 
an action be useful, but whether it be right. This is a very ingenious, 
(as not admitting the system I must not call it a successful,) attempt 
at extrication from a most importunate difficulty, involved in adopting 
the principle of utility as the basis of morals.-Had I been Burke, I 
could hardly have forgiven his comparison of me to Judge Jeffereys, p. 
326.

APRIL. the 30th

Read Cicero's Lucullus; in which he makes that character expose very 
forcibly the scepticism of the Academics, through the intervention of 
his master Antiochus. He afterwards, himself, take& up their defence 
with much address and spirit; and maintains, from the various deceptions 
of the senses, and the infinite diversity of opinion on all subjects, 
that though there is probable, there is no certain truth; and, to remove 
the obloquy of such a doctrine, that this probability is sufficient for 
all the purposes; of life. There appears much of puerile subtlety in the 
argument on both sides.—A sentence in the 9th c. struck me as 
comprehensively and concisely expressing the two great objects of 
Ancient speculation, "judicium veri et finem bonum":<69>—the latter of 
these is explained before, by "extremum et ultimum bonorum, quo omnia 
referantur."<70>—How mankind have perplexed their enquiries by their 
expressions!—The passage c. 41, beginning, "Neque tamen istas 
quaestiones"<71>—is wonderfully fine.

MAY the 2nd

Read Soame Jenyns' Origin of Evil. His grand solution of the 
introduction of evil, is, that it could not have been prevented, by 
Omnipotence, without the loss of some superior good, or the permission 
of some greater evil. He divides it, with this view, into, 1st evils of 
imperfection; which are only the absence of comparative advantages, 
essential to a state of subordination, and in truth no evils at all: 
2ndly, natural evils; which are the necessary consequence of the 
imperfection of created beings, the untractableness of matter, and some 
incomprehensible connection between good and evil; and, thus regarded, 
are the fewest possible: 3rdly, moral evils; which are expedient, that 
natural evils may fall to the lot of guilt instead of innocence,—besides 
that they ultimately contribute to the general good: 4thly, political 
evils; which originate in the depravity of man, who, as he will never 
submit his private advantage to public utility, must be compelled by 
violence or bribed by corruption to do so: and, lastly, religious evils; 
which result from the necessity, that religion must originally have been 
accommodated to, and will afterwards be vitiated by, the same depravity. 
The whole extremely ingenious, and wretchedly unsatisfactory.—In his 3rd 
Division, after exploding all former criteria of virtue as superficial, 
he maintains, that moral good and evil is, nothing but the production of 
natural good and evil; that this is the only solid foundation on which 
any system of ethics can be built, and the only just rule by which we 
can pass a judgment on our actions, as it not only enables us to 
determine which are right and wrong, but almost mathematically to 
demonstrate the proportion of virtue and vice belonging to each, by 
comparing them with the happiness or misery they occasion: but, that 
though such is the essence of morality, its end is probation, it having 
been properly appointed by God as a test of our obedience to his will; 
and on this account entrusted to our discretion, while every other 
important object in life is secured by adapted appetites; and that it is 
only as virtue is performed in conformity to the will of God, that it 
has any merit, it being otherwise nothing more than a part of prudential 
economy. All this he delivers in great pomp and form, as a new and most 
important discovery: and perhaps it may be regarded as the most clear, 
broad, and explicit statement, then known, of a theory since become so 
popular.—With all its paradoxical ingenuity, there appear to me only two 
truly original thoughts in this work:—one which Johnson has so 
successfully ridiculed in his review of it:—and another, of which I 
cannot sufficiently praise the acuteness, "That, in politics, most 
principles speculatively right are practically wrong, because they are 
founded on the plausible but false presumption, that mankind in general 
act on honest and rational principles".

MAY the 7th

Looked into Gibbon's "Extraits de Journal." In Page 214 he observes, 
very justly, "Jamais les principes et les actions des hommes, ne sont 
plus differents, que lorsque les principes sont opposés aux sentimens 
naturels de l'humanité: le coeur corrige erreurs de l'esprit".<72>—In 
Page 301 he remarks of Bayle, "que les deux Lettres sur l'amour paternel 
et sur la jalousie, sont d'une philosophe profond; il y développe une 
chain de préjuges liés a notre être, nécessaires a notre bonheur, et 
destinés par l'Etre Supreme a nous tenir lieu d'une raison trop relevée 
pour le commun des hommes, et qui n'auroit jamais eu le degré de 
vivacité propre a nous faire agir".<73> The observance of moral 
distinction, whatever Soame Jenyns may imagine, is unquestionably 
secured, like every other purpose of our being, by appropriate 
instincts.—On Middleton's Enquiry, Gibbon very justly remarks, p. 283, 
"Il voyoit bien jusqu'où l'on pouvoit pousser les consequences de ses 
principes, mais il ne lui convenoit pas de les tirer".<74>

MAY the 12th

Finished the perusal of Cicero's Treatise "De Finibus". The three grand 
divisions of Ancient Philosophy, appear to have been, Physics, 
Dialectics, and Morals; in the last of which they sought, with 
reference, I think, to the individual solely, "Quid sit finis, quid 
extremum, quid ultimum, quo sint omnia bene vivendi recteque faciendi, 
consilia referenda?"<75>. In the Treatise in question, Cicero expounds, 
with much spirit and force, in the way of Dialogue, the sentiments of 
the principal Schools of Philosophy on the latter of these subjects. In 
the first Book he provokes Torquatus to an eloquent defence of Epicurus' 
opinion, "Omne animal, simulatque natum sit, voluptatem appetere, eaque 
guadere, ut summo bono; dolorem aspernari, ut summum malum, et quantum 
possit, a se repellere: idque facere nondum depravatum, ipsa natural 
incorrupte atque integre iudicante;"<76> and therefore, that pleasure 
(natura ducente)<77> is the chief good, and pain the chief evil, of 
life: which opinion he principally vindicates, by insisting on the 
virtues and vices as being merely modes of action conducive, and 
valuable or pernicious solely as they are conducive, to these ends. 
Epicurus despised dialectics as of no assistance, and cultivated physics 
as of important service, to morals: and he insisted on the veracity of 
the senses, as the sources of all our knowledge; which if deceptive, all 
art and science must be fallacious too.—In the 2nd Book, Cicero 
powerfully attacks this sensible but obnoxious system in its weak point, 
by lowering the "voluptas"<78> of Epicurus (an unfortunate term 
certainly—"happiness" would have been clear of all suspicion) to animal 
gratification; and then setting it up as opposed to the "honestum":<79>—
a principle, of which it appears from the 19th chapter, how imperfectly 
he knew the origin, how incapable he was of defining its nature, and how 
forcibly he felt its operation.—In the 3rd and 4th Books, Cato expounds, 
and Cicero, as before, in person attacks, the doctrine of the Stoics. 
Zeno and his disciples having placed the "summum bonum" in the 
"honestum", and the "summum malum" in the "turpe",<80> seem to have been 
driven to great straits in reconciling to their system the necessary 
preference of objects which certainly fall within neither of these 
descriptions; and it is on this ground that Cicero assails them, 
maintaining that they ought not to have separated from his sect—the 
Peripatetics and Old Academy—who held, that those intermediate objects 
were "bona et mala",<81> though immensely subordinate to the "honestum 
et turpe". Certainly Arista and Pyrrho, who, adapting the same principle 
as the Stoics, obstinately held, that there was no difference in these 
objects, nor any ground of preference between the acutest pain and most 
exquisite pleasure, were at once more consistent and absurd.—In the 5th 
Book Piso undertakes the cause of the Old Academy; and accordingly, 
after a long and intricate deduction and exposition of the origin and 
grounds of the other systems of philosophy, proceeds to maintain, That 
the "summum bonum" or "finis bonorum" consists in living "secundum 
naturam"<82>, in possessing that state of body and mind to which nature 
primarily and instinctively invites, and of which reason enlarges and 
corrects our view, teaching us to estimate the relative importance of 
the various "bona et mala" of life, from the free use of the meanest 
member of the body, to the command of the most exalted and diffusive 
virtue; That the seeds of the virtues composing in conjunction the 
"honestum", are implanted, in our common nature; That these virtues are 
valuable on their own account, and without reference to any advantage 
beyond themselves; That the most illustrious of them, are those which 
relate to and tend to promote social intercourse, though they contribute 
to the "summum bonum" solely as they respect the individual possessing 
them; and, finally, That, such is their transcendent excellence, the 
wise man must be happy in their possession, though he may be rendered 
happier still in the accession of other advantages.—This system, in its 
spirit, seems to have approached very near the purest and highest form 
of Epicureanism.

I do not observe the shadow of an attempt, in any quarter, to deduce the 
virtues from utility, in its modern sense of general good; or even to 
refer them to that cod. Wherever the word "utilitas"<83> is used, it 
seems to relate solely to the advantage of the individual.—With respect 
to the term "honestum", though sometimes rather loosely and vaguely 
employed in their theories, it appears properly and emphatically to 
include, and whenever they speak naturally and from the heart, it always 
denotes, those sentiments and actions which excite our moral 
approbation; the grounds of which approbation, they do not seem to have 
explored, but to have taken, the feeling itself, with our other 
appetites and passions, as a part of our nature.—The capital error, 
which most effectually misled the Ancient philosophers in their moral 
speculations, appears to have been, the looking in their "summum bonum" 
for what they-had exalted too high to find anywhere; and then 
endeavouring to restrict it to some specific possession. The Epicurean 
and Peripatetic systems, seem to have been the most free from this 
charge, by being the most enlarged in their scope.—The principle which 
gave credit and currency to those systems which placed the sole or the 
chief good in the "honestum", it is easy to guess. The philosophers 
pretended to teach, and their disciples aspired to learn, the art of 
living happily: now the goods of fortune they could not command, nor 
avert its evils; the main stress, therefore, would naturally be laid on 
those goods and evils which depend upon ourselves, and result from the 
government of the mind.

MAY the 17th

Read Gibbon's "Essai sur l'Etude de la Littérature":<84> an ostentatious 
performance; written with no apparent end, but to display the erudition 
of the author in two or three critical digressions—if indeed the term 
deviation can be properly applied, where there is no direct path. He 
defines criticism, section 23, "l'art de juger des écrits et des 
écrivains; ce qu'ils ont dit, s'ils sont bien dit, s'ils ont dit vrai 
historiquement";<85> and "l'esprit philosophique"<86>, of which he 
speaks in high-flown terms, the ability (section 46) "à pouvoir remonter 
aux ideés simples; a saisir et combiner les premiers principes".<87> In 
section 77, he maintains, "Que la beauté n'est peut-être fondée que sur 
l'usage. La figure humaine n'est belle que parcequ'elle se rapporte si 
bien aux usages, auxquels elle est destinée":<88>—the first "usage" is 
equivocal till it is explained by the second.

Finished Lord Bacon's Letters, edited by Birch. It is grievous to see 
this great man, who appears from various passages fully sensible of his 
vast powers and attainments, and impressed with a just confidence of the 
weight he would have with posterity, eternally cringing, and a beggar, 
to men so infinitely beneath him, and whom he must have felt to be so. 
One curious disclosure of his, in the heads of a proposed conference 
with Buckingham, struck me most forcibly. He was proposing to offer his 
services to go over to France to conduct a secret negotiation: "I have 
somewhat" says this Lord of human kind "of the French: I love birds, as 
the King does; and have some childish-mindedness wherein we shall 
consent"!

MAY the 20th

Finished Cicero's three Books "De Naturâ Deorum". In the first, Velleius 
maintains, and Cotta assails, the notions of the Epicureans; and in the 
second and third, Balbus expounds and defends, and Cotta once more 
endeavours to expose and explode, the doctrine of the Stoics, respecting 
the Gods: in the latter case, however, his attack is successful only 
against the particular conclusions of that sect; and to their general 
argument for a creating and superintending Providence, he has nothing to 
oppose but the existence of physical and moral evil. His salvo, Lib. 1. 
c. 22, at the outset, for his character as Pontifex, is highly curious.—
I do not exactly understand Cicero's conclusion from the whole debate: 
yet at the opening (Lib. c. 2,) he utters in his own person a sentiment 
sufficiently devout, "atque haud scio, an, pietate adversus Deos 
sublata, fides etiam et societas humani generis, et una excellentissima 
virtue, justitia, tollatur".<89>—It requires, I may here remark, a very 
vigilant attention a deméler<90> Cicero's real opinions, from those 
which he imparts to the various personages he brings forward in his 
Dialogues: even Middleton, on the important occasion of summing up his 
character, has fallen into some confusion and mistakes on this head.—It 
appears from c. 55. Lib. 2., that the Ancients conceived the blood to be 
diffused from one ventricle of the heart, by the veins; and the spiritus 
extracted by the lungs, circulated from the other, by the arteries—which 
indeed derived their denomination from this function.

MAY the 24th

Read Cicero's Treatise, "De Legibus." In the first Book, he undertakes 
to open the fountain from whence all law is derived, preparatory to 
treating of the laws of his own country; but I cannot say that he 
executes his task in a manner very clear and satisfactory to my mind, or 
which disposes me to think that he himself possessed any distinct and 
fixed ideas on the subject. From whence does moral distinction, which he 
makes the basis of all law, and the great object of his enquiry, spring? 
To this fundamental question, I gather, after diligent search, no other 
answer, than that it is the result of the right reason implanted in us 
by the Gods.—In the 2nd Book, assuming what he conceives he has 
established in the first, That Law is not of human invention, nor 
varying in different countries and ages, but, as proceeding from right 
reason, coeval with the great Author of all things in whom perfect 
reason must reside, and consequently the same in all times and places, 
he proceeds to inculcate the necessity of impressing on mankind the 
persuasion, that all things here below are administered by the Gods; and 
concludes with prescribing, for this purpose, various particular 
religious regulations, in which he approves himself a very Catholic 
Pagan, and exhibits the sad spectacle of a mighty river, sprung from an 
exalted source, and drawing abundant supplies from every quarter as it 
advances, which having long held on its steady and majestic course with 
a brimming current, and visited the most inviting and favoured regions 
in its progress,—finally loses itself, before it reaches its 
destination, in the sands.—In the 3rd and last Book, he descends, from 
the religion, to consider the political constitution and municipal 
economy of a state: but as his remarks are made chiefly with a reference 
to the particular polity of Rome, they contain little matter of general 
application or interest.

MAY the 26th

Read the 1st Book of Hooker's Ecclesiastical Polity. He defines Law, 
"that which modifies any power to the production of any effect"; and 
divides it into, 1st, That Law which God hath prescribed for himself in 
all his works; 2ndly, The Law of natural and necessary agents; 3rdly, 
The Law of animated brute agents, or the judgment of common sense and 
fancy concerning the sensible goodness of those objects whereby they are 
moved; 4thly, The Law of angels, or their intuitive intellectual 
judgment concerning the amiable beauty and high goodness of the objects 
which excite them; 5thly, The Law of voluntary human agents on earth, or 
the sentence of reason concerning the goodness of the things which they 
are to do; 6thly, positive conventional Laws; and 7thly, divine revealed 
Laws: but how reason, under the 5th head, distinguishes good from evil, 
and establishes a consequent Law, he by no means satisfactorily 
explains:—like Cicero, on this important and fundamental question, he 
leaves us, nearly as he found us,—much in the dark.—Hooker's march is 
uncommonly dignified and stately. 

JUNE the 3rd

Visited the Royal Exhibition; and was again struck and delighted with 
Turner's Landscapes: particularly with fishermen in an evening—a calm 
before a storm, which all nature attests is silently preparing, and 
seems in death-like stillness to await: and Caernarvon Castle, the sun 
setting in gorgeous splendour behind its shadowy towers:—the latter in 
watercolours; to which he has given a depth and force of tone, which I 
had never before conceived attainable with such untoward implements.-
Turner's views are not mere ordinary transcripts of nature: he always 
throws some peculiar and striking character into the scene he 
represents.

Viewed afterwards the Miltonic Gallery; and was powerfully impressed 
with the striking illustration it affords of Burke's Doctrine (Sub. and 
Beau.; p.2, sects. 3rd and 4th) respecting the superior efficacy of the 
indistinctness of poetical imagery, in exciting emotions of the sublime, 
over the necessary precision and exactness of actual delineation, 
however forcible and vivid. The example perhaps May be considered as not 
altogether a fair one—for Fuseli is unquestionably rather bombastic than 
sublime; and in his vehement struggles to embody the preposterous 
phantoms of a fevered brain, exhibits the writhings and contortions of 
the Sibyl, without the inspiration: yet he has done enough, I think, to 
show, how feeble and ineffective any attempt must be, to represent on 
canvas those awful and mysterious forms which our great Bard has 
shadowed forth, so impressively yet obscurely, in his immortal Poem.—The 
department in which Fuseli appears most calculated to shine, is in the 
fantastic portraiture of fairies, sylphs, and elves—where the wildest 
freaks of fancy may be safely indulged without offence to truth and 
nature.—He injudiciously represents the visions, and even the metaphors, 
of Paradise Lost.

JUNE the 8th

Visited the Orleans Gallery, Pall-Mall.-Several pictures by Raphael in 
the first room; none of which pleased me much: there was a hardness in 
the manner, a laboured stiffness in the design and drawing, and a 
general cast of resemblance to the illuminated frontispieces in old 
missals, in all of them; and Christ praying that the cap might pass from 
him, however prized (surely from mere pedantry, or at most an 
association with his latter and more perfect productions), was in no 
respect better, as far as I could discern, than one of these 
decorations.—Poussin's Seven Sacraments:—very fine, both in design, and 
colouring, the tone of which was admirably harmonious in all, and 
exquisitely clear and brilliant in some. Alexander and his Physician by 
Le Sueur;—a good deal after the manner of Poussin, but in colouring I 
think still preferable: this is the first production I have met with by 
this artist; and I shall be anxious to see more, The Ecce Homo by Guido, 
above all praise—I could only gaze upon it in silent admiration.—In the 
second. room, a St, John by Raphael, the Transfiguration from Michael 
Angelo, and Diana and Actaeon by Titian, fully vindicated, in my 
judgment, the transcendent reputation of these great artists 

JUNE the 13th

Had a long and interesting conversation with Mr. M., turning principally 
on Burke and Fox. Of Burke he spoke with rapture; declaring that he was 
in his estimation, without any parallel in any age or country—except 
perhaps Lord Bacon and Cicero; that his works contained an ampler store 
of political and moral wisdom than could be found in any other writer 
whatever; and that he was only not esteemed the most severe and 
sagacious of reasoners, because he was the most eloquent of men,—the 
perpetual force and vigour of his arguments being hid from vulgar 
observation by the dazzling glories in which they were enshrined. In 
taste alone he thought him deficient: but to have possessed that quality 
in addition to his others, would have been too much for man. Passed the 
last Christmas with Burke at Beaconsfield; and described, in glowing 
terms, the astonishing effusions of his mind in conversation. Perfectly 
free from all taint of affectation: would enter, with cordial glee, into 
the sports of children; rolling about with them on the carpet, and 
pouring out, in his gambols, the sublimest images mingled with the most 
wretched puns. Anticipated his approaching dissolution, with due 
solemnity, but perfect composure. Minutely and accurately informed, to a 
wonderful exactness, with respect to every fact relative to the French 
Revolution.—M. lamented, with me, Fox's strange deportment during this 
tremendous crisis; and attributed it, partly to an ignorance respecting 
these facts, and partly to a misconception of the true character of the 
democratic philosophers of the day, whom he confounded with the old 
advocates for reform, and with whose genuine spirit he appeared on 
conversation totally unacquainted, ascribing the temper and views 
imputed to them, entirely to the calumny of party. Idle and 
uninquisitive, to a remarkable degree. Burke said of him, with a deep 
sigh, "He is made to be loved". Fox said of Burke, that M. would have 
praised him too highly, had that been possible; but that it was not in 
the power of man, to do justice to his various and transcendent merits. 
Declared, he would set his hand to every part of the Preliminary 
Discourse on the Law of Nature and Nations, except the account of 
Liberty—a subject which he considered with Burke, as purely practical, 
and incapable of strict definition. Of Gibbon; neatly remarked, that he 
might have been cut out of a corner of Burke's without his missing it.—
Spoke highly of Johnson's prompt and vigorous powers in conversation, 
and, on this ground, of Boswell's Life of him: Burke; he said, agreed 
with him; and affirmed, that this Work. was a greater monument to 
Johnson's fame, than all his writings put together.—Condemned democracy 
as the most monstrous of all governments; because it is impossible at 
once to act and to control, and consequently the sovereign power, in 
such a constitution, must be left without any check whatever: regarded 
that form of government as best, which placed the efficient sovereignty 
in the hands of the natural aristocracy of a country, subjecting them in 
its exercise to the control of the people at large.—Descanted largely in 
praise of our plan of representation; by which, uncouth and anomalous as 
it may in many instances appear, and indeed on that very account, such 
various and diversified interests became proxied in the House of 
Commons. Our democracy, he acutely remarked, was powerful but concealed, 
to prevent popular violence; our monarchy, prominent and ostensible, to 
provoke perpetual jealousy.—Extolled in warm terms—which he thought as a 
foreigner (a Scotchman) he might do without the imputation of 
partiality, for he did not mean to include his own countrymen in the 
praise-the characteristic bon naturel,<91> the good temper and sound 
sense, of the English people; qualities, in which he deliberately 
thought us without a rival in any other nation on the globe.—Strongly 
defended Burke's paradoxical position, that vice loses its malignancy 
with its grossness, on the principle, that all disguise is a limitation 
upon vice.—Stated with much earnestness, that the grand object of his 
political labours should be, first, and above all, to extinguish a 
false, wretched and fanatical philosophy, which if we did not destroy, 
would assuredly destroy us; and then to revive and rekindle that Ancient 
genuine spirit of British liberty, which an alarm, partly just and 
partly abused, had smothered for the present, but which, combined with a 
providential succession of fortunate occurrences, had rendered us, in 
better times, incomparably the freest, wisest, and happiest nation under 
heaven.

JUNE the 15th

Visited for the first time (so strangely is it buried in obscurity) St. 
Stephen's Church, Walbrook. The interior architecture, rich, elegant, 
chaste; and (what may be deemed its appropriate and distinguishing 
merit) effecting much in a small compass. I doubt whether a Gothic 
building could have been constructed on the same scale, which would have 
produced an equal effect. The tendency, it is true, of the Gothic style, 
is to enlarge, and of the Grecian, as it is called, to reduce, the 
apparent size of the edifices to which they are applied: but the Gothic 
artist must have positive magnitude to work upon, or the imposition 
arising from real disproportion and seeming irregularity, would be 
detected and despised; whereas that exquisite order and symmetry, by 
which the whole of a Grecian structure, however stupendous in bulk, is 
brought at once within the grasp, still retain their charm, however 
limited the scale on which they are employed, and perhaps carry with 
them on this occasion something of the real majesty and grandeur of the 
objects with which they are usually associated.—This reads a little "a 
la Warburton"; but let it pass.—The Altar Piece, the stoning of St. 
Stephen, by West, struck me as incomparably the best production I had 
ever seen by that artist.

JUNE the 18th

Reached Speen,<92> yesterday; and strolled a pleasant circuit about it. 
The country round, highly beautiful: to the South, a rich expanse of 
cultivation; then rising ground, skirted with wood; and, above these, 
the broad backs of naked downs, giving a fine relief to the other parts 
of the scene: the battered ruins of Donnington Castle towering proudly 
on an eminence to the North, and the Priory standing in a delicious 
shady recess at its bottom.

This day reached Bath. Burst suddenly, from the edge of White-Horse 
Downs, on a vast and variegated expanse, spreading from below, and 
stretching far away before us as the eye could reach. Had a distinct 
retrospect of the White Horse, peeled from the surface of the chalky 
Downs, as far as Pickwick; presenting at a distance, over the 
intervening heights, a most singular and imposing aspect. From Pickwick, 
descended down the left side of a beautiful and luxuriant vale, opening 
in a superb vista to the South-West: passed the agreeable scattered 
village of Box; and, crossing the valley, pursued the right side of it, 
through Bath Easton, into Bath.

JUNE the 19th

Perambulated Bath. Captivating as are the beauty and symmetry of the 
buildings in this city, at first view, I begin already to suspect that 
we should be better pleased, in the long run, with the intricacy and 
variety of more irregular towns.—The great Ball Room, 108 feet by 42, 
and 42 feet high, as is usual in such cases, disappointed me. It is not 
in general, till we get back, and find the comparative inferiority of 
what we before esteemed considerable in the same way, that we become 
fully sensible of transcendent excellence in anything abroad. Perhaps a 
little pride, and a little vanity, mingles itself with our judgments on 
these occasions:—a little pride, which makes us disdain to be suddenly 
overpowered into an acknowledgment of the comparative littleness of what 
we once thought great; and a little vanity, by which we are afterwards 
led, amongst our neighbours, to arrogate to ourselves some portion of 
the consequence of those objects, which we have seen, and they have 
not.—The effect of the Lower Crescent, composed of twenty-eight noble 
houses, is unquestionably striking; yet viewed as one structure, it 
offends by the worst sort of disproportion—by appearing much too 
depressed for its extent.

JUNE the 20th

Drove to Clifton. Walked over the Downs to the remains of a tower and 
Roman encampment; and descended, down a chine a little beyond, to the 
banks of the Avon, which we pursued up to the Wells. The rocks which 
tower to the right, richly feathered with wood to their summits; those 
to the left, naked, abrupt, and precipitous; forming a fine contrast: 
the river at the bottom, a miserable muddy ditch: had it been an alpine 
torrent, the scenery of this romantic cleft would have been complete. 
Awful effect of the blasting of the rocks, reverberated from side to 
side, and dying away in distant murmurs. Tasted the water at the Wells; 
warm and milky, but without any perceptible mineral flavour: did it 
possess any peculiar sanative virtue, indeed, the inhabitants of Clifton 
would be pre-eminently blessed—for the same or a similar spring supplies 
the whole village. The air strikes us as uncommonly soft and balmy; and 
here, probably, if anywhere, resides the restorative Genius of the 
place.

JUNE the 21st

Visited Bristol; of which we caught a most striking coup d'oeil on our 
way, from the brow of Brandon Hill. The streets and buildings of this 
vast town, bear so exact a general resemblance to those of the City of 
London, that a stranger, not perfectly versed in every part of the 
latter, may sometimes forget himself:—I felt, more than once, the full 
force of this illusion.—Visited, with much interest, Radcliffe Church; a 
most grand and venerable pile. Three paintings over the Altar, by 
Hogarth—the Sealing of the Tomb—the Ascension—and Annunciation of it by 
the Angel: not much to be said for the design, in any of them; and the 
colouring, in his usual slight, but quiet and inoffensive style. Shown 
the armour of Sir William Penn, father of the Quaker; and the monument 
of William Canynge, which fixes his death to Nov. the 7th, 1474. 
Ascended the Tower, to a room containing the chests from which 
Chatterton professed to draw his Ancient Manuscripts:—long nearly as a 
coffin, and curved on the top:—falling fast to decay.

Entertained after dinner with a dulcimer: a stringed instrument, 
something like a small spinet; sounded on the wires with sticks of cane, 
and producing tones singularly plaintive, wild, and soothing.

JUNE the 26th

Reached Chepstow, by the Aust Passage, on the 22nd; and have since 
explored, in various strolls, its delightful vicinity.—The banks of the 
Wye here, though yielding perhaps in simple dignity to those of the 
Avon, are far more diversified with picturesque combinations of rock and 
wood and water. The Bristol Channel, as seen from the heights around, 
must disappoint those who have formed magnificent ideas of the mouths of 
mighty rivers: little short of the Andees, would be requisite to furnish 
a suitable back ground to such a breadth of waters while their turbid 
and terraqueous aspect, viewed even at this distance, will be forcibly 
and offensively felt by eyes accustomed to rest with delight on the pure 
and pellucid currents of the Menai straights, or the Solent.

JUNE the 27th.

Walked to Tintern. Attaining the highest point of the eminence on the 
road to Monmouth at a place called Chapel Hill, paused to enjoy a 
magnificent retrospect over the Grounds Of Persefield, the Town and 
Castle of Chepstow, and the variegated tract we had traversed, of the 
Severn, sweeping from behind the feathered rocks of the Wye, to the 
left, and, rapidly dilating in breadth as it advances, losing itself in 
the vast expanse of the Bristol Channel, to the right: the whole backed 
by the coast of Somersetshire, spreading to an illimitable extent in the 
distance, and distinctly marked with wreaths of smoke from the glass 
works at Bristol, not less than 20 miles off.—Descended by a tortuous 
and rugged road, amidst a prodigality of shade and the refreshing murmur 
of gurgling rills, into a deep and sequestered hollow, formed by. a 
sweeping recess of the Western banks of the Wye, and enclosing in its 
secluded bottom the village and abbey of Tintern: a delicious retreat; 
most felicitously chosen—(as where, indeed, have the founders of such 
establishments not evinced their taste and discernment in the choice of 
situation)—for the purposes of religious meditation and retirement.—
After encountering the thick enclosures and vile hovels which in every 
direction vexatlously obstruct the approach to the Abbey-Church, and 
intercept a distinct view of it, magical and sublime effect, on entering 
the West door, of the whole interior of this venerable pile, carpeted 
with velvet turf, and roofed by the azure sky:—the lofty side walls of 
the nave, bleached by an exposure of two centuries and a half, and 
beautifully stained with mosses and lichens of various dyes, retiring in 
long and deep perspective to the tall eastern window, aerially light, 
and gracefully festooned with wreaths of ivy:—an exquisite and 
inimitable picture; singularly, yet harmoniously, blending the solemnity 
of Gothic architecture with the cheerful gaiety of nature.—Strolled in 
the evening up the banks of the Wye, through the scattered village of 
Tintern:—many of the houses in ruins, and the whole place exhibiting 
strong marks of poverty and wretchedness. Ivy everywhere luxuriates in 
wonderful profusion: taking advantage of the general listlessness which 
reigns here, it has quietly forced its way into the little church of 
Tintern, and spread completely over the sounding-board of the pulpit, 
which it fringes very picturesquely.

JUNE the 29th

Reached Newport, 16 miles; keeping the Bristol Channel all the way in 
sight to the left.—Strolled after dinner, by a sequestered footpath, 
leading through Christ-Church wood, to Caerleon; a neat, quiet and 
retired town, invitingly situated on an extensive level of fertile 
meadows, intersected by the winding Usk, and bounded on either side by 
gentle but lofty acclivities, which gradually close towards the North:—
barren ridges of hill swelling boldly over the nearer heights to the 
West. Of the former grandeur of this once celebrated spot, could 
discover no vestiges, but the remains of a massy tower at the East end 
of the bridge, and a considerable tumulus, probably the site of the 
ancient keep of the Castle, lying a little to the North-West, on the 
opposite side of the river;—yet Caerleon was incontestably a Roman 
station of considerable distinction; and, if Giraldus may be believed, 
exhibited, so late as the 12th century, many interesting and splendid 
monuments of its former magnificence.

The Bridge here, like that at Chepstow, is lightly but compactly built 
of wood; and the platforms of both, are composed of boards loosely laid 
down and confined from slipping merely by tenons at their extremities 
projecting against a rail above:—not, as has been absurdly supposed, 
that they may rise and fall with the tide, for the play which the planks 
derive from this construction, is very inconsiderable; but to prevent 
their being blown up and carried off by it, as would probably be the 
consequence were they attached in the usual manner to the timbers below. 
The precaution, to those who look down from a height of not less than 50 
or 60 feet (a fearful and giddy height with such a footing) on the 
stream at low water, appears very superfluous; but so immense is 
sometimes the influx of the current from the tide pent up in the Bristol 
Channel, that almost every year's experience, we were told, evinces its 
utility.

JUNE the 30th

Reached Cardiff, by the lower road; an uninteresting drive of 12 miles. 
Viewed the Castle; occupying the West side of a quadrangular area of 
about 8 acres, enclosed by the Ancient walls of the fortress: a raised 
terrace walk, with occasional peeps over the parapets, running along the 
North and East sides, and terminating in a lookout from a tower at the 
South-East angle: the keep, a polygonal tower on a steep mound in the 
centre. The whole kept in very trim order; and the ancient apartments of 
the castle transforming, at a great expense, into something like a 
semblance of the snug accommodations of a modern dwelling. A few family 
pictures by Dahl and Kneller; a fine portrait by Vandyke; and a piece 
containing several heads, in fine preservation, by Holbein, decorate the 
walls. Holbein appears to have copied individual nature, just as he 
found it, with great exactness; and on this account to have failed in 
picturesque effect, which demands a greater breadth and force of light 
and shade than ordinarily occurs in real life. As far as he goes, 
however, he is truly excellent; and there can be little doubt that his 
likenesses were very correct.

Strolled afterwards to Llandaff, having, to the left, an immense expanse 
of level meads stretching away to Pennarth point; and, to the right, a 
luxuriant vale, 5 miles across, bounded by a range of heights sprinkled 
with houses and opening in a deep recess towards Pontypridd: Arthur's 
Butts, the loftiest of these eminences, capped with clouds. The city 
itself consisting of a few scattered hovels, interspersed, here and 
there, with a neat prebendal house. The nave of the Cathedral, the West 
front of which is fine, in ruins: the choir, new built, but in a most 
incongruous style of architecture; composing altogether a preposterous 
medley.

JULY the 4th

Returned from a pedestrian excursion round by Caerphilly and Pontypridd. 
Pursued the first 5 miles over a level plain; then winding up the range 
of heights in front, had an expansive retrospect, over the flat we had 
traversed, of Cardiff, Pennarth point (a bold headland), the Bristol 
Channel studded with the two islands called the Steep and Flat Holmes, 
and the Somersetshire coast in the distance.—Steep descent, to 
Caerphilly, lying in a deep hollow surrounded on all sides with 
mountainous swells:—a neat, well-built, and apparently thriving 
village.—Explored the castle; dreadfully shattered by violence and time, 
but still attesting prodigious strength and rude magnificence. Entered 
by the grand approach in the East front. The interior area, an immense 
enclosure, surrounded by a deep ditch and massy walls, and flanked by 
four gigantic towers, one at each angle: that at the South-East, solid 
as it is, reft to its foundation, and fearfully overhanging its base at 
least 12 feet. The great hall, of enormous dimensions, lying on the 
South side of the area; and covered galleries, communicating with each 
other and the different apartments by spiral staircases, running through 
the whole extent of this labyrinth of buildings. Connected originally 
with the first area by a drawbridge, and like that defended by a deep 
fosse, extends another court, projecting boldly, in the form of a vast 
bastion, to the West; and beyond this, are the remains of other out-
works advancing to a considerable distance in the same direction. The 
effort which it must have cost, to rear so vast a pile, is prodigious; 
yet there remains no certain history or tradition, I believe, by whom 
this stupendous labour was achieved. The next day, crossed over the 
mountains to Eglwysilan; a solitary church, the most wretched I have yet 
beheld; dark, damp, and gloomy, with crazy benches instead of pews, and 
raised graves of loose earth, some strewed with faded flowers, on the 
uneven floor of clay. Lost ourselves, for some time, in this forlorn and 
desolate region:—mountains swelling over mountains, in dreary succession 
and savage grandeur, to the North.-Descended, by a precipitous and 
rugged gulley in the mountain, into the romantic valley of the Taff, 
opening to the left in a narrow but superb vista, and exhibiting in 
remote but bright perspective, Pennarth Cliff, the Steep and Flat 
Holmes, the Channel, and the coast beyond it.—Striking effect of 
Pontypridd, seen from below: the span of the single arch 144 feet, the 
breadth of the bridge only 12; the abutments pierced, to lessen their 
pressure;—stretching, light as air, like a rainbow, across the river. 
Overpowered, in every other direction, by the magnificence of the 
scenery around;—so much so, that when we first caught a view of it from 
the heights above, we mistook it for a foot-bridge.—Pursued the Taff, 
raging over gigantic slabs of rock, and at a sudden bend to the left 
joined by another mountain stream pouring through a grand recess to the 
North-West, till we reached the Bridgewater Arms.—Ascended the cliff 
behind the inn, and examined a large slab of rock, perhaps 40 feet in 
circumference, and between 4 and 5 thick, sensibly, though slightly, 
librating, on a moderate pressure.—On our return this morning, followed 
the Taff for some miles, gushing with a pure and rapid current over its 
rocky channel, and bounded on either side by steep and picturesque 
acclivities, till we reached the gorge of the valley; into which we had 
peeped from the heights of Llandaff, and where it suddenly and abruptly 
expands, without any preparation, upon a level champaign. Perched on the 
extremity of the last rugged precipice to the left, tower the ruins of 
Coch Castle, guarding the entrance to the valley, and commanding an 
immense extent of country spread beneath it to the South.—Struck to the 
left, at the base of the hill which we had traversed on setting out; and 
rejoined the road to Caerphilly, a few miles from Cardiff.—All has been 
completely Welsh in this little circuit: English is scarcely understood; 
never voluntarily spoken; and, when attempted, badly and with 
difficulty, as a foreign language.

JULY the 7th

Visited, from Pyle, Mr. Talbot's grounds at Margam; lying, with the 
village, snugly sheltered under a steep and lofty screen of hill, 
thickly mantled from its base to its summit in wood. The fine collection 
of orange trees (the noblest I believe in the kingdom) disposed in 
square tubs round a basin; in a parterre, formed in the midst of a thick 
shrubbery, and sheltered on all sides by an amphitheatre of trees: 
perfuming the whole air of this calm and sequestered retreat, with their 
delicious odour. The Green-House, in which they are protected, except 
during the summer months, 275 feet in length; with two handsome square 
rooms at each extremity of this long-drawn vista, filled with antique 
statues, busts, and vases, and some exquisite models in cork of the 
principal ruins at Rome. The roof of the chapter-house, which, with the 
remains of the monastery, is enclosed within the grounds, and the 
impending fate of which Mr. Wyndham so feelingly deprecated in his tour 
more than 20 years since, fell in last winter, and covered its owner 
with disgrace.

JULY the 9th

Walked back from Neath, part of the way we had come, to view the scenery 
of Briton Ferry. Interesting track from the high road to the Ferry. To 
the right, the little sequestered church of Briton, and Lord Vernon's 
house and sloping lawns, embowered in foliage: to the left, a rocky 
knoll projecting as a cape between Llan-Bagton Bay and the mouth of the 
Neath River, richly tufted with trees and underwood, and formed into 
walks commanding in every direction the scenery around, and, from the 
summit to which they conduct, the whole sweep of Swansea Bay circling 
round to the Mumbles: in front, the Neath River, about a quarter of a 
mile in width, retiring to the right, before Lord Vernon's house, 
between folding crags feathered with wood to the very edge of the water: 
behind, a screen of steep and noble heights, skirted with wood below, 
but bare above, and giving a fine relief to the immediate features of 
this Elysian scene—altogether the most pleasing in themselves, and the 
most happily combined and agreeably diversified, I have ever beheld.—
Marked, on our return, a considerable druidical upright, in the middle 
of a meadow, to the West of the road, something short of two miles from 
Neath.

JULY the 10th

Strolled up the Western banks of the Neath River, under a noble screen 
of hill to the left, to Aberdillis Mill; where, in a deep and dark 
recess of the cliff, overspread with foliage, a torrent from the 
mountains, bursts through a chasm above, and thunders impetuously down, 
amidst huge slabs and masses of rock, tumbled into the wildest forms 
that fancy can conceive:—a wonderful little scene; quite a cabinet 
picture of Salvator Rosa's. Crossed the river above, and returned under 
the heights of Gnoll Castle:—ruined by that pest of modern improvement-
plantations of fir, extending their stiff and murky files in long and 
hideous array.—Awful effect, in the night, from the lurid and infernal 
glare of the furnaces round the town. But for the nuisance of these 
works—a growing evil—few places could boast a more delightful and 
inviting vicinity than Neath.

JULY the 12th

Crossed yesterday by Pont y Neath, over the mountains, to Brecknock, 32 
miles. Passed Aberdillis mill, and pursued for some way the banks of the 
Neath river, along its picturesque and richly wooded valley; then struck 
to the left, and climbing by a long and steep ascent into the heights 
above, traversed a region of mountain tops, bleak and wild, without 
signs of cultivation or inhabitants: the road dreadfully rugged, gulled 
with torrents, and in some places trackless; clouds gliding athwart 
barren ridges around us, and spreading, beneath, a night of shade:—a 
most forlorn and desolate scene. Opened, from a deep mountain hollow, 
beyond Pont y Neath, on a vale to the left, stretching magnificently 
downwards to Trecastle, and giving us once more a glimpse of the world 
below. Approaching Brecknock, skirted the huge base of the Monuchdenny 
or Van mountain, furrowed deep with torrents; its summit wrapped in 
clouds, diffusing a sad purple gloom over its hollows and recesses, far 
more awful and impressive than mere darkness, and which seemed at the 
moment to explain and justify (in one who must have often witnessed its 
solemn effect) Homer's epithet of πορφυρεος Θανατος.[porphyroeos 
Thanatos]<93>

Followed this morning, from the Collegiate Church, the whole extent of 
the Priory walks; winding picturesquely along the sleep, woody, and 
sinuous banks of the river Honddy, rushing with an impetuous current 
over its rocky channel below. Returned by a route above them; and had a 
clear and distinct view, over the gentle eminences which bound the vale 
to the South, of the whole form of the Monuchdenny Mountain—so 
conspicuous a feature from all the heights near Brecknock:—sharp and 
angular in its contour, and towering sublimely to its forked summit; 
supreme above all the aspiring heights around it. This is incontestibly, 
I believe, the loftiest mountain in South Wales: its height, by a late 
accurate measurement, was ascertained to be 2592 feet above the vale 
which separates it from Brecknock.

JULY the 20th

Reached Rhaiadrgwy, 29 miles from Brecknock, by Builth, 14. The Wye, 
which we have followed for the last stage, maintains much the same 
character here that it does a hundred miles below; pursuing, over a 
rugged channel, its rapid and devious course, between grand folding 
steeps, presenting, at every turn, new and diversified combinations of 
those elements of picturesque beauty—rock, foliage, and water.

In the evening, explored our way up a sequestered hollow, to the left of 
the heights on the Aberystwith road, and buried deep under their 
shelving steeps. A magnificent scene at the head of this grand recess: a 
mountain torrent, swelled by the late rains, and rushing from above, 
bursts down a groove at the junction of the cliffs, and tumbles in a 
succession of falls, sometimes conspicuous, sometimes hid, sometimes 
plunging in a stream, sometimes spreading into sheets of foam, for at 
least a quarter of a mile, and from a height not less than St. Paul's, 
between two gigantic precipices full a thousand feet high:—some 
venerable oaks, the skirts of a hanging grove to the left, throwing 
their branches wildly athwart the base of the chasm! As we lingered in 
silent admiration, at the foot of this grand spectacle, the dark and 
heavy clouds of the evening, gathering to a tempest, and shedding a 
solemn twilight on all beneath, came-slowly sailing up from behind; 
while a cormorant, startled from his solitary haunts by our presence 
suddenly sprung, with flapping wings, from the awful shade in, which we 
stood:—slight incidents; but of thrilling power, when fully accordant 
with the character and genius of the scene.

JULY the 23rd

Reached Llanidloes, 15 miles from Rhaiadr. Descending the heights to the 
town, had a gorgeous prospect before us of mountains rising over 
mountains: the Van, a truncated cone, towering grandly in front; the 
huge uplifted ridge of Plinlimmon, of gigantic bulk and transcendent 
elevation, stretching to the left; and the Severn, reduced to a mountain 
stream, winding its course from it through a cleft, skirting the town 
beneath, and pursuing its devious track through a noble vale spreading 
far away, to the right, towards Welshpool. Perambulated the town: 
consisting chiefly of four streets, intersecting each other at the 
Market-House; and composed of some of the best and some of the meanest 
buildings I have seen in Wales, strangely intermingled: here a 
respectable mansion, and next to it a straggling line of deplorable 
weather-boarded hovels, sordid with smoke and filth, without glass to 
the windows, and with ragged ends of plank tacked together for 
chimneys:—particularly in the suburbs. Passed, as we came along, some 
still more wretched huts, constructed solely of loose stones, sods, and 
faggots; and merely pierced, to let out the smoke and admit the light.

JULY the 24th

Crossed the Severn by the wooden bridge, just below its junction with 
the Lleweddock river, and pursued the latter for some way, gushing in a 
deep and romantic hollow to the left, thickly shrouded in wood: then 
struck to the right, and, with some difficulty of approach, gained the 
summit of the Van mountain, which had confronted us so nobly yesterday:—
evidently the highest ground immediately round Llanidloes. A gloomy 
tempest to the North, blackened and obscured everything beneath it; but 
to the West of the North, stretched the whole ridge of Plinlimmon, of a 
lumpish form and unimposing aspect, but uplifted upon other heights, and 
incontestibly supreme: farther northwards, as the weather cleared up, 
appeared the ragged summits of the Merionethshire mountains—two spiky 
tops, probably of Cadair Idris and the Arran, pre-eminent, with light 
fleecy vapours floating athwart them: to the East, spread, in a vast 
expanse, the vale of Severn; marked in remote distance by the peaked top 
of the Breddin mountain: to the South, lay Llanidloes; apparently at our 
feet, though 4 miles distant.

JULY the 25th

Ascended Plinlimmon. Pursued for 7 or 8 miles, the left bank of the 
Severn, dwindling by degrees to an alpine torrent, and raging at the 
bottom of a deep and narrow glen; our track hanging fearfully on a ledge 
to the right. Opened at length, between the receding heights, on the 
supreme ridge of Plinlimmon: its top saddened and obscured with driving 
storms; its sides furrowed deep with torrents. Entered an open and 
dreary moor extending to its base, and left our horses at a solitary 
hovel to the right, on a spot the most truly desolate and forlorn I have 
ever seen inhabited. Pursued our way up the side of the mountain, 
keeping the Severn torrent to our left, by a long but gradual ascent 
through perpetual bog; then struck to the right, and attained the 
highest elevation of the ridge, conspicuously marked to the surrounding 
country by two considerable piles of stones:—clouds driving and 
whirling, on all sides, with a rapid motion, beneath and athwart us; and 
allowing only partial glimpses of the mountain-tops around;—some, afar 
off, illumined by the sun, and exhibited, through the openings of the 
mist, in bright and beautiful transparency. To the left, an immense and 
dreary plain, extending several miles into Cardiganshire, and excluding 
all view in that direction. Crossed a part of this plain, intersected by 
deep grips formed in the loose texture of the boggy soil of which it is 
composed, about a mile, to visit the source of the Severn—a small rill 
of strongly chalybeate water, gushing down the side of one of these 
gullies;—and stopped, without difficulty, the course of this mighty 
river with my hand. The rise of the Wye, about 2 miles farther on; and 
of a similar character.—Of the view from Plinlimmon, we are incompetent 
judges; but there is nothing in the form or aspect of the mountain 
itself, remote or near, which is at all striking; and it owes its 
principal celebrity, I should suppose, to the two distinguished rivers 
which spring from it.

JULY the 26th

Drove to the Devil's Bridge, 20 miles. Met the Wye, and pursued it for 
some way, placidly meandering, to our left, over a pebbly channel; then 
crossed it, rolling as a torrent through a recess to the right, opening 
upwards to Plinlimmon. Pursued a wild and dreary mountain hollow, 
without tree or bush or brake, but here and there a wretched hovel; 
till, turning to the left, we opened on the spiky and jagged summits of 
the Cardiganshire mountains, towering one above another in sublime 
confusion. Overtook the Rheiddol, hid in a deep and feathered cleft to 
the right; and crossing the Devil's Bridge, ascended to the Inn, a 
solitary house, commanding nearly the same view which Grimm has heavily 
and feebly portrayed in Wyndham's Tour.—Spent the evening in feasting 
our eyes upon the scene before us; which is surely more romantic and 
delicious than ever fancy feigned—and cannot be described: soft vapours, 
as the evening advanced, steaming up the sides of the feathered clefts 
below, from the concussion of the waters; and the sun, from beneath a 
stormy cloud, with "farewell sweet", pouring his last glories on the 
heights above.

JULY the 27th

Visited the Monach, raging through a shaggy chasm from above, and 
working down its tremendous way, under the Bridge, through a yawning 
fissure in the black rock, worn smooth by its friction. Then walked to a 
projecting point of the cleft, and viewed the remainder of the fall:—400 
feet in the whole; but broken into four or five parts, and taking rather 
a curve to the right:—the spray, at the bottom, blown about like vapour. 
Explored our way down the side of the cleft through which it flows, to 
the Rheiddol; and climbed over the rugged rocks which form its channel, 
to the foot of the fall of that stream, which, diminutive as it appears 
from our window, is the perpendicular plunge of a considerable river, 
from a height of not less than 30 feet: a projection of the rock catches 
part of the stream in the first gush of its descent, and whirls it round 
with a fury that adds much to the grandeur and spirit of the effect.—
Descended afterwards by a slippery and precipitous track, through a 
thicket immediately beneath the Inn, to the foot of the great cataract; 
viewing all its falls successively in our way. The last plunge is down a 
steep, almost, but not quite perpendicular, of 120 feet, when the whole 
mass of waters raging headlong from above, is transmuted into foam; and 
part, encountering a ragged projection of slate rock, dissipated in 
vapour:—a maddening scene.—A storm came on in the evening, which raged 
with increasing violence till two in the morning, when it blew a 
hurricane. The stunning roar of the adjoining cataracts exasperated into 
fury by torrents of rain, heard deeply swelling in the pauses of the 
gusts, and sensibly shaking the earth with the momentum of their fall, 
beyond expression awful.

JULY the 30th

Visited Hafod, three miles from our inn, Col. Johnes'. Had the Monach 
for some way to our left; hid, like the Rheiddol, in a feathered cleft. 
Passed a mill upon it, from whence a woman, some years since, attempting 
to ford the river after rain, was—the blood curdles at the thought—
hurried away by the stream, precipitated down all the falls of the great 
cataract, and found floating, a mangled spectacle, half a mile below. 
Pursued our way over naked hills; then struck to the right, and burst 
suddenly on Hafod house and grounds, in a deep hollow richly mantled 
with wood, the Ystwith flowing through it—a scene of enchantment amidst 
this barren waste. The House sweetly sheltered to the North and East by 
richly wooded acclivities surmounted by bare heights rising behind; a 
waving Lawn spreads before it, the Ystwith rolls beyond, and then towers 
a lofty and magnificent screen of hill nobly shagged with timber to its 
summit. Made a tour of the grounds, by walks conducted with admirable 
taste along the steep side-screens of the valley, and, as they descend 
or climb or wind, exhibiting the scenery around, in all its possible 
combinations; the Ystwith, or some tributary stream, for ever murmuring 
in deep glens, raging over rocks, or dashing in cascades, and diffusing, 
at every turn, a new and refreshing spirit on the scene. Much struck 
with a waterfall, accessible only by a dark and winding passage hollowed 
through the rock, and which, after a long suspense, opens abruptly and 
closely, full in front, on the stream plunging from above into a deep 
and gloomy chasm beneath: the head of the cleft being immediately closed 
with rock, the narrow aperture at the top overspread with foliage, and 
the only exit for the waters an inscrutable fissure to the left—the 
effect of this natural picture, thus singularly circumscribed and 
illumined, seen from the dim twilight of the cavern's mouth, is 
altogether magical.—Col. Johnes, we were assured, had planted above 
three millions of trees. Were his example followed, Cardiganshire, from 
a stormy sea of bleak denuded hills, might be converted into one of the 
most pleasing counties in the principality: under the most unpromising 
aspect, a Hafod exists potentially in almost every valley.

Drove in the evening to Aberystwith, 12 miles. The road conducted on a 
sort of terrace, overlooking the hollow of the vale of Rheiddol to the 
right; and exhibiting, towards the latter part of the drive, a grand 
view of the Merionethshire mountains, gilded by a gorgeous sunset, and 
towering, one behind another, in striking tumult: Cadair Idris, with its 
double apex, distinctly visible; and Snowdon said to be so, but obscured 
by storms.

AUGUST the 1st

Perambulated Aberystwith; lying in a wide-spread opening to the sea, at 
the confluence of the rivers and the vales of Rheiddol and Ystwith, and 
between two noble cliffs rising to the North and South of the town. The 
two rivers, previously separated by the ridge we traversed yesterday, 
form a junction a little South of the town, and then run for some way 
parallel with the shore, before they meet the sea; presenting a very 
narrow, and, I should suppose, difficult entrance to the port.—The 
remains of the Castle, nearly effaced; and its area converted into 
pleasant walks, opening on the sea.—Ascended the lofty cliff to the 
North of the town; commanding the whole sweep of Cardigan Bay, from 
Bardsey Isle to St. David's Head;—the mountains of North Wales rearing 
their majestic heads one over another to the North West.

AUGUST the 3rd

Reached Machynlleth, 20 miles from Aberystwith. Passing Tal y Bont, an 
extensive prospect opens to the left, over an immense turbary and the 
estuary of the Dyfi, spreading to the sea. Skirted, after this, the 
Eastern acclivities of the vale of Dyfi; having the river winding to the 
left, and the heights of Merionethshire rising in great majesty beyond 
it. Every step we advance, the features of the country grow bolder and 
bolder; and we are sensible that what before struck us as grand in the 
Principality, would now appear inconsiderable. A most noble mountain. 
Tarren y Gesail—or Thunder beneath the Arm-Pit—throwing out its vast 
roots, and lifting its awful summit, wrapped in a night of shade, on the 
other side of the valley, approaching the town.

AUGUST the 7th

Crossed the valley of the Dyfi, and explored our way, by a narrow and 
rugged path, up one of the roots of Tarren y Gesail; having on either 
side a deep glen, richly feathered with thickets. Opened at length on 
the mountain itself, rearing its gigantic head most awfully above; and 
making a long sweep to the left, attained the foot of the steep and 
lofty ridge which forms its capital. Climbed laboriously up this last 
and stiff ascent, having a terrific precipice to our right, and then 
struck to the point where this crowning height projects roundly and 
boldly towards Cardigan Bay. A most transporting scene! The air 
clarified to keenest transparency by the late rains; and only a few 
light fleecy clouds floating far above the region of the mountain tops. 
To the North, apparently close at hand, rose the whole rugged form of 
Cadair Idris, with its jutting precipices craggy steeps and dark 
recesses, tapering in a jagged line to its supreme apex, and barring 
from its superior elevation all farther view in that quarter. In an 
opposite direction, ranged the heavy ridge of Plinlimmon, running out in 
the line of heights which break down towards Machynlleth. South of 
Plinlimmon, beyond the river, vale, and estuary of the Dyfi, spread the 
whole Western part of South Wales, comparatively flat, stretching out 
beyond the Preseli mountains—their summits blue and clear, their bases 
hazy—in a long-drawn line to the extreme rising of St. David's Head. 
South of Cadair Idris, extended the intensely blue summits of the 
Caernarvonshire mountains, projecting into the vast promontory of Llyn, 
shooting far into the sea, and pointed by the Isle of Bardsey—so 
exquisitely clear, that we could discern the surf, all the way, upon the 
shore. To the North-East, rose, sharp grey and clear, over intervening 
ridges, the two peaks of the Arran: and to the South-West, expanded the 
whole crescent of Cardigan Bay, from St. David's Head to Bardsey Isle, 
smooth as a mirror, and brightly burnished towards its centre with the 
midday sun.—I have missed few opportunities of ascending remarkable 
heights; but this is unquestionably the most magnificent mountain 
prospect I ever beheld,

AUGUST the 9th

Drove to Dolgellau, 15 miles.—Crossed the valley of the Dyfi, and wound 
in among the opposite hills, pursuing the river Dyflas along a luxuriant 
and romantic valley; the bare and lofty steeps of Tarren y Gesail to the 
left, surmounting with a grand effect the richly feathered crags and 
opening glens.—A little beyond the mill of Esgairgeiliog, the valley 
narrows to a pass, the road is hewn out of the rock to the right, and to 
the left soars to a stupendous height a most magnificent precipice 
luxuriantly clothed with loose and spreading foliage to its summit; the 
river Dyflas raging over its rocks darkly in a hollow beneath:—a scene 
of uncommon grandeur, and which would reduce to comparative 
insignificance the boldest features of the Wye. Entered a dreary region 
of mountain hollows, forlorn and wild; till approaching-the brow of a 
stem) descent to Talyllyn, burst suddenly on the whole majestic form of 
Cadair Idris, with its channelled sides, deep hollows, and rugged 
precipices, full in front, towering far above, descending deep below, 
and filling up with its tremendous bulk the entire opening before us: 
the lake of Talyllyn, bright as a mirror, diffused in a hollow to the 
left, between sloping steeps opening in a long vista on Towyn and the 
sea.—Struck from the bottom of the descent to the right, and climbed up 
a narrow and terrific pass, between the craggy roots of Cadair Idris on 
one side, and shattered precipices shooting up in fantastic forms on the 
other; all gushing with torrents, waving like threads of silver from the 
heights above, and bursting down with tremendous fury around. us. 
Emerging from this pass under the dark and awful brow of Craig y Llam 
impendent to the right, and traversing a dreary moor, magical effect of 
the expanded and diversified scenery round Dolgellau—lying at the bottom 
of a long and. steep descent before us, beneath the gigantic precipices 
of Cadair Idris towering to the left: the grey bare crag of Yroballt 
rising over the heights and woods of Nanney to the right; and, folding 
round a rocky promontory beyond the Town, in front, the vale to 
Barmouth—its level bottom intersected by a winding stream, and a grand 
sweep of mountain headlands, breaking down from the North, and towering 
one-behind another in sublime succession, forming its opposite boundary, 
and closing the scene with prodigious magnificence in that direction.

Strolled about the town: a most uncouth and extraordinary place; 
apparently growing in wild disorder out of the rock on which it stands, 
and from which it is scarcely distinguishable,—all the houses being 
composed of huge blocks of unhewn granite, rudely piled on one another, 
as they are torn from the neighbouring heights, and forming walls of 
stupendous thickness and grotesque aspect. Low buildings thus 
constructed, unless crushed by their own weight, must last for ever; and 
most of the houses, accordingly, bear the marks of great antiquity.

AUGUST the 18th

Still at Dolgellau. Our table, here, has become a sort of ordinary to 
the Inn; and we have been infinitely entertained, today, with a very 
extraordinary character under a most unpromising aspect—the Rev. Mr. T.; 
once the Porson of Oxford, for genius eccentricity and erudition. He has 
visited Germany, France, Switzerland, Italy and Sicily; conversed with 
Voltaire, had an interview with Rousseau, and was acquainted with 
Johnson. Scarce a place could be mentioned or a character named, with 
which, from personal knowledge or exact information, he was not 
perfectly conversant and though positive, captious, irritable, and 
impatient of contradiction, he amply atoned for all the rubs he gave us, 
by the acuteness of his remarks, the originality of his sallies, the 
vivacity of his anecdotes and descriptions, and the promptness and depth 
he evinced on every topic that was started, however remote from the 
ordinary track of conversation. Such a companion would be an acquisition 
anywhere, but was inestimable here.—Had spent an evening with Lavater, 
who pronounced him flatly, at first view, an incorrigible rogue:—L. 
himself, something more than an enthusiast, and very near mad; fancying 
that he resembles Jesus Christ in the countenance, with many other such 
preposterous whimsies. Represented the King of Naples, with whom he had 
frequently conversed, as perfectly stupid, sottish, and ignorant;—
literally scarcely able to write. Had twice attempted Etna; the second 
time successful, and saw from its summit the sun rise in all its glory:—
affirmed Brydone's glowing description of this gorgeous scene, however 
carped at, to be very correct, and not more than just. Described, with 
great force, his having heard a religious enthusiast preach his own 
funeral sermon, with the ghastly horrors of the "facies 
hippocratica"<94> depicted in his aspect—a thrilling spectacle.

We have been fortunate, too, in meeting with Mr. D. the grandson of the 
chronologist. He knew Hume well; and spoke of him as the most amiable of 
men, and of the most accommodating manners. Mentioned that his father, a 
Canon of Salisbury, piqued himself much, on having distinguished and 
patronised Burke, when quite obscure at Lincoln's Inn; and having then 
pronounced, from the rare combination he observed in him of transcendent 
ability and unwearied application, that he would become one of the 
brightest ornaments of his country.

AUGUST the 19th

Reached Bala, 18 miles. Pursued, for the first 9 miles, the valley and 
the river of Dolgellau, the former gradually narrowing to a romantic 
glen, the latter to a mountain torrent dashing in cascades at the 
bottom; the heights of the Arran rising steeply to the right, and the 
whole range of Cadair Idris towering in great majesty behind: Ascending 
the head of the valley, entered on a dreary moor, the Arrenig stretching 
to the left; and crossing the Dee near its source, opened on the lake of 
Bala—the largest sheet of fresh water in Wales, being about 5 miles long 
by three-quarterss of a mile in width; but, viewed in this direction, 
very deficient in picturesque effect, from the regularity of its form 
and the tameness of its shores: as we skirted its margin, however, the 
prospect improved; and from its farther extremity, near the Town of 
Bala, had a pleasing retrospect, over its whole expanse, and through the 
vista of its acclivities and the heights beyond—the Arran with its 
double peak rising to the left—on Cadair Idris, 20 miles off; planted 
there as if on purpose to be admired—though the level over which it is 
seen, is too elevated to gratify a true votary of that magnificent 
mountain.

AUGUST the 23rd

Crossed over, yesterday, to Ruthin, 22 miles. Left the Town of Corwen, 
lying snugly sheltered at the extreme foot of the Berwyn mountains, 
about a mile to the right; and passed soon afterwards near the remains 
of Owen Glendwr's celebrated entrenchment, forming a singular fillet 
round the Western brow of a commanding eminence on the opposite 
heights.—Sudden transition, and sweet effect, on entering transversely 
the vale of Clwyd—a luxuriant hollow, nearly 20 miles in length, and 
gradually expanding to 6 or 7 in breadth; tufted with trees, chequered 
with enclosures, sprinkled with houses, and smiling with cultivation: 
the evening, as we advanced, cleared up; and we seemed to breathe a 
balmier air, to behold a serener sky, and to enjoy a brighter sun, than 
we had for some time been accustomed to, in the mountainous region we 
had quitted.

Visited, to day, the remains of the castle; built of a reddish coloured 
stone, which, wherever it is employed (and a vein of it seems to run 
through nearly the whole western side of our island) has a meagre and 
miserable effect. Part of the Castle area—(of the Castle itself, little 
has survived the vengeance of Owen Glendwr)—converted to the peaceful 
purpose of a bowling-green, commanding a rich view down the whole extent 
of the vale of Clwyd to the sea.—The town of Ruthin, far more 
respectable than any we have seen in Wales: many of the houses very old, 
and with enormous uncouth porticos of most grotesque appearance to a 
modern eye; but kept in admirable condition; and the whole place (unless 
we are deceived by contrast with our late experience) exhibiting a 
remarkable air of neatness, tranquillity, and comfort.—The Town Hall, 
lately erected, is a handsome and commodious building; in which, with a 
laudable attention that deserves to be copied, every party in the Court, 
from the Judge to the witness, has a convenient and appropriate place 
assigned him. The saloon to the Court, forms, with some little 
incongruity, the Assembly Room: and here the convenience of the dancers 
has been consulted, for there is an artificial spring to the floor.

AUGUST the 24th

Pursued the Mold Road across the vale of Clwyd, and up a gap—Bwlch Pen y 
Barras—by which it traverses the range of heights that forms the Eastern 
barrier of the vale; passing the beautiful little church and village of 
Llanbedr, hanging sweetly on the slope of the hill, and overlooking the 
valley beneath. Found, on the crown of the height to the right, a large 
area encompassed with a double ditch and rampart.—apparently a British 
fortification, and constructed to guard this pass into the vale. Struck 
to the left, and pursued the extreme ridge of the range, sloping steeply 
away in both directions, about a mile and half, to its highest point of 
elevation, marked by a tumulus—Moel Vamma. Prodigious prospect. To the 
West, spread beneath us, was the whole expanse of the vale of Clwyd, 
from its amphitheatrical origin in a nook amongst the mountains near 
Llangollen, to its broad exit to the sea over the level marshes of 
Rhyddlan; intersected by the silver thread of its river, and beautifully 
variegated, through all its extent, with thickets, enclosures, villages, 
and villas:—Ruthin, Denbigh and its castle, and the city of St. Asaph, 
conspicuous features in it. To the North East, over the whole of 
Flintshire diffused beneath the projecting roots and shelving hollows of 
the mountain, and beyond the estuaries of the Dee and Mersey, (the 
former marked at its head by the dusky red walls of Chester, the latter 
on its sloping side by the white villas of Liverpool,) extended a long 
line of the Lancashire coast, stretching far away to the North, and 
faintly closed, in remotest distance, by the mountains of Westmoreland 
and Cumberland—dissolved in ether. To the East and South East, dilated a 
boundless expanse over Cheshire, Shropshire, and Staffordshire;—the 
insulated and solitary knoll of Beeston Castle, near Tarporley, starting 
very distinguishably from the general level. From the South to the West, 
over the intervening eminences, towered, in magnificent succession, the 
summits of all the conspicuous mountains in North Wales—the Arran—Cadair 
Idris—the Arrenig—Moel Shiabod—Snowdon—the Glyders—the Trevaen Rock—and 
Penmaenmawr.—A prospect altogether, for variety and expansion, probably 
unequalled in this island.

AUGUST the 28th

Reached Holywell. Pursued the left side of the vale of Clwyd, having the 
heights of Moel Vamma (viewed with fresh interest from having climbed 
them) ranging to the right, to Denbigh; passed the little and 
sequestered city of St. Asaph; and striking to the right, ascended out 
of the vale through a gap in the continuation of the Eastern heights, 
exhibiting a sweet retrospect of this beautiful tract—evidently scooped 
out far below the general level of the country on either side of it.—
Visited the celebrated spring at Holywell; of a bluish green tinge, and 
bubbling up, with great vehemence, in a basin under a rich shrine facing 
the North, a little below the church. From the basin, the stream 
immediately passes to a square reservoir, under cover, for the bathers; 
and thence to a small pool which it forms by the road side. Crutches and 
litters hung up in the shrine, as testimonials of its efficacy; but none 
apparently of a very recent date. Followed the stream down the 
picturesque glen through which it flows to the Dee, supplying impetus to 
many extensive manufactories on its way; and pursued the banks of that 
vast but insipid estuary, having a dreary expanse of level marshes to 
the left, as far as Flint. Flint Castle, on the edge of the marshes: 
exactly rectangular, like that of Rhyddlan, with a round tower at each 
of its angles: that to the South East, larger than the others, and 
detached from the rest of the building, with a curious covered-way round 
the interior base of it. Perambulated Flint; beyond all comparison the 
most dull, melancholy, and uninviting county-town I have ever beheld.—
Extensive view from the slope of the hill on which Holywell stands, over 
the estuaries of the Dee and Mersey, and the level champaign round 
Chester: Park-Gate and Neston, distinctly visible on the opposite shores 
of the Dee-: and Liverpool, with its spires and villas, faintly 
discernible, stretching in a long line, under a cloud of smoke, upon 
those of the Mersey.

AUGUST the 31st

Reached Tarporley. Walked, by an intricate road, to Beeston Castle; 
about 4 miles to the South-West of the town, and forming a very 
conspicuous feature from it. Stands singularly and boldly on an 
insulated rock, rising steeply from the South-East to the out-works of 
the fortress; then more gently to the castle itself, which occupies its 
summit; and under the farther walls of the castle, breaking abruptly 
down in huge and fractured masses of rock, projecting upwards, in the 
inclination of the strata, to the West, and fearfully overhanging a 
shelving precipice which slopes steeply clown into the plain below: a 
most commanding, and, till the invention of artillery, I should suppose, 
an impregnable position.—Expansive prospect, from the top, over an 
immense diffusion of level and cultivated country; bounded to the West 
by the Moel gamma range, and extending to the East as far as the Peak of 
Derbyshire.

SEPTEMBER the 1st

Reached Litchfield, through a country very tame and uninteresting: the 
first 20 miles unusually flat, and affording, all the way, a distinct 
retrospect of Beeston Castle. Visited the cathedral: the most rich in 
decoration without, and the most truly elegant within, of any in 
England; and kept in exemplary condition. The grand western front, 
profuse in images, exhibits a striking proof of the gorgeous effect of 
statuary as an architectural embellishment; and excites a deep regret 
for the general slaughter of these innocents at the Reformation. The 
choir, unusually large; occupying, with great propriety, and good 
effect, nearly half the whole building: the stone screen to it, most 
richly and lightly carved. The Ascension painted on glass at the East 
window, behind the altar:—a subject happily chosen (a point not always 
sufficiently consulted) for transparent effect. Two corresponding 
monuments to Garrick and Johnson, on the East side of the North 
Transept: severely simple—a plain tablet, surmounted by a bust in a 
shallow niche. Johnson's countenance far more powerful, in sculpture, 
than Garrick's. The inscription on Johnson, very tame and languid; 
describing him only as "a man of extensive learning, a distinguished 
moral writer, and a sincere Christian"—unquestionable truths, but feeble 
characteristics. The Palace and Gardens, very unassuming.—Reconnoitred, 
with much interest, Johnson's father's house-a large corner building, in 
the Market-place, of white plaster: the projection of the first floor 
over the shop, supported by wooden pillars; and pilasters rising above, 
to the roof: three stories high: apparently much in the same condition 
as it must have been in, when the old bookseller occupied it.—Observed 
an inscription on a house in a street leading from the South towards the 
Cathedral, purporting, that Lord Brooke was killed on the spot beneath, 
by a ball in the forehead, shot by a Mr. Dyott from the principal Tower 
of the Cathedral, March 2nd 1643; as his Lordship was besieging the 
Close with the Parliament forces.

SEPT. the 6th

Visited once more—and never without fresh emotion—King's College Chapel, 
Cambridge. I should not choose to oppose this Gothic edifice to a 
Grecian temple, because it is deficient in some of the most striking 
features of Gothic architecture as displayed in our cathedrals; but 
perhaps it affords a still prouder triumph, as it evinces what Gothic 
architects could effect, without their aid, upon a Grecian ground-plan. 
The screen to the choir, rich in carving, and grand in its tone of 
colour, is unquestionably fine in itself; but, for once, I should like 
to see it removed, and try the effect of this magnificent parallelepiped 
on in one unbroken continuity. The exquisite preservation of the whole 
interior of the building, is wonderful: it seems, to its minutest 
ornaments, sharp and pure, as if fresh yesterday from the mason's and 
statuary's chisels.

Viewed Long's concave celestial sphere:—a sublime conception. In a 
shamefully neglected state. What would be the worthy projector's 
feelings, could he view his favourite piece of mechanism thus 
obliviously dropping to decay!

Went with Mr. H. of Sidney, to his rooms; and saw, for the first time, 
what I have long wished to see, some of Gilpin's original sketches in 
Indian ink:—very masterly; and asserting a claim to the highest species 
of merit, by producing great effects with little effort.—H. speaks con 
amore<95> of Gilpin, as a friend, a companion, a pastor, and in every 
social relation. Afflicted with an incurable complaint; but perfectly 
resigned to his fate; and complacent, and even cheerful, under it. It is 
delightful to find our admiration of the writer, confirmed, on a nearer 
view, by qualities which must secure our esteem for the man.—H. showed 
me the copy of a Letter from Mason to Gilpin (with Gilpin's comments) 
written on the same day that Mason was struck speechless, and within two 
of his death: very easy, gay, and spirited:—he had no presentiment of 
his danger.

SEPT. the 21st

Received through Lord C. a flattering message from Dr. P—r; in which, 
"not with the scanty and penurious measure of a critic by profession", 
but, evidently, from the overflowings of a heart warmed with the 
subject, he bestows his commendations on the little pamphlet I published 
last year. "Laudari a laudato viro"<96>—to be thus commended, by one to 
whom I am utterly unknown, and from whom praise is of such value, and 
this amidst the cautious reserve of some from whose friendship I should 
have expected a more encouraging reception, is a gratification to which 
I cannot be insensible: yet the predominant and final effect upon my 
mind, has been depression rather than elation. How is this? Opposition 
and indignity, I believe, have a natural tendency to rouse, condense, 
and invigorate; excessive favour and commendation, to dissipate, relax, 
and enfeeble, our energies and spirits. When stung with neglect, or 
galled by injuries, the mind, bent back upon itself, and driven to its 
own resources for support, collects its scattered strength, fastens on 
whatever is excellent in its faculties or achievements, and dilates with 
conscious pride:—when hailed with eulogy which we are sensible far 
exceeds our deserts,, after the first tumultuous throbbings have 
subsided, all our defects and infirmities rise up in appalling array 
before the judgment; and the heart, sickening at the spectacle, sinks in 
despondency within us. Such, I should suppose, would be the general 
feeling: except with very superior minds, who are above all disturbance 
from such causes; or with those happily gifted beings, those fools of 
fortune, provoking rather our spleen than our envy, who enjoy the 
blessing of perfect self-satisfaction and complacency, and as they are 
completely callous, from vanity, to censure, are enabled, by the same 
principle, to swallow, without being cloyed, any measure of praise.

SEPT. the 25th

Looked over the last Vol.—(the first I have been able to meet with)—of 
Maty's Review. There is a negligent ease, and artless vivacity, in his 
manner, which are highly engaging: his first impressions, however, 
though generally just, sometimes mislead him. He surely speaks too 
irreverently of Johnson, when (Art. 10., March 1786) he confirms Mrs. 
Piozzi's description of him, as a man of little learning and less taste! 
"The little black dog", must have operated on this occasion. To have 
been deluded, too, by such a meteor as Heron, alias Pinkerton, was 
rather unlucky.—He mentions (Literary Intelligence Feb. 1786) a new 
Lyceum opened in Paris, with the following Professors: History, 
Marmontel; Literature, De la Harpe; Mathem., Condorcet; Physics, Monge; 
Chem. and Nat. Hist. Fourcroi:—what a set! The account of the conference 
with the Bohemian Deists (Art. 7, August 1786), is very curious: they 
seem to have been plain sensible fellows.

Read the 1st Vol. of Barruel [Memoirs, illustrating the history of 
Jacobinism] on the anti-Christian conspiracy; in which he has expanded a 
sentence of Burke, into a ponderous Volume. The poor Abbé, in the warmth 
of a zeal which out-steps all discretion, unfortunately takes more 
ground than it is possible to defend by any powers; and exhibits, at the 
same time, but a feeble specimen of his own.

SEPT. the 26th

Read the 2nd and 3rd Volumes of Barruel—on the Anti-Monarchical, and 
Anti-Social, Conspiracies. He considers, perhaps justly enough, 
Montesquieu as the original introducer, and Rousseau as the ultimate 
perfecter, of the democratic system of political philosophy in France—
though he might have traced it much higher here; but in struggling to 
lug the Freemasons into the conspiracy, he surely raves. That the 
Masons, like other men, might be perverted by this new mania; that their 
notions of brotherly equality might even predispose them to receive it, 
is perfectly credible: T—y, who was himself a Mason, told me at 
Dolgellau, that when he visited a Lodge at Paris, 20 years since, he 
found them all charged up to the muzzle (as he expressed it) with 
Jacobin principles, and ready for explosion: but that this curious and 
ancient society was originally instituted to cherish such principles 
under a veil of mystery, surpasses all belief. The anti-social 
conspiracy of the Illuminées in Germany, founded by Weishaupt, bears 
much stronger marks of authenticity, since it would be difficult to 
invent, for the purpose of imputation, an institute of discipline and 
doctrines so exquisitely adapted to the ends they aim at. The 
fundamental tenets of this Order, were, That all inferior local and 
partial affections, should be absorbed and merged in an aspiration for 
the general happiness; That whatever conduces to this happiness, is 
virtuous, the end sanctifying the means; and, That the only restraint to 
which we should be subject in the prosecution of this object, is Reason. 
Was Godwin an Illuminée?

Read Gilpin's General Preface, and Prophetic Life of Christ, prefixed to 
his Exposition of the New Testament. His easy manner of treating 
subjects, will not do, where there are real difficulties to encounter.

SEPT. the 29th

Finished Hurd's Lectures on the Prophecies. The same spirit of 
discrimination which leads him, on some occasions, to distinguish too 
subtly, prompts him, however, on others, to view a question in all its 
phases, and not to content himself, as writers of a more sanguine 
temperament too frequently do, with one leading circumstance, in the 
solution of a difficulty, where many ought to be taken into account as 
conspiring to solve it: he is often eminently happy in this respect. In 
the character of objector, he frequently proposes his objections in very 
irreverent—not to say, indecent—terms. They certainly ought to be 
proposed strongly, and met as he meets, them—directly and fairly, in 
their full force, without diminution or evasion.—His style, abating a 
few affected impurities from quaint idioms and colloquial cant, is 
really a fine one; and his account of Mede, in the 10th Discourse, is in 
every respect—in sublimity of conception, and in felicity force and 
grandeur of expression, worthy of Burke.—P—r, Lord C. tells me, is 
satisfied that Hurd altered his Life of Warburton, in consequence of 
what he wrote: had he found in it, what he expected to find, he meant to 
have entered into a general review of Warburton's life, character, and 
writings. How splendid and appropriate a field for the exhibition of his 
talents!

Read the 4th and last Vol. of Barruel; in which he labours to deduce the 
conjoint agency of the three conspiring Sects against Religion, 
Monarchy, and Social Order, as operative in the French Revolution. The 
poor Abbé has unhappily more zeal than judgment; and is at the same time 
dreadfully heavy and ineffective in his movements: with all its 
absurdities, however, his work might furnish matter for another, of 
some, interest, in which the rectified spirit should occupy the text, 
and the substance from which it is drawn, the Notes.

OCTOBER the 1st

Finished Bishop Shipley's Works; to the reading of which I had been 
powerfully recommended by M——h. A vein of good sense, expressed in an 
original, unaffected, and frequently energetic and impressive manner, 
runs through the whole of these compositions. In religion, I suspect the 
Bishop was a great latitudinarian. In morals, though manifestly 
enamoured of the principle of utility as a standard of right and wrong, 
and applying this principle pretty largely, he still seems to cherish a 
salutary prejudice in favour of the manners and institutions of our 
forefathers. In politics, though espousing a side which in a prelate 
must always be admired, I confess he meddles more than I could wish; 
for, in spite of all he urges to the contrary, it is much to be feared, 
that the character of a teacher of Christianity as it stands revealed, 
and of a political partisan, as parties prevail, are utterly 
inconsistent. In his intended Speech on the Massachusetts Bill, a very 
masterly performance, he takes up Burke's view of the question; and 
waiving all consideration of the right to tax the Colonies, maintains 
the impolicy of so doing, with great ability and force.—It seems 
difficult to conceive two characters, placed in the same sphere, more 
opposite than Hurd and Shipley; and it would be pleasant to know, though 
it is easy to guess, what sentiments these Right Reverend Gentlemen 
entertained of each other.

OCT. the 3rd

Read the first Vol. of Hurd's Sermons at Lincoln's-Inn. In the 3rd he 
not only maintains that we have a natural sense of right and wrong, 
independent of all revelation, but insists that, without it, we could 
never ascertain whether any revelation were true: and then vindicates 
Christianity, not simply as useful, from confirming, illustrating, and 
enforcing, the dictates of this sense, but as necessary for the 
redemption of mankind. This is quite after his distinguishing manner.—In 
the 8th, he makes Sympathy the natural parent of the social virtues; 
observing that "God has implanted in man, not only the power of reason, 
which enables him to see the connexion between his own happiness and 
that of others, but also certain instincts and propensities, which make 
him feel it, and, without reflexion, incline him to take part in foreign 
interests: for, among the other wonders of our make, this is one, that 
we are so formed as, whether we will or no, to rejoice with them that 
rejoice, and to weep with them that weep": and in the next Discourse, he 
adduces this principle, as that natural corrective upon "a conscious 
sense of dignity"-(leading by itself to an offensive injurious pride)—
which constitutes politeness; and maintains, that the perfection of our 
nature consists in the due operation of both these principles. His 10th 
Sermon, and the last in the Volume, are fine examples of his "toils in 
chasing the subtle".

Perused with much interest, in the European Magazine for last month, 
Hoole's account of his intercourse with Dr. Johnson during the last six 
weeks of his life. So great a man, approaching that awful term to which 
he had always looked forward with such horror, is a most awakening 
spectacle, and rivets the attention. What a composition does he exhibit, 
on the occasion, of strength and weakness!—With Lives of Johnson to a 
surfeit, we have nowhere, I think, a masterly analysis of the mind of 
this wonderful man; which, while it confounds the stoutest by the 
promptitude and vigour of its powers, may furnish to the feeblest the 
flattering unction of a sneer.

OCT. the 12th

Perused Barton's Preface to his Edition of Plutarch's Lives of 
Demosthenes and Cicero; which Dr. P—r had recommended to Lord C's. 
attention, as a very masterly piece of criticism. The part in which he 
vindicates Plutarch, by distinguishing biography from history, 
illustrating the advantages of the former in conveying a knowledge of 
the human character, and displaying Plutarch's peculiar use of it in 
kindling emulation by exhibiting patterns of virtue, is particularly 
excellent: but the portico is too august for the temple; for the Lives 
themselves, are but meagre compositions; and in the parallel between the 
two orators, Plutarch leans shamefully in favour of his countryman.

OCT. the 14th

Read the 3rd and last Volume of Hurd's Sermons.—The first of these, is 
of a very peculiar character: there is a pithy sententious brevity of 
period, and deep earnestness of manner in it, strikingly different from 
what we meet with in any of the other Discourses.-The 4th, in which he 
deduces the divinity of the Gospel, from "never man spake as this man"; 
and the 7th, its authenticity, from "we preach not ourselves but Christ 
Jesus the Lord", are most powerful addresses. Such internal marks of 
truth as are here forcibly exhibited, weigh more, in my mind, than all 
the external evidences of Christianity put together; and, for strokes of 
eloquence, what can be finer than this passage in the 4th, "When a voice 
speaks, as from heaven, it naturally turns our attention to that 
quarter; and when it speaks in inimitable thunder, it speaks, methinks, 
like itself, and in accents that cannot well be misunderstood", 
judiciously prepared, too, as this sublime ejaculation has been, by what 
precedes it—for I feel, while I am transcribing the sentence, how much 
it suffers by this detached exhibition.—In the 14th, he divides the 
different cardinal principles upon which the various systems of moral 
philosophy hinge, into, 1st, abstract truth, or the differences of 
things; 2ndly, an instinctive moral sense; 3rdly, private happiness; and 
intimates that these systems might be made to consist together; but 
maintains that they do little more than inform us what virtue is, while 
they slenderly provide for the practice of it:—he had his eye, here, on 
Warburton's Div. Leg. B. 1, Sect. 4.—In a note to his 1 9th Sermon, he 
observes, that Christianity is a religion founded, not on opinions, but 
facts: that the Apostles showed, by their sufferings, that they knew 
what they attested to be a true fact; succeeding sufferers showed, that 
they believed it to be so.—On the whole, I have never met with 
discourses, which, without yielding to the prevalent laxity of opinion, 
are so admirably adapted to work upon the reason and feelings of the 
age, as these.

OCT. the 18th

Finished Gilpin's Exposition of the four Gospels. Luke appears to 
narrate what he had collected, with great sobriety: not spying out the 
accomplishment of a prophecy in every incident, like Matthew; nor 
indulging that propensity for the marvellous, which, with all the 
paraphraser's smoothings and glossings, strikes an unprejudiced mind, 
most forcibly and revoltingly, in Mark. John manifestly labours to 
obviate scruples and objections, through the whole of his narrative; and 
particularly in what he represents Christ as saying. The last Chapter in 
this Gospel, must surely stagger the most implicit believer: it has to 
me strongly the air of having been subsequently appended.—Is it not very 
extraordinary, that Matthew should alone assert so important a fact as 
the sealing and guarding of the tomb; and that John should alone record 
so striking a miracle as the resurrection of Lazarus?

OCT. the 21st

Finished a review of Cicero's tract De Officiis; in which he treats his 
subject far better than we should be led to expect from the preposterous 
distribution he makes of it, and with which he is evidently in a state 
of perpetual struggle through the whole disquisition.

All duty he derives from the "honestum"<79> and the "utile"<97> in human 
character and conduct. The "honestum" he resolves into, 1st such 
qualities as tend to advance our knowledge of truth, 2ndly such as 
contribute to the maintenance of society—chiefly justice and 
benevolence, idly. greatness of mind, and 4thly a certain decorum in 
whatever we say or do; and proceeds, in the first Book, to treat of the 
duties flowing from this principle, thus strangely divided, and of the 
preference to be given where they interfere with each other. In 
discussing the last branch—the decorous, he confounds it (c. 27), as 
might be expected, with the root from which he considers it as derived—
the "honestum"; but afterwards exhibits an exquisite discrimination, 
when he comes to apply his ideas to particulars; and most eminently, 
when he illustrates (c.31 &c.) how much personal decorum depends on the 
particular genius of the character where it obtains.—"Communis 
utilitas"<98> is twice mentioned (c. 7 and 10); 1st as constituting one 
of the two branches of justice, "ne cui noceatur—at communi utilitati 
serviatur";<99> and 2ndly as modifying the general duties of that 
virtue: it is, however, but faintly recognized, compared with the modern 
importance assigned to this principle.—In the 2nd Book, he proceeds to 
consider the duties flowing from the 2nd of his two divisions—the 
"utile"—by which he evidently understands, the good of the individual; 
and regarding mankind as the principal agent by which we can be 
benefited or injured, he confines himself, almost entirely, to the means 
by which we may conciliate their good will; touching very slightly, at 
last, upon the goods of health and wealth, and the "comparatio 
utilitatum".—In the 3rd Book, he proposes to adjust the duties of the 
"honestum" and the "utile", where they interfere. Well! but if the 
"honestum" is, according to the Stoics, the solum, and according to the 
Peripatetics, the summum bonum<100>, the "honestum" and the "utile" must 
be the same; and how can any competition arise between them? Yet there 
are cases—(tyrannicide to a Roman, for instance)—where the "honestum" 
must give way to a paramount expediency; where morality, as Burke 
somewhere says, suspends its rules for the preservation of its spirit: 
here then Cicero is obliged to maintain, not indeed that "utilitas vicit 
honestatem", but something very like it, that "honestas utilitatem 
sequitur"<101>. The great danger, however, is on the other side—that men 
should think "est istuc quidem honestum, verum hoc expedit",<102> that 
that should appear to be "utile" which is "turpe"<103>: against this, 
therefore, he manfully and eloquently contends, "viris equisque"<104>, 
through the greater part of the Book; maintaining, with an amiable 
inconsistency, not merely "est nihil utile, quod idem non 
honestum"<105>, but, against those who asserted that "quod valde utile 
sit, id fieri honestum"<106>, that "nec quia utile, honestum est; sed 
quia honestum, utile".<107>-Much confusion seems to have arisen amongst 
the Ancient philosophers, from employing "utilitas" to denote, sometimes 
the private advantage of the individual, and sometimes the public good.

Cicero (Lib. 1. c. 12) praises the mildness of Roman manners, which give 
to an enemy the appellation of a stranger—"hostis": does not this term 
rather indicate a barbarous ferocity, which gave to a stranger the 
appellation of an enemy?—The doctrine that government is instituted for 
the sake, not of the governors, but the governed, is well stated (Lib. 
1, c 25) "ut enim tutela, sic procuratio reipublicae, ad utilitatem 
eorum qui commissi sunt, non ad eorum, quibus commissa est, gerenda 
est"<108>.—In Lib. 2, c. 12, he ascribes the origin of kings, and thence 
of laws, to the struggles of the poor and helpless, against the 
oppression of the rich and powerful.—Speaking of thieves, assassins &c. 
(Lib. 3, c. 18) he says "non verbis sunt et disputatione philosophorum, 
sed vinculis et carcere fatigandi":<109> "it is not the syllogism of the 
logician, but the lash of the executioner, which should refute a 
sophistry that becomes an accomplice of theft and murder", says Burke in 
his Reflections: a striking resemblance, I apprehend without any 
imitation.

OCT. the 24th

Read Cicero De Senectute: a most exquisite and finished disquisition; 
with which it appears evident, from the last Chapter, that Burke was 
very familiar.—Read afterwards his "De Amicitia"; though a very 
engaging, a much less perfect, composition, I think, than the former. 
Cicero here (c. 9) affirms of Friendship, what I have said of Virtue, 
"quanquam utilitates multae et magnae consecutae sunt, non sunt tamen ab 
earum spe causae diligendi profectae":<110> and again (c. 14.) "non 
igitur utilitatem amicitia, sed utilitas amicitiam consecuta est"<111>.—
In his Stoical Paradoxes, this accomplished orator has amused himself 
with endeavouring to give a popular air to the extravagant and revolting 
doctrines of this arrogant sect of moralists; and his success has been 
greater than the subject deserves.

Looked into Park's interesting Travels in the interior of Africa. I 
observe that in the numeration which obtains in many of the African 
states, they advance no farther than 5; recurring to 5 +1, for 6, &c. 
They reckon the fingers of only one hand; we, of both.

OCT. the 30th

Looked into the first three Volumes of Maty's Review. His negligent easy 
manner, for want of adequate stamina to support it, sometimes 
degenerates into flippancy and pertness: his critique, however, on the 
Poem of "Les Jardins" by the Abbe de Lisle (Art. 17, June 1782), is 
wonderfully animated and fine:—he catches, like Longinus, the spirit of 
his author; and blazes into congenial excellence with him.—It is amusing 
to mark his speculations, in the first article for Jan. 1783, on the 
probability of a change in the government of France. an event which he 
thinks not likely to take place in the then reign, nor for a great 
length of time, and at last only from the extreme misconduct of its 
rulers;—but which in fact did take place within 7 years from his penning 
of that article, and without the immediate agency of any such 
misconduct.

It appears from a Paper in the New Annual Register for 1798, that 
Gibraltar is an oblong rock, about 3 miles in length, and three quarters 
of a mile in breadth: its summit, a sharp craggy ridge sinking in the 
middle; the Sugar Loaf, its Southern apex, 1439 feet; the Rock Mortar, 
its Northern, 1350, and the Signal House, in the centre between the two, 
1276 feet, above the level of the Sea. The whole description is 
remarkably clear.

NOVEMBER the 3rd

Read the first 6 chapters of May's History of the Long Parliament; 
containing a retrospect of affairs, down to its assembling. With an air 
of great impartiality and candour, supported by an equable and tempered 
gravity, it is impossible not to perceive that he inclines decidedly to 
the popular side. He represents the higher ranks of the people as in 
general content with the proceedings of the Court, while the middle and 
inferior orders were as generally averse to them; and strongly marks the 
spirit of enquiry respecting public affairs, which began to spread among 
the latter.—The previous embroilment with the Scotch, strikingly 
prefigured what was to follow in England. Charles' high pretensions, and 
impotence to enforce them—the strange mixture, in his character, of 
pertinacity and irresolution—and the shuffling evasive conduct resulting 
from this unlucky combination of qualities—on the one part; and the 
determined spirit of resistance in the people, supported by enthusiasm, 
sharpened by suspicion, and incapable of being appeased by anything 
short of unlimited compliance, on the other, are strongly evinced in 
that preliminary rupture.—It is curious that the Long Parliament should 
have met precisely on this day, 159 years since: a Jenkins might have 
remembered its assembling.

Finished Gilpin's Exposition of the Epistles. The Epistle to the 
Hebrews, I should decide from internal evidence, not to be Paul's: it 
has the cloudy character, rather of dullness, than enthusiasm; nor is it 
irradiated with a single gleam of that genius, which occasionally 
flashes, in irregular and awful coruscations, through the "palpable 
obscure" of the other compositions of this Apostle.—After all—are these 
productions such as we should expect, from persons divinely inspired to 
unfold the whole mystery of the Christian Dispensation, and endowed with 
the power of working miracles to evince its authenticity?

NOV. the 7th

Finished the 1st and read the 2nd Book of May's History. With all his 
apparent coolness and candour, he leans most unequivocally and decidedly 
to the side of the Parliament; whose proceedings he exhibits in the most 
plausible and imposing form, while he is ever insinuating the worst 
construction upon those of the Court: yet it comes out, I think, from 
his own account, that the conduct of the House had at last begun to 
disgust a great portion of the sober and reflecting part of the kingdom; 
while the prevailing party there, derived their grand support from the 
rabble of the City. In their third Remonstrance, they distinctly assert; 
"That all regal power is merely a trust for the good of the People; that 
the Parliament, while sitting, is the sole judge of what is good for the 
People; and, consequently, that they should be the King's sole 
counsellors and directors in the exercise of the power with which he is 
thus entrusted";—in other words, that the King should be merely their 
ministerial officer: a claim, which however it might be warranted by the 
exigencies of the times, is certainly most foreign to the true genius of 
our Constitution.—With respect to the great cause now at issue, without 
adverting to those particular circumstances of character and incident 
which gave a peculiar bias to the case, the leading feature seems simply 
this.—We had been gradually advancing from that rude state of society, 
in which exertions of political power are regarded merely in their 
immediate consequences, and relished or distasted, encouraged or 
opposed, as these are directly felt to be beneficial or oppressive, to 
that in which, through habits of speculation, they derive their whole 
complexion and character from considerations far more remote-from the 
right they tend to establish, by precedent, to the exercise of similar 
authority in future. In the rude acts of power occasionally exerted by 
his predecessors, as rudely resisted (whenever they were resisted) by 
the Barons, and, on their decline, experiencing little resistance of any 
kind, Charles could find precedents in abundance for the establishment 
of a prerogative almost absolute in the Crown; and the spirit of the 
times evinced, that now, or never, was the period for asserting it: to 
collect, claim, and consolidate such a sway, became accordingly the 
favourite measure of his reign; and so strongly does he seem to have 
been impressed with the justice of his pretensions, that he disdained to 
take the pains which common prudence would have prescribed, to disguise 
his designs. The Commons, representing a new interest in the state for 
some time rising into consequence, felt, on their part, that now or 
never was the juncture for bursting the web which was collecting on all 
sides to enthrall them; and taking their stand on the privilege of 
granting or withholding supplies—a privilege originally derived under 
very different circumstances, and with very different views—they 
resolved, by an ample assertion of their own indefinite claims, to 
circumscribe the authority of the Crown within the strictest limits 
possible. A contest between these two adverse powers—a struggle between 
privilege and prerogative—maintained with more or less violence and 
obstinacy, must, I think, sooner or later, have occurred: but I confess 
I perceive no necessity for a civil war. To expect that Charles should 
have begun right, would perhaps be exacting too much from human 
infirmity: but after 15 years experience of the temper and spirit of the 
times, had he combined, in due proportion, candid conciliating 
concession, with dignified firmness, I see no reason why he should not 
have transmitted to his descendants as ample a share of power as the 
present Family enjoy; with claims to an affectionate personal attachment 
on the part of the people, beyond what a foreign dynasty, derived from a 
female slip long severed, can for some time hope to inherit.

NOV. the 8th

 Read the 3rd and last Book of May's History: detailing the proceedings 
of the War (for which he deserts his Parliament) down to the Battle of 
Newbury; but in so confused a manner, that it is impossible to extract 
any clear conception of the events of it,—at least in any consecutive 
order.—What he says of Cromwell, evinces the future Protector to have 
been a man of vigorous resolution, prompt decision, and rapid despatch. 
Of course he only speaks of the opening of his military career in the 
Eastern part of the kingdom: his name, I think, does not once occur as a 
Member of the Parliament.

Finished Sotheby's Translation of Wieland's Oberon: displaying an 
imagination highly poetical, voluptuous, and sublime; but of too aerial 
a fabric to bid fair for permanent fame. Supernatural machinery may have 
a good effect in an epic poem, when introduced to solve a difficulty 
arising out of probable circumstances; but cannot fail to cloy and 
disgust, when it forms, as here, the entire contexture of the piece. 
Course after course, of ragouts, would probably be too much for most 
palates; but what should we think of a banquet composed of the 
condiments alone with which such dishes are seasoned.

NOV. the 10th

Read Dr. Combe's Statement of Facts; and Dr. Parr's Remarks upon it, in 
which he vigorously and successfully repels Combe's ill-advised attacks. 
It is impossible to read the latter pamphlet, without being struck with 
admiration at Parr's force of intellect, and grieving at the strange 
misapplication of it. His praise of Burke, p. 9, is fine; and of Porson, 
p. 13, transcendental. I am surprised that in vindicating his politics 
by appealing to their sources, p. 71, he should have mentioned Helvetius 
in the list of his tutors.—I am told, from the best authority, that 
Porson considers Wakefield as a man of no judgment.

Read Dryden's Dedication to his Translation of Juvenal's Satires:—a 
strange rambling composition; mingling in its rapid but desultory 
current, gross adulation, historical deduction, fine criticism, and wild 
decisions. Amongst the latter, I should place his assertion, that Horace 
instructs, and Juvenal delights, most:—an absurd ground of comparison; 
and surely a most unjust judgment with respect to Horace.—The Second 
Satire, by Tate, is most grossly translated—such violations of common 
decency, either in an author or translator, would not, I think, now be 
borne.

Looked over Rousseau's four curious Letters "a M. de Malesherbes", 
"contenant le vrai tableau de mon caractère, et les vrais motifs de 
toute ma conduite"<112>. I had never met with these letters before; but 
in many passages they singularly justify the opinions I had previously 
formed and expressed (See April 15, 1798) respecting this extraordinary 
genius, from a general survey of his compositions and conduct.

NOV. the 15

Read Richardson's Philosophical Analysis of some of Shakespeare's 
Characters. The design is happy, and, upon the whole, ingeniously 
executed; but there is something in his manner which fails to arrest 
attention; and with the best dispositions in the world to listen to his 
comments, I find my mind perpetually flying off from the subject.—One of 
his remarks on Macbeth, appears both just and new. He maintains, that if 
a person originally possessing a strong sense of right and wrong, once 
becomes corrupted to vice, he will turn out more vicious than another 
less happily constituted; because, judging of the sense which others 
will form of his conduct, from his own, he must naturally fear and hate 
mankind—and (he might have added) cordially despising and detesting 
himself, will probably be goaded to plunge, under the agitation of these 
furies, into still deeper enormities. He accounts, on this principle, 
for the different conduct of Sylla and Augustus after the accomplishment 
of their schemes, and of Herod and Nero after they had tasted of guilt.—
In his appended Essay on the faults of Shakespeare, he vigorously 
contends, that in criticism, as in morals, our judgments, to be correct 
and steady, must be established on those maxims, which may have been 
originally suggested by feeling, but which derive their force and 
stability from subsequent reason and reflection.—Richardson, by 
employing "will" for "shall" and "would" for "should", and so 
conversely, must be a Scotchman: it is singular, that the correctest 
writers of that country—Blair, for instance, in his Lectures on 
Rhetoric—should occasionally lapse into that offensive provincialism.

NOV. the 18th

Looked over Maty's Review for 1784. It appears from Art. 13 (March), 
that Euler, in his New Theory of Music, published in 1739, maintained, 
"That all the pleasure of harmony arises from the love of order in man; 
in consequence of which, all the agreeable sensations excited by hearing 
fine music, come from the perception of the relations the different 
sounds have to each other, as well with regard to the duration of their 
succession, as with regard to the frequency of the vibrations of the air 
which produces them". This is surely very fantastic: how can any species 
of pleasure be derived from causes which are not felt as operating to 
produce it?—I was much pleased with Maty's recommending to Mr. Hardinge 
(Arts. 18 and 19, March) "a broader manner—a little more neglect, of the 
effect of single sentences, and single words": much is implied in this 
precept.—In noticing (Art. 14, May) Jenyns on Parliamentary Reform, who 
contends that an independent Parliament would overturn the Constitution, 
Maty remarks "this might be, and, I believe, would be, the case: still 
it is a question, though I own a very nice one, whether it ought not to 
be tried, as In ordine ad, to get us (through much and long horror and 
confusion) out of a state that has ruined all the great countries in the 
world:—but it is a very nice speculation". Surely this is very cool!—Dr. 
Priestley (Art. 2, Oct.) defends Origen, whom Horsley had accused of 
avowing the practice of employing unjustifiable means to accomplish a 
good end, by averring that this is too strongly stated; that what Jerome 
in his Letter to Pammachius says, is, that Origen had adopted Plato's 
doctrine of the subserviency of truth to utility—as Mr. Hume and other 
speculative moralists have done, considering the foundation of all 
social virtue to be the public good; and that we must not impute immoral 
consequences to speculative opinions on the foundation of morals, till 
we see those practices connected with the principles. On the first 
point, I am incompetent to decide: with respect to the second, 
undoubtedly the tendency is, to ascribe too much to speculative 
opinions, which, while the mind is intent on the view of them, are apt 
to be regarded as the ruling principles of our conduct, whereas at most, 
except with enthusiasts, they operate merely to modify other more cogent 
principles implanted in our nature: still, however, they are not to be 
neglected: affectation, on one side, and hypocrisy, on the other, apart, 
we should be less disposed, ceteris paribus,<113> to trust our wives and 
daughters to a man who openly professed that all women were fair game, 
than to one who acknowledged the obligations of restraint in the 
intercourse of the sexes.—Upon the whole, this Review is a creditable, 
and a wonderful, work, for one man. The responsibility of furnishing the 
public with, a certain quantity of criticism every month, would paralyse 
my powers completely.-I am surprised that no Review has been since 
started, which should notice only important works of British literature, 
and give ample attention to these.

NOV. the 20th

Read Cambridge's Scribleriad. The mock heroic is well sustained 
throughout; but the Poem is deficient in broad humour:—it shakes no 
laughter outdone; and failing here, it is the "attempt without the 
deed".

Mr. L., with some other friends, dined with me. Mentioned that Fox 
confessed to his friend Dr. John Jebb, that he had personal ambition—
that he wished For power; but trusted that he should employ it to good 
purposes. Never disguised from his adherents of this school, his decided 
aversion to their schemes of parliamentary reform. This is quite 
according to Fox's characteristic candour: yet I well remember Horne 
Tooke's sarcastically telling me on the hustings at Covent-Garden, that 
he regarded him as a cunning, but not as a wise, man! Exactly, I 
conceive, the reverse of the truth. Mr. Fox's wisdom, few but Mr. Tooke 
will be disposed to question: it is a species of wisdom, however, if 
ever there was one, which neither his supporters nor his opponents can 
reproach with guile; and rarely, I believe, has this illustrious 
statesman had occasion to blush, at proving himself too shrewd, in those 
cases—and such Mr. Burke has acutely remarked there are—-in which a man 
of honour would be ashamed not to have been imposed upon.

NOV. the 23rd

Finished the perusal of Blair's Lectures on Rhetoric. The praise of 
ingenuity, of a judgment in general accurate, and a taste for the most 
part timidly correct, I can readily allow him; but to the higher order 
of merit in a critic—to that superior sensibility which imparts a just 
relish for transcendent excellence, and to that philosophical sagacity, 
penetrating discernment, and nice tact, which qualify the possessor for 
tracing the pleasures of the imagination to their secret springs, he has 
certainly not the slightest pretensions. There is no raciness—no smack 
of an original cast of thought or feeling in his work: where little is 
hazarded, little can be gained; and though his Lectures (I feel the 
qualifying force of this title) are exempt, accordingly, from any gross 
or offensive errors, they are destitute, on the other hand, of whatever 
is adapted powerfully to awaken interest, and enchain attention, on the 
most engaging of all human speculations.—He starts on a right principle, 
by maintaining at the outset (L. 2.), that Taste is founded on a natural 
instinctive sensibility to beauty, refined by exercise, and guided and 
improved by reason; whose office he appears to limit (on this head) to 
the ascertaining the resemblance of an imitation to the original, or the 
reference of parts to the whole, or of means to an end, so far as any 
beauty depends on such resemblance or reference. Thus far, he seems to 
think that reason may act as a standard to taste: but then, as the 
application of this test is not sufficiently extensive, and as our 
reasonings appeal always, in the last resort, to feeling, he has 
recourse for this purpose, to the concurring sentiments of men placed in 
situations favourable to the exertions of taste. Truth, the object of 
reason, he remarks, is one; beauty, the object of taste, manifold; so 
that men may differ in preferring one beauty to another, according to 
their age, sensibility, &c. provided they agree in considering the same 
object as still beautiful, in sufficient consistency with justness of 
taste.—Genius (L. 3.) he distinguishes as the power of executing, taste 
as the power of judging, and criticism as the application of taste to 
the fine arts; and maintains here again, that the rules of criticism are 
not formed by any induction a priori—by any train of abstract reasoning—
but are derived from an observation of such beauties as most generally 
please, though reason afterwards approves them as just and natural. His 
ideas on this subject, are, on neither occasion, so precisely and 
determinately marked as one could wish; but they are valuable as 
enforcing, however loosely, a fundamental distinction too generally 
overlooked in our researches into the principles of criticism.—
Abandoning the efficient causes of the pleasures of taste as 
inscrutable, he proceeds to the consideration of sublimity or grandeur; 
which he divides, into sublimity in objects, and sublimity in writing; 
and the former, into physical and moral—the sublime in external things, 
and the sublime in sentiment. He differs from Burke, who makes terror 
the source of the sublime; and suggests, with diffidence, that if there 
is any one quality in which all sublime objects agree, and which is the 
cause of their producing a similar emotion, it is "mighty power": but 
mighty power, Burke has very justly remarked, is terrible; since so much 
does our sense of pain predominate over that of pleasure, that we are 
instinctively prompted to anticipate rather the evils such a power may 
inflict, than the benefits it may confer. Sublimity in writing, he makes 
to consist (L. 4.) in describing sublime objects, or exhibiting sublime 
sentiments, so as to give us forcible impressions of them, viz. with 
conciseness, simplicity, and strength—the result of lively feelings in 
the writer.—In treating of beauty (L. 5.) he professes himself unable to 
discover any common quality running through all the varieties of objects 
regarded as beautiful, which entitle them to that distinction; and he 
proceeds accordingly to consider separately, the beauty of colour figure 
and motion, the union of these, the beauty of expression of the mind-
where he takes occasion to observe, that the higher virtues (such as I 
should term, those which turn on self-command) excite an emotion of the 
sublime, the social and more gentle (those which turn on sensibility) of 
the beautiful,—and lastly the beauty arising from the fitness of means 
to an end:—he distinguishes, too, an appropriate beauty in writing, 
consisting in a certain turn in the style and sentiment, calculated to 
diffuse a serene delight. The truth is, I think, that beauty, in its 
popular sense, and regarded as applicable to the exciting causes of 
every species of the gentler pleasurable sensations, is much too lax to 
oppose to the sublime; except in the very vague sense in which that term 
is employed by Longinus, who seems to include under it, whatever 
produces vehement emotion: and a consequent embarrassment, I suspect, 
must ever take place in the treatment of this subject, till a more 
precise circumscription of these qualities obtains. Besides beauty and 
sublimity, Blair considers that there are other pleasures of taste, such 
as those arising from novelty, imitation, melody, harmony, numerousness, 
and the effect produced by wit, humour, and ridicule; and remarks, that 
poetry and eloquence avail themselves of all these modes of touching the 
affections.—In the 6th and 7th Ls., he treats of the progress of speech 
and writing. Of the former, he observes, that the understanding has, in 
all its successive changes, been gaining ground on the imagination; and 
that language was originally descriptive in the sound, expressive in the 
utterance, figurative in the style, and that the order of the words 
followed the order of events in the mind of the speaker, and not, as in 
modern languages, their real order in point of time. Writing, he 
deduces, from pictural representations, through hieroglyphics (in which 
the specific signification of these pictures was extended by analogy), 
to arbitrary marks (probably originating from this source) like the 
Chinese characters and Arabic numerals: thus far, the sign immediately 
represented the thing signified; till it occurred, that these signs 
might be employed to denote, not the thing itself, but the sound by 
which it was known; and, by tracing these sounds to their elements, be 
simplified into the Letters of the Alphabet. These two latter leaps, 
however, though easy in the statement, are in practice surely immense.—
In the 8th and 9th Ls., he discusses the nature of language in general, 
and of the English language in particular; but as he takes Harris and 
Monboddo for his guides, I have nothing to say about him.—From the 10th 
to the 13th he treats of style, in the choice of terms, and structure of 
sentences. I was most pleased with his remarks on precision in the 
former department (L. 10.), illustrated by his distinctions between 
words which are loosely regarded as synonymous; and his judicious 
recommendations (L. 11.) of unity, in the latter. He very justly 
observes, that our modes of thinking, and our modes of expressing 
ourselves, mutually act and react upon each other.—From the 14th to the 
17th L. he treats of figures of style, which, he well remarks, to have a 
good effect, must spring spontaneously from the feelings of the speaker 
or writer. I cannot, however, agree with him in his censure (L. 15.) of 
two passages, in the Tempest and Romeo and Juliet, "The charm dissolves 
apace", and "As glorious as is a winged messenger", as involving mixed 
metaphors: the leading figure is surely preserved with sufficient 
distinctness in both instances; and the expressions at which he cavils, 
as incongruous, are so little obtrusive in their primitive and 
metaphorical sense, as, with me at least, not in the slightest degree to 
impair the general unity and beauty of the image presented to the mind.—
There is nothing new under the Sun. The passage I admired so much (April 
10th, 1799), in one of the Papers of the Corresponding Society, saying 
of the Temple of Liberty, "that it had the ample earth for its area, and 
the arch of Heaven for its dome", seems to have been taken from the 
Epitaph on Charles the 5th (L. 16.) "Pro tumulo ponas orbem, pro tegmine 
coelum":<114>-the rest spoils all—"Sidera pro facibus, pro lachrymis 
maria":<115>—yet it evinces, by how slender a partition the extravagant 
and preposterous is divided from the sublime.—From the 18th to the 24th 
L., Blair treats of style. His divisions of the subject are not, I 
think, sufficiently clear and distinct: but his particular criticisms 
are in general acute and just; and his strictures upon certain passages 
in the writings of Addison and Swift, and the emendations he proposes, 
to rectify and improve them, for the most part, eminently judicious.—In 
the 25th L. he at length enters upon Eloquence; which he defines, the 
art of speaking in such a manner as to attain the end for which we 
speak—to please—to inform and convince the understanding—and to actuate 
the will. The highest species of eloquence, that which hurries along the 
hearer with the speaker, he contends, is always the offspring of 
passion; and he accounts for the inferior degree of liveliness in modern 
compared with Ancient eloquence, partly from the progress of philosophy 
and correct habits of thinking, which are averse to such excitations.—In 
the 26th L. he institutes a formal comparison between Demosthenes and 
Cicero. I pretty nearly agree with him in the result, though I differ 
widely in many of the particular criticisms from which it is deduced. 
The character of Demosthenes, says he, is vigour and austerity; that of 
Cicero, gentleness and insinuation:—feeble characteristics, surely, of 
two such mighty and opposite proficients in eloquence. With emotions 
still stronger than those of dissent, do I listen to his unmerciful 
depression of the moderns compared with the Ancients, and of the English 
compared with the French, in oratory. Did he never hear of such men as 
Chatham, Fox, or Burke? Or would he deny the praise of pathos, to those 
vehement and impassioned appeals of Erskine, which I well remember to 
have seen draw tears down the veteran Bearcroft's cheeks, though opposed 
to him as counsel in the cause<116>:—a triumph more truly glorious, 
perhaps, to eloquence, than Cicero's expulsion of Cataline from the 
Senate.—In the 32nd L. he maintains, that the three great subjects of 
discussion among mankind, are, truth, duty, and interest; and that all 
arguments are directed to prove one of these three things, that 
something is true, that it is right, or, that it is profitable: that 
where we want, not merely to convince, but to actuate, we must touch the 
springs of action, the passions: and, that to effect this, it is not 
sufficient to show, that we ought to be moved, but to exhibit the 
incentive of that passion which we wish to raise; and, for this purpose, 
to be moved by it ourselves.—In the 34th L., amongst other arguments to 
establish that virtue is necessary to true eloquence, he contends, that 
from the fountain of virtuous feeling alone, are drawn those dignified 
and impassioned sentiments, which communicate a glowing ardour and flame 
to language; and, above all others, command the passions of mankind.-In 
the 35th L. he observes, that as we advance in knowledge, systems of 
philosophy may perish; but that works of taste are addressed to the 
feelings; that these feelings are the sole test of their merit; that the 
universal feeling of mankind, is the natural, and therefore the right, 
feeling; and that long continued reputation, consequently, is, in such 
cases, decisive of excellence.—In the 38th L. he enters on the 
consideration of Poetry; which he defines "the language of passion, or 
of enlivened imagination, formed, most commonly, into regular numbers": 
and the primary aim of the Poet, he justly maintains, is, not to 
instruct, but to please and to move; though, by pleasing and moving, he 
may, and he ought to, endeavour to accomplish that end.—In the 42nd L. 
he eloquently remarks, that the respect which Epic Poetry must of 
necessity bear to the moral sentiments of mankind, is such a testimony 
in favour of those sentiments, that were it in the power of sceptical 
philosophers to weaken the force of the reasonings which establish the 
essential distinction between virtue and vice, the writings of Epic 
Poets were alone sufficient to evince the fallacy of their deductions, 
since by the appeal which such Poets are ever making to the feelings of 
mankind in favour of virtue, they irresistibly attest, that the 
foundations of it are laid deep and strong in human nature.—In the 45th 
and 46th Ls. he discourses on Tragedy; the characteristic of which, he 
thinks, is to move, as that of Epic Poetry is to elevate, the mind. He 
accounts for the gratification produced by the sorrows it excites, from 
the pleasure attending the exercise of the social affections; which is 
peculiarly strong in pity, and compassion, and overbalances the distress 
arising from sympathy with the sufferers:—the heart is warmed with 
kindness and humanity, while it is affected by the sufferings in which 
it shares; and the pleasure thus derived, is heightened by the 
satisfactory reflection, that we feel as we ought to feel on the 
occasion. If the pain involved in this mixed emotion be made to 
predominate, the scene becomes too shocking for representation.—His view 
of Shakespeare, is most unworthy that great master of the human heart: 
Blair is evidently not up to the high task of criticising such a 
Genius.—The 47th and final Lecture, treats of Comedy: and is decidedly 
the poorest, and feeblest, and flattest, of them all; huddling up the 
Course to a miserable close.—After having skirted, with a pale and 
ineffectual ray, the whole horizon of Taste, this Arctic Phoebus sets at 
last in a fog.

NOV. the 25th

Looked over some of Rousseau's Letters, contained in the 15th Vol. of 
his Works,. 4to. Ed. Geneva, 1790. In a curious one, dated a Bourgoin, 
le 15me. Janvier 1769, he defends the existence of a God; a position 
which, after all, he rests upon "un sentiment interieur", whose voice is 
that of nature, whose judgment is infallible, whose dictates can alone 
preserve us against the delusions of reason, which in the end would 
leave us nothing to believe: and maintains, that without a belief in 
God, virtue must perish; since virtue means force, a force exerted over 
ourselves, and which requires a God, if not as a judge, at least as a 
witness, of its achievements. With respect to the first position, if 
Rousseau means, as he appears to do, by a "sentiment interiéur", a blind 
instinctive principle of belief, a principle which may be felt but 
cannot be stated, the admission of such aground of credence, it is 
evident, would give the privilege of sanctuary to every prejudice of 
which we had forgotten the origin. With respect to the second, though, 
in extreme cases, a belief in a supreme Being, potent to reward and to 
avenge, or at least sympathising in omniscience with the secret 
struggles of the human heart, may be necessary to support Virtue from 
sinking under temptation or yielding to despair, this quality, I 
conceive, in the popular and just acceptation of the term which denotes 
it, is, in its nature and essence, entirely distinct from all such 
considerations; and, whatever succour it may occasionally derive from 
their aid on extraordinary emergencies, is perfectly capable of 
subsisting and flourishing to a large extent without them. Rousseau 
proceeds to combat the doctrine of necessity, as abhorrent, in its 
consequences on morals, to the same "sentiment intérieur"; and then 
vindicates the superior character of Christ as a moral teacher. He seems 
to have been seized, on this occasion, with one of those fits of piety, 
to which his erratic genius was casually subject, and into which it 
might at any time be exasperated by opposition.—In a subsequent Letter, 
á M. D'Offreville, he formally examines the motives to virtue. He admits 
that we must in all cases be actuated by self-interest; but then he 
distinguishes this interest into a higher and a lower, a spiritual and a 
sensual interest, the former of which is, the latter is not, compatible 
with virtue: and to decide the question, whether there is not an 
interest immediately attached to virtue, which makes it amiable for its 
own sake, or whether, according to the doctrines of "la nouvelle 
philosophie" as he calls it, "nul ne peut faire aucun bien que par le 
profit qu'il en attende d'autrui, quil n'y a, par conséquent, que des 
sots qui croient a la vertu, et des dupes qui la pratiquent"<117>, 
proposes, as an experimentum crucis, the case of the juryman, who was 
resolved to perish rather than convict another of a murder which himself 
had perpetrated.—Swift observes in his Detached Thoughts, "the self-love 
of some men inclines them to please others; the self-love of others 
inclines them to please themselves; and this makes the great difference 
between virtue and vice."—The difficulty which appears to have perplexed 
both Rousseau and Swift on this subject, seems solved by the principle 
of sympathy:—by sympathy we are interested in the interests of others, 
ipso facto, and antecedently to all reflection on consequences.

NOV the 29th

Finished the perusal of Rousseau's Miscellaneous Letters. The two M. le 
Maréchal de Luxembourg, are admirably descriptive, the former of the 
manners of the inhabitants, the latter of the aspect of the country, of 
the Val-de-Travers in the Compté de Neufchatel: nothing can be more 
finished and exquisite than the painting in both. The last sentence but 
one in the latter, breathes precisely the same sentiment which occurs in 
Tooke's Dedication of his Diversions of Purley: "comment pourrois-je 
n'etre pas touché des pontés qu'on m'y témoigne, moi qui dois tenir a 
bienfait de la part des hommes tout le mal qu'ils ne me font pas"<119>. 
I confess I have learnt to lend a dull ear to these complaints of 
persecution from authors; and to suspect, where they are not mere 
rhetorical flourishes to conciliate and allure—(for "pity melts the soul 
to love"),—that there is, at the bottom, something wrong, in those who 
make them;—some addiction to what, though plausible, is really culpable; 
or some perversity, at least, in pursuing what is right. There is a fund 
of good sense and honest sympathy in the public, which costs nothing in 
the exercise, and can scarcely fail to render their moral judgments, on 
these occasions, in general as just as they are conclusive.—In a Letter 
dated, Motiers, le 4 Mars, 1764, he combats a disciple of the New 
Philosophy, who endeavoured to deduce virtue from the love of order; and 
maintains, that it must be founded on—an instinctive belief in a 
superintending providence—the immortality of the soul—and the freedom of 
the will: take the two first of these considerations away, "je ne vois 
plus dans la vertu qu'une folie à qui l'on donne un beau nom"; take away 
the last, and "ce'st un son qui bat l'oreille, et rien de plus".<120> 
Self-love, he admits, is the sole principle of action in man; but how 
virtue can be founded intrinsically on this principle, he declares, 
passes his conception.—Rousseau frequently vents his spleen against the 
doctrines and the professors of "la nouvelle philosophie" as he terms 
it; and when tolerably at ease in his own mind, strongly inculcates on 
others a spirit of accommodation to the opinions and sentiments of 
mankind, especially with regard to religion—(see, particularly, the 
preceding and two succeeding Letters)-: but there is no reliance to be 
placed on him; and we feel that the slightest and most unfounded 
disgust, would exasperate his irritable spirit into a consuming fire 
against the cause, which a kindlier humour had led him to espouse with 
all the warmth and earnestness of a decided votary.—"A mon avis", says 
he, in a Letter dated, Wootton, Sep. 27th, 1767, "le sang d'un seul 
homme, est d'un plus grand prix que la liberté de tout le genre-
humain."<121> What a sentiment to have flashed upon his deluded 
followers in France, in the midst of their atrocities!

DECEMBER the 6th

Read Jackson's (of Exeter) Four Ages. He inverts the usual order; and 
promises halcyon days, from the improvement of every art and every 
science, in the golden age to which we are rapidly advancing:—a more 
consolatory and a more plausible fallacy, certainly, than the prevalent 
one, of looking with regret on the past, and dismay to the future. Many 
of his remarks are ingenious and acute; but they are delivered in a very 
desultory form.

Looked through the 3rd Book of Warburton's Divine Legation. It is 
impossible to pursue this eccentric genius steadily, through the mazy 
curves along which he wheels his airy flight; "fetching in and 
inclosing" (as Bacon expresses it) "by a winding expatiation, matter 
which speaks nothing to the purpose". He contends (sect. 2.) that the 
genius of their religion taught the Ancient sages to conclude, that 
utility, not truth, is the end of religion; that utility and truth, 
consequently, do not coincide; and that it is lawful and expedient to 
deceive for the public good: he, himself, (sect.6) on the contrary 
maintains, from a petitio principii,<122> I think, That truth is nothing 
but that relation of things which is attended with universal benefit; 
That truth and utility must, therefore, necessarily coincide; That truth 
is productive of utility, and utility indicative of truth; and, 
consequently, That religion, or the idea of the relation between the 
creature and the Creator, as useful, Must be true. He afterwards 
observes, very justly, that there never was a great conqueror, 
legislator, or founder of religion, who had not a mixture of enthusiasm 
and policy in his composition;—of enthusiasm to influence the public 
mind, and of policy to, direct it.

DEC. the 8th

Read Balguy's nine Discourses. They are all masterly; but the first 
four, and the 8th, tower above the rest in excellence. In the 7th he 
says "To live without government, belongs only to savages; to be 
governed by will, is the condition of slaves: the freest of men, are 
those who live by settled rules, under the influence of authority 
prudently constituted, and temperately used". This nearly coincides with 
Mackintosh's definition of Liberty in his Preliminary Dissertation.

Looked into Warton's Edition of Milton's Minor Poems. I am surprised 
that in enumerating (in a note on Lycidas) the proofs of Shakespeare's 
attachment to the figure of the canker and the rose, he should have 
omitted the celebrated passage-

"But let concealment, like a worm 'ith bud,
Feed on her damask cheek".<122>

"Sere", or "dry", which he mentions as one of the most uncommon of the 
obsolete words employed by Milton, is surely now very customary as 
applied to wood for fuel.

DEC. the 9th

Read Balguy's seven Charges, appended to his Sermons. In the last, he 
grows mystical: it is a most unfortunate close: though, indeed, there 
appears to me something very like inconsistency in the preceding part of 
the volume; and that what the author seems to grant very liberally with 
one hand, one moment, he withholds very tenaciously with the other, the 
next. I should say of the whole volume, that it is the product of a 
stout, well-furnished, reflecting mind; too vigorous to bear the 
trammels of prejudice, and thinking originally and deeply on whatever 
subject occurred; but which perhaps had not very curiously collated its 
opinions, and moulded them into one consistent system.—In the 2nd 
Charge, Balguy explicitly maintains, That Christianity, did not 
promulgate a new system of morals, which was unnecessary; but merely 
gave an additional sanction to the rules which previously existed on 
this subject.—In the 6th he observes, "That a heart which has hardened 
itself against all impressions of gratitude to God, will be equally 
insensible of human kindness; and that all the-charities of 
neighbourhood, and kindred, and friendship, will be sunk and stifled in 
a cool philosophical selfishness."

DEC. the 11th

Looked into some of Dryden's Prefaces and Dedications. He is surely the 
most rambling and desultory writer that ever wielded pen! I take it, he 
never meditated: before he committed his thoughts to paper, or corrected 
a syllable afterwards: yet, such are the exuberant stores of his mind, 
he weaves, as he goes along, a rich and enchanting tissue.

Read the 1st Vol. of Sully's Memoirs. They open a scene of manners, 
which, to modern conception, appears perfectly romantic:—what a strange 
mixture of ferocity and gallantry, generosity and treachery, cruelty and 
courtesy, heroic virtues and the meanest vices! Sully insists upon it, 
that Henry the IVth's conversion from the Protestant to the Roman 
Catholic faith, was conscientious and sincere. Though far from thinking 
that other motives, besides a preponderance of argument, may not operate 
in producing belief, such a momentous change, so exactly synchronising 
and quadrating with the dictates of policy, staggers, I confess, all my 
dispositions to be charitable on the occasion. It is curious, that these 
Memoirs should have been written by a French Protestant, and translated 
by an English Papist.

DEC. the 21st

Looked over the 1st and 2nd Parts of Watts' Logic. In recommending us 
(c. 4, p. 2.) to cast away all our former prejudicate opinions, and form 
them afresh on an impartial examination, he seems to feel the danger of 
following this advice to its full extent; and therefore more than once 
observes, that this is not proposed to be practised at once, as men of 
business or religion, as friends or neighbours, as fathers or sons, as 
magistrates, subjects, or Christians, but merely as philosophical 
searchers after truth.—Watts, when he does not bewilder himself and his 
readers in scholastic subtleties—(for Locke had not quite purged him 
from the taint of the Schools)—but follows the dictates of his own 
sense, is very judicious. He may be regarded, I believe, as the last of 
that race of primitive divines, who united, in an eminent degree, 
sanctity with learning.

DEC. the 23rd

Looked over the 3rd and 4th Parts of Watts' Logic. In the former, on 
"reasoning and syllogism", I was in hopes of meeting with something 
which might throw light on the principles of ratiocination; but was 
disappointed. He defines reasoning, "the joining several propositions 
together, and making a syllogism, i.e., an argument whereby we are wont 
to infer something that is less known, from truths which are more 
evident." This more evident truth, forms the premises of a syllogism; 
the less evident, the conclusion: now the presiding principle, he 
observes, which governs all syllogisms, is, that what is generally true, 
is true in all the particular instances included in the general idea; 
and the grand rule which he lays down as the test of a true syllogism, 
is, that the premises contain the conclusion, or, that one of the 
premises contain the conclusion, and that the other show it is contained 
in it—c. 2, sect 1. and c. 3, sect 2:—directly the inverse, I apprehend, 
of the method which the mind really pursues in the advancement of its 
knowledge.

Pursued Sully's Memoirs. I blush when I read the account he gives of his 
Embassy to our Court, on the accession of James the 1st. How much more 
respectable do we appear in Henry the IVth's previous correspondence 
with Elizabeth! James should have worn the petticoat, and Bess the 
breeches.





1800

JANUARY the 4th

Read the First of Alison's Two Essays on the Nature and Principles of 
Taste. Taste, he defines, That faculty by which we perceive and enjoy 
whatever is sublime and beautiful: and he proposes to investigate, 1st, 
what is the effect produced on the mind, when the emotions of taste are 
felt; 2ndly, what are the qualities which produce these emotions; and 
3rdly., what is the faculty by which they are received. The present 
Volume is confined to the first of these objects. In the 1st chapter, he 
endeavours to establish by examples, That whenever the emotions of 
sublimity and beauty are felt, an exercise of imagination is excited, 
consisting in a train of thought; that without this exercise of 
imagination, these emotions are unfelt; and, that they obtain in 
proportion to this exercise: the consequence from which is, that the 
effect produced by objects of sublimity and beauty, consists in the 
excitation of this exercise. Of this train of thought, however, upon 
which the imagination is exerted whenever we feel the emotions of Taste, 
he proceeds, in the 2nd chapter, to maintain, That it must consist of 
ideas producing emotion; and, That one uniform character, with respect 
to the emotion produced, must pervade and connect the whole series. If 
the first proposition, he proceeds to show, be true, then no objects can 
be experienced to be sublime or beautiful, which do not primarily excite 
some simple emotion, without which no such train could be suggested: if 
the second, then no composition of objects can produce emotions of 
Taste, in which this unity of character is not preserved;—and in this 
consists the great advantage of artificial compositions, such as 
gardening, painting, and (above all) poetry, over natural combinations 
of objects; and the great test of the excellence of the former, that 
composition being the best, in which the different parts most completely 
unite in the production of one unmingled emotion. The effect, therefore, 
of objects of Taste, may be considered as resting in the production of a 
consistent train of ideas of emotion: and emotions of Taste, may be 
distinguished from emotions of simple pleasure, in this, that the 
latter, as joy, pity, gratitude, &c, terminate in themselves; whereas 
the former, though founded on some simple emotion, require, in addition 
to this, an exercise of the imagination on a consequent train of 
thought, from which we are conscious of a higher and more pleasing 
emotion, to which he wishes to appropriate the designation of 
"delight".—The characteristic of this solution of the pleasures of 
Taste, appears to be, the placing them in a succession of pleasurable 
images:—for as to the mere exercise of the imagination, though he takes 
up this idea decidedly enough at first, he very judiciously abandons it, 
since the imagination, it is obvious, may often be exerted, without any 
gratification whatever to the feelings. But surely this succession—(I 
wish to say it without offence)—reminds one of the hypothesis of the 
elephant and tortoise: for where a train of similar causes, multiplied 
indefinitely (it should seem) for no other purpose but to increase the 
intensity or duration of the effect, is called in to account in one 
grand result, we are still left to search for the efficient causes of 
that result, in the agency of the separate principles which compose the 
series to which it is ascribed.

Finished Sully's Memoirs. The presages of Henry's death, are very 
extraordinary. The connection, in these cases, no doubt, is only in the 
mind of the observer: the emotion, however, which this supposed 
correspondence excites, when the feelings are powerfully agitated by any 
great event, is so truly congenial and delightful, that the most 
philosophical spirit can scarcely resist a temporary submission to its. 
influence; and must find in its own illusions, however transient, a 
satisfactory solution of the general propensity of mankind, at all 
times, and in all countries to believe in prodigies and portents.—
Henry's great political scheme for the perpetual peace and security of 
Europe, appears more splendid than specious:—though, indeed, the 
political face of Europe has been since so greatly changed, that it is 
difficult to form just opinion of it.—One wishes that Sully had retired 
sooner on the accession of the Queen Regent. For his reputation, his 
career ought to have closed with that of his illustrious Patron.

JAN. the 8th

Read. Alison's 2nd Essay—on the Sublimity and Beauty. of the Material 
World: He denies that mere matter is capable of, exciting any emotion 
whatever; and contends—from the general turn of language, and by 
pointing out, removing, or changing, the associations, through, which he 
conceives them to be transferred—that the beauty and sublimity of 
material objects,, spring solely from their being the signs or 
expressions of such qualities as are fitted to produce those emotions. 
What these qualities are, he leaves very undetermined; merely observing, 
at the close, that, besides the qualities of mind and matter, there are 
qualities arising from the relation of matter to matter, of mind to 
mind, and of matter to mind: nor does he intimate, how he means to 
distinguish the sublime from the beautiful, by these qualities; though, 
from incidental glances, he seems to agree in substance with Burke (wham 
he only once slightly notices), That such qualities are sublime, as turn 
on pain and danger; and beautiful, as turn on pleasure.—The material 
qualities he considers, are, 1st:, Those that we receive from Hearing—
Sounds, simple and composed: 2ndly, Those that we receive from Sight—
Colours, Forms, and Motions. The associations he enumerates, as the 
sources from which material qualities derive their power of producing 
emotion, are, 1st, Those which obtain, with the ends for which they are 
destined; 2ndly, with the power by which they are contrived; 3rdly, in 
the human form, with the mental qualities they denote; 4thly, in 
inanimate substances, with resembling qualities in animated ones; 5thly, 
such as arise from resemblances between the sensations which material 
qualities excite, and certain emotions; 6thly, the associations produced 
by language, which collects and confirms all others; 7thly, accidental 
associations, peculiar to the individual.—There are repeated incidental 
observations in the course of this Work, which display great depth of 
research and justness of taste; but, upon the whole, it leaves the mind 
miserably dissatisfied with respect to the main object which is proposed 
to be explored.

Read the Supplement to Sully's Memoirs. Sully—such is the total change 
of manners—appears to have kept up more state in private life, after his 
retirement, than a crowned head does at present, in the plenitude of 
power: yet I question whether Henry the 4th himself, enjoyed half the 
personal accommodations and real luxury of a respectable London merchant 
of this day.—The trial of Ravaillac is extremely interesting. His 
answers are clear, collected, and consistent; and evidently show him to 
have been an enthusiast, intrepidly pursuing the dictates of a misguided 
conscience. The account of his torture, is horrible.

JAN. the 9th

Looked over the Introduction to Pemberton's View of Sir Isaac Newton's 
Philosophy. He affirms (sect. 2.) that it is the gratification of our 
taste, which is the source of our desire of knowledge; perspicuous 
reasoning being not only beautiful, but, when set forth in its full 
strength and dignity, partaking of the sublime. In some cases it may be 
so: but the general stimulus to the acquisition of knowledge, is, I am 
satisfied, the mere love of novelty or ambition of distinction.—The 
proofs in Natural Philosophy, Pemberton observes (sect. 20.), cannot be 
so conclusive as in the Mathematics, because the subjects of the latter 
are merely ideas, the arbitrary productions of our own minds; of the 
former, objects without us. I confess I long for some fair opportunity 
of exposing this superannuated distinction between abstract science and 
physical knowledge. As if all knowledge that did not immediately refer 
to real existencies, would not be perfectly fantastic—as much so, as a 
disquisition on the natural history of the Centaur, or a diatribe on the 
polity of Sylphs; and as if Euclid's Elements of Geometry had not as 
absolute a reference to those existencies, and did not as much derive 
its sole value from the means it affords of extending our knowledge 
respecting them, as a dissertation on the properties of platinum!—The 
three fundamental principles of the Newtonian Philosophy, are; That more 
causes are not to be allowed, than are sufficient to account for 
effects; That like effects are to be ascribed to the same (to like) 
causes; and, That those qualities which belong to all bodies with which 
we are acquainted, and which in the same body can neither be increased 
nor lessened, should be deemed the universal properties of all bodies. 
The obvious tendency of these principles—resting solely, it should seem, 
on the general simplicity and constancy which we observe to reign in all 
the works of nature—is, to authorise the induction of general 
conclusions from particular experiments.

Finished Moore's Zeluco. This character is well contrived to purge the 
selfish and malignant passions, by exhibiting the hideous effect of 
their unrestricted indulgence; and the crush of the sparrow at the 
outset, and of the child at the close, is felicitously conceived for 
this purpose: but the last moments of Zeluco should have been deepened 
with greater horror;—it was a most inviting opportunity for applying the 
terrible graces to a great moral purpose.

JAN. the 13th

Assisted at the first distribution of Soup to the Poor, in this hard 
season:—a mode of relief, which, however exposed to obloquy, seems 
eagerly and gratefully accepted. It was gratifying to observe Churchmen, 
Presbyterians, Independents, Unitarians, Quakers, all actively united in 
the same benevolent design; and warmed, from this circumstance, into 
complacency and kindness to each other. If no other good arises from the 
undertaking, this is a great one.

Read Pope's five Ethic Epistles, or Moral Essays. There is an occasional 
pertness and flippancy in them, not to my taste; and which would never 
have accorded, with the Essay on Man completed, of which they are 
professed to be "membra disjecta"<124>. Pope, I suspect, felt himself 
unequal to the execution of this Essay in all its proposed extent;—if he 
ever seriously designed it, which I much doubt.

Finished Moore's Edward. The outset of this novel delighted me highly; 
but as it advances, the interest declines. Rather too many characters, 
with perplexing relations, are introduced; the narrative is 
precipitated, on important occasions, too rapidly for exciting a lively 
concern; and the final denouement is forced and hurried. Barnet's, 
however, is an original and finished portrait: and Edward, himself, 
forms an admirable contrast to Zeluco.

JAN. the 18th

Read the 1st Book of Pemberton's Newton. The Laws of Motion on which 
Newton grounds all his conclusions, (and the simplicity of which 
Pemberton has injured by periphrasis), are these: 1st, That all bodies 
persist in a state of rest, or of moving uniformly onwards in a straight 
line, till compelled to change this state by some force impressed upon 
them: 2ndly, That the change of state thus produced, is always 
proportional to the moving force impressed, and takes place in the right 
line in which that force is impressed: 3rdly, That the re-action of any 
body acted on by another, is always equal in force, and opposite in 
direction, to the action of that other body upon it. These Laws 
established—and uniform observation attests them to obtain wherever we 
have an opportunity of making the experiment—by simply assuming an 
original projectile and rotatory motion impressed, and a power of 
gravitation in all bodies, proportioned to their quantity of matter, and 
diminishing (as all radiating power will of course diminish) in the 
duplicate ratio of the distance to which it extends, he accounts for all 
the planetary movements, and all the influences of these bodies on each 
other. That such a power of gravitation retains the moon in its orbit, 
seems past all doubt, because it is demonstrable, that the same power of 
gravity which operates on the surface of the earth, extended to the 
moon, is precisely what is requisite for effecting this purpose: and the 
exact solution which this principle affords, not only of all the simple 
planetary motions, but of all their disturbances of each other—
disturbances, which on the supposition of such a power must exist, which 
observation exactly verifies, and which the assumption of such a power 
enables us to calculate with the utmost nicety beforehand—can surely 
leave no doubt on the most sceptical mind, that the same principle 
pervades and sustains the whole of our system.—Such is the solid and 
broad basis of Newton's distinguishing fame as an original discoverer in 
science: and it may well sustain the loftiest column.

JAN. the 20th

Looked over Whitehurst's Theory of the Earth. His hypothesis is, That 
our globe was originally a confused mass of all the elements; That from 
gravitation and elective attraction, these elements gradually subsided 
into concentric layers, of which water occupied the highest station; 
That during this process, the whole mass assumed, from rotation, a 
spheroidical form; That the terraqueous part of the antediluvian world 
was formed of mud, congested by the aestuation of the tides; and, That 
the deluge, and present state of continents and islands, was produced by 
the superficial water falling, through chasms, on an ignited stratum 
beneath; and bursting, by the expansive force of steam (twenty-eight 
times more powerful than gunpowder) the superincumbent layers:—whence 
the ruins of order that we discover in mountainous regions, together 
with the remains of animals and, vegetables found imbedded there.—These 
Theories may amuse the imagination, but, can surely never satisfy the 
judgment.

Finished afterwards the 3rd and last book of Pemberton's. Newton;—on 
Optics. Bold and sublime invention may be regarded as the predominant 
feature of the Principia, patient and sagacious investigation of the 
Optics; but, both, these qualities eminently obtain in each of these 
immortal Works.

JAN. the 23rd

Read the 1st Part of Price's Essay on the Picturesque. After urging the 
propriety of an attention to landscape-painting in the improvement of 
ground, on the principle that landscape-painters, have made the most 
pleasing selections from nature, he proceeds to the consideration of 
picturesqueness. This he regards, not (what its name might seem to 
denote) as whatever affords us pleasure in a picture—for beauty and, 
sublimity, may do this; but as a third quality, distinct from both, and 
furnishing a pleasure sui generis: and he places it, in that intricacy 
and variety which obtain in objects, rough, suddenly diversified, and 
irregular; and which nourish, by partial concealments and perpetual 
change, a lively and active curiosity in the mind of the observer.—
Picturesqueness stands thus distinguished, from Beauty, which arises 
from smoothness instead of roughness, and from gradual instead of sudden 
variation, and which disposes the soul to languor; and from Sublimity, 
which is promoted by simplicity, instead of variety, and whose tendency 
is to rigify with terror: it holds a middle station between these 
qualities: it is engrafted, not on pleasure like the former, nor on pain 
like the latter, but on curiosity; it neither relaxes, like the one, nor 
violently stretches like the other, but maintains the fibres, by its 
active stimulus, in their full tone, and just tension; and may thus 
advantageously mingle with either, correcting the languor of beauty and 
the horror of sublimity, though it must necessarily diminish in this, 
case the peculiar effect of each—As the sublime cannot be created; the 
art of improving landscape must depend on cultivating the beautiful, and 
the picturesque; and the grand mistake in this art has hitherto been, in 
pursuing the former to the exclusion of the latter—the effect of mere 
beauty being repose, which may degenerate into insipidity, of the 
picturesque, irritation, by which that faulty tendency is counteracted. 
He proceeds to instance the presence of the picturesque, where beauty 
alone has been supposed to obtain,—in the crisped and shadowy hair of 
the human head—the jagged and angular leaves of shrubs—and the sharp and 
rough ornaments of architecture: to enforce this distinction still 
farther, he points to Claude and Correggio on the one hand, and to 
Rubens on the other—to the light sprayey foliage and fresh tints of 
spring, and to the rich masses of chiaroscuro and the deep mellow 
glowing hues of autumn—as furnishing eminent examples, the former of the 
beautiful, and the latter of the picturesque: and he closes, with 
endeavouring to establish, that the properties of objects which 
constitute beauty of form, by having their smooth and flowing outlines 
clogged up, degenerate, through insipidity, into ugliness; white those 
which constitute picturesqueness, tend, by distortion, into deformity—so 
that deformity is to ugliness, what picturesqueness is to beauty.—Such, 
on a rough view, seems the outline of Mr. Price's theory, and of the 
arguments which he adduces to support it: and to me, I confess, they 
appear fully to justify the separation he has made, of the Picturesque, 
from the other qualities with which it is commonly confounded. It is 
only by discriminations like these in the different species of delight 
with which we are touched in contemplating the physical and moral world—
modes of affection, which, however distinct in their nature, are, in 
ordinary language, usually lumped together under some general title 
expressive of the gratification they in common afford—that we can ever 
hope to arrive at any clear and precise views of the pleasures of taste, 
or qualify ourselves to form any satisfactory hypothesis respecting 
them.

JAN. the 26th

Read the 2nd Part of Price on the Picturesque: in which he exposes, with 
great wit, force, and effect, the insipidity, monotony, and ugliness; of 
the clump, the belt, the fir groves, serpentine walks, and aqueous' 
sheets, of Kent, Brown, and the herd of modern landscape-gardeners; and 
deduces, as a general conclusion, that that artist is the best improver 
of landscape, who leaves, or who creates, the greatest variety of 
pictures, such as painters will least wish to alter.—He admits, nay 
contends for, the propriety of rich artificial scenery near the house, 
and derides the affectation of simplicity, and what is called nature, 
there.—Whatever becomes of his theory, we must allow that his taste in 
practice—in the practice, I mean, which he prescribes—is admirable: for 
who would not wish to realise, around him, the scenes which he paints so 
vividly to the imagination as examples of his principles!

JAN. the 27th

Looked over Gilpin's Two Essays; on Picturesque Beauty, and Picturesque 
Travel. The former of these, evidently manifests the necessity, and 
points to the establishment, of Price's distinction. Gilpin enforces the 
propriety of discriminating, between such objects as are beautiful, and 
such as are picturesque; such as please in their natural state, and such 
as please from some quality capable of being illustrated in painting; 
and he makes roughness, this distinguishing quality: but why roughness 
should make this essential difference between the beautiful and the 
picturesque, the objects of nature and the objects of artificial 
representation, he cannot satisfy himself: and Reynold's Letter leaves 
the question still more perplexed.—Dipped afterwards into Knights' 
Landscape. He inculcates the same practical doctrine as Price; though 
his theory, which he does not clearly propound, seems to be different.

Read Fielding's Life of Jonathan Wild; a caustic satire, in Swift's 
coarsest manner; but displaying a wonderful knowledge of low and 
villainous life: and his Journey into Another World; in which much 
useful irony is couched in a very wild and original form.

FEBRUARY the.2nd

Finished the perusal of the First Six Books of Milton's Paradise Lost. 
The scene betwixt Satan, Sin, and Death, in the 2nd Book, is 
transcendently sublime: the Allegory, to which Addison objects, is lost 
amidst such force and vividness and majesty of description, as, I think 
with Atterbury, renders the grandest passages in Homer and Virgil 
comparatively feeble and dwarfish.-In the 3rd Book, not all the powers 
of Milton's skill and genius, though vigorously exerted for the purpose, 
can palliate the monstrous absurdities, or reconcile the glaring 
inconsistencies, of the orthodox faith: they rather stare out in higher 
and more offensive relief, from the strength with which he has brought 
before us, the personages, and the state of being, to which they 
attach.—Relieved from these shackles, in the 4th Book, Milton once more 
towers into native excellence, and "is himself again".

In a note on v. 53, of the 5th Book,

 	fair it seem'd, 
Much fairer to my fancy than by day:

Newton remarks, that our sensations are more vivid in dreams than when 
awake; and represents Milton as ascribing it, to the action of some 
spiritual Being on the sensory. I see no reason to alter the opinion I 
long since formed upon this subject.

Of the fact itself, there can be no question—it must have fallen, I 
should suppose, within almost every one's experience; and this superior 
susceptibility seems by no means confined to impressions from the fair 
and beautiful; but to extend to every species of emotion whatever. If it 
be a scene of horror-if we are encountered, on a trackless heath, by 
some dire form; if it hunts us, with a murderer's knife, to the edge of 
some hanging precipice; if we struggle to shriek for some near help, and 
utterance is denied—there is a degree of anguish and wretchedness in our 
sufferings, and a prostration of all manly energy under an irresistible 
and overwhelming terror, exceeding far, I conceive, what any mortal ever 
endured from real apprehension. If it be a scene of sensibility—if we 
recognize some long-lost friend; if we meet, after hapless separation, 
the dear object of our tenderest affection; if we hold sweet 
intercourse, if we mingle heart with heart and pour out all our fondest 
wishes, the melting soul dissolves in a deliquium<125> of tenderness and 
delight, which I doubt whether the warmest friend or most passionate 
lover ever experienced. We feel when we awake from such glowing visions, 
and while their effects still vibrate on the mind, that everything in 
this life is stale and flat and tasteless on the comparison. It is 
related of the celebrated Tartini, that he once dreamed he had entered 
into a compact with the Devil, who, to exhibit a specimen of his powers, 
played him a solo so divinely on the fiddle, that the musician waked 
with transports, seized his violin, and tried to catch the fleeting 
idea, but felt his utmost efforts at imitation so tame and unavailing, 
that he dashed his instrument in despair to the ground; and ever after 
declared, he should never have brought himself to touch catgut again, 
could he possibly have gained a livelihood without it. This story is by 
no means incredible: though, probably, had Tartini heard, when awake, 
the same notes which ravished him in vision, he would have formed a very 
different estimate of their merit. I have always found, at least, when 
successful in recalling any specific object—a piece of poetry or 
eloquence, for instance—which delighted me beyond measure in a dream, 
that it has appeared on the revision very puerile or uncouth. For a time 
indeed, and whilst the intense idea still breathes its charms or its 
horrors on the mind, the delusion may continue: but it soon vanishes; 
and had we an opportunity of making the comparison, I suspect we should 
invariably discover, that the strength of the emotion in our dreams, was 
quite disproportionate to the apparent occasion which produced it.

This curious phaenomenon, which seems to have escaped investigation, may 
perhaps admit of the following easy and simple solution. In sleep, not 
only are our senses closed against all impressions from without, but the 
command which we possess over the train of our ideas, when awake, seems 
entirely suspended; nor do these ideas appear to suggest many of the 
various associations with which on other occasions they are usually 
combined: of course, whatever image is presented to the imagination 
under these circumstances, must exert its whole influence on the 
sensibility, undiminished by any disturbing action whatever; and 
enjoying full occupation of the mind, must excite there all the effect 
which such a cause operating on such a substance is capable of 
producing. The case is obviously very different when we are awake; 
since, to say nothing of the constant importunity of what is passing 
around us, some voluntary or some spontaneous suggestion is for ever 
mingling with the immediate object of our thoughts. If we are assailed 
by distress, the mind naturally turns to its resources; it looks 
backward, it looks forward; it adopts some fortifying reflection, it 
encourages some soothing hope; and contrives to abate its present 
suffering, by the powers of consolation or the prospect of deliverance. 
In our happiest moments, on the other hand, our delight is not 
unadulterated: some obtrusive care, some obscure suspicion, some cruel 
jealousy or apprehension; the mere reflection that all this bliss must 
soon end, and may be interrupted, alloys and vitiates our very purest 
enjoyments. We are more poignantly affected in our dreams than when 
awake, not because our sensibility is more acute, or the objects 
presented to it are more forcible and impressive than in real life—for 
the contrary may rather be presumed;—but because whatever affects us in 
this state, operates undisturbed by the various interfering influences 
which are perpetually mingling with the proper current of our ideas when 
awake, and abating the force of the predominant impression which obtains 
there.-A consideration of two or three cases something analogous to 
dreaming, will perhaps throw some additional light and evidence on this 
attempted explication.

I. The susceptibility of little children to gratification or distress, 
is obvious to everyone. Children have little to look back upon; and they 
look forward, still less; nor is their attention diverted by any of 
those associations which farther experience contracts: their minds are 
almost entirely engrossed with the occupation, whatever it he, of the 
moment. The morning of life, therefore, is something like a dream; and 
real existencies affect us, in this state, much in the same manner as 
visions do in sleep. A child who has its favourite plaything taken away, 
suffers more than a monarch from the dismemberment of his empire. The 
monarch, indeed, by summoning before him, in succession, all the 
consequences of his loss, his diminution of revenue, of power, and 
reputation, may protract his sufferings longer; but it is impossible not 
to think, that the little urchin, who shrieks, and stamps his foot, and 
is convulsed with grief, endures, for the time, more real vexation and 
anguish, than the unhappy Sovereign, who eats his dinner very calmly, 
and partakes, though somewhat cloudy perhaps, of his ordinary 
amusements. "I despair", says Mr. Burke, in his Introduction to the 
Sublime and Beautiful "of ever receiving the same degree of pleasure 
from the most excellent performances of genius, which I felt, at that 
age, from pieces which my present judgment regards as trifling and 
contemptible". Mr. B. ascribes this principally to the fastidiousness 
which a mind acquires from cultivation. And in some measure, no doubt, 
this accounts for the phenomenon; but not, I think, completely. There 
are many persons who pass in the world for men of fair understandings 
and competent taste, who are just as incapable, I apprehend, of 
discovering the blemishes of a first-rate composition, as a child is, of 
detecting the nonsense of Tom Thumb; yet I much question whether such a 
reader would derive half the gratification from the first perusal of the 
Aeneid, which infant curiosity eagerly extracts from the life and 
achievements of the other ill-fated hero. It is not merely that in early 
youth we are blind to defects, but that we enter with an entire and 
cordial interest into whatever captivates the imagination. When I first 
read Robinson Crusoe—(the remembrance of it is still delightful, and 
refreshing to the spirits)—I went along with him completely—I was 
absorbed in his adventures: I sailed with him on the raft; I saw the 
print of the foot upon the sands; I prattled with Friday. The most 
devoted novel-reader, in maturer life, I would suppose, never attains to 
such a perfection of illusion and interest. It is indeed scarcely 
possible that he should. As we advance in years, a thousand collateral 
considerations, the fruits of our knowledge and experience, break in 
upon our thoughts, and mingle their influences with whatever engages our 
attention; that integrity of feeling, which gave to youth its frankness 
and its fire, its keen susceptibility and ardent passions, gradually 
yields to the temperament of suggestions, which at once abate our joys 
and sorrows, our pleasures and our pains; and life insensibly assumes, 
under this equalising process, that subdued tone and evenness of tenor, 
which distinguish old age, and for which a mere decay of sensibility, or 
of the stimulus of novelty in the objects which act upon it, (though 
these causes no doubt co-operate), will be found., in themselves, very 
insufficient to account.

II. Intoxication; like sleep, induces an oblivion of the past and 
neglect of the future; dissolves the associations by which our ideas are 
ordinarily combined; and disposes us to a vivid perception of the images 
and feelings of the moment, by obstructing the avenues to other 
impressions. I am not sure that it materially promotes hilarity in any 
other than this negative way; for those who besot themselves privately, 
are often sufficiently grave, and conscious of no other effect from the 
stimulus of their potations, than the dispersion of care. Men assemble 
at the table on purpose to be gay; and festivity usually accompanies the 
social circulation of the bottle: our hearts expand; trifles delight us; 
an ordinary anecdote assumes poignancy and spirit; we are enchanted with 
a joke which our returning reason disdains; our mirth is intemperate, 
boisterous, and absurdly disproportionate to the occasion. It is not 
however to joyous emotions, exclusively, that wine quickens us, but, as 
we should naturally expect from the influence of such a cause, to the 
predominant impression, whatever it may be. Joy commonly prevails at the 
table, because it is preconcerted that it should do so: this convivial 
arrangement, however, is sometimes disturbed: men are often exquisitely 
sore and irascible in their cups, whether replenished with Falernian or 
Champagne; and, though certainly more rare, and somewhat ridiculous, I 
have witnessed scenes of drunken grief and tenderness, surpassing, to 
all appearance, what sober sensibility ever felt, and which the parties 
concerned have compared, on recollection, to the vivid mockery of 
dreams.

III. Though it be difficult to speculate on a condition of our unhappy 
species which we never experienced, and whose afflicting presence, 
wherever it prevails, we approach with trembling and horror, yet, as far 
as we can explore this obscure and dreadful visitation, there seems a 
striking analogy between insanity and dreaming. In both cases, an unreal 
vision is presented to the fancy, which extinguishing memory and 
foresight and arresting the whole attention of the mind, induces the 
deluded patient to think and reason and act, in a way, which, however 
consistent with the scene before him, appears to the waking and rational 
spectator in the highest degree incoherent and preposterous. In dreams, 
indeed, these apparent extravagancies are usually veiled; they are not 
however always so. There are persons who preserve in sleep a sufficient 
knowledge of their actual situation, to rise, dress themselves, and 
perform many of the common offices of life, though actuated all the time 
by a fantastic illusion. Such persons, on such occasions, exhibit the 
picture of madness. When Lady Macbeth, under the visitation of those 
"terrible dreams" that "shake her nightly", seizes her taper and stalks 
forth; when she sees and smells' the blood upon her hand—which is not 
there; when, in vacancy, she communes with her husband—so express an 
image does she present of mental alienation, that an audience, not 
previously prepared for the purpose, would naturally conclude that the 
great Master of the human heart designed to exhibit, in her person, the 
hideous, but less original and striking spectacle, of a mind impelled to 
distraction, and permanently deranged, by the complicated pangs of 
horror and remorse. The maniac, indeed, perceives more distinctly than 
the somnambulist, the real situation of things around him: his external 
senses are commonly perfect and acute; nor is there visibly anything in 
the construction of his organs, calculated to distort the 
representations they transmit. It is the vision within that disturbs 
him. Partly, this vision confounds the real representation, and 
assimilates it to its own ideal forms: partly, it should seem incapable 
of completing the delusion. The lunatic discovers that things about him 
are not, as according to the phantasm that possesses his mind, they 
ought to be: this distracts his hurried fancy; everything around, seems 
wild and discomposed; his dearest friends appear his bitterest enemies; 
the order of nature, to his imagination, is subverted; he feels 
oppressed by a general conspiracy of his species; and is filled with 
those dark, jealous and malignant suspicions, which are considered, I 
believe, by those conversant with this dreadful calamity, as, above all 
others, the most decisive tokens of insanity. As insanity bears this 
resemblance to dreaming, so it seems to partake of that extreme 
susceptibility, and to be exposed to those excesses of delight and 
sorrow, which form so remarkable a feature in our dreams. That there are 
"joys in madness which none but madmen know", has been affirmed by one 
who is supposed to have felt them; and is attested by the tumultuous and 
frantic transports which some maniacs exhibit. We shudder, indeed, at 
beholding them; and Gray's image, of

Moody madness, laughing wild 
Amidst severest woe,

is amongst the most affecting that poetry presents: the woe, however, 
seems altogether confined to the spectator, who is naturally shocked at 
witnessing such insensibility to the heaviest affliction with which it 
has pleased the Almighty to humble the arrogance of man: the maniac 
himself, appears perfectly and eminently happy. As there occurs, in some 
sorts of madness, a vacancy from care and a swelling rapture of heart, 
surpassing, apparently, the most pleasurable emotions a sane mind ever 
feels, so, in other descriptions of this deplorable malady, we behold a 
settled and brooding melancholy, a deep despair, whose gloomy horrors no 
art can divert, no consolation can assuage, and of whose unutterable 
anguish, the sound imagination, it may be presumed, can form no 
conception whatever. The mind shrinks with dismay from the aspect and 
contagion of a woe, which, as it springs from no visible cause, admits 
of no discoverable relief; nor can we easily account for the exorbitance 
of misery, any more than for the extravagance of joy, in disordered 
intellects, but by supposing (as in dreams) a total absorption of the 
soul in the scene presented to it, and an entire seclusion from the 
influence of those palliative principles, which, in a waking and sober 
and rational agent, produce a sort of equanimity through all the 
vicissitudes of existence, and if they deaden our sensibility to some of 
the most endearing and exalted pleasures of life, seem designed too, in 
the constitution of our being, to mitigate its insupportable 
afflictions. The poignancy of existence, no doubt, is degraded by their 
action: but Hope, which may be regarded as a kind of voluntary and 
flattering dream of the future, still remains, our last best friend, to 
triumph over experience; and by anticipating only the bright side of the 
prospects before us, to shed a ray of interest upon scenes, which, were 
they presented to the mind with all the drawbacks that we are morally 
assured must attend the actual accomplishment of our fondest wishes, 
would stifle every generous exertion, and sink the human heart in 
listlessness and despondency.

FEB. the 7th

Finished the remaining Six Books of Paradise Lost. The Battle of the 
Angels, in the 6th Book,—a most daring effort of invention,—is supported 
with wonderful force, fire, and sublimity; and rises to the last:—nor do 
I, myself, when warmed with the subject, object to the taunting jeers, 
and scornful puns, of Satan and Belial.—In the 9th Book, Milton 
naturalises the fall of Man, with admirable address.—The interest of the 
poem, no doubt, in some measure declines as it advances; but, upon the 
whole, my opinion of this astonishing effort of genius, is greatly 
raised by this review of it. Compare the slender and unpromising stamina 
on which Milton had to work, with the stupendous production which he has 
formed upon them:—this is the way to estimate his powers of invention, 
the great characteristic of a Poet.

Read the 4th and last Book of Fielding's Joseph Andrews. I see no 
necessity for the marvellous in incident, at the conclusion of this 
Novel: which might have ended in the same easy and natural strain in 
which it had been conducted; and asserted its claim to interest, solely 
from the masterly effect with which it exhibited a picture of real life 
and manners, though sketched by one who has an evident propensity to 
seize their coarser features.

FEB. the 11th

Read Lindsay's Sermon on the death of Dr. Towers; containing a most 
eloquent and masterly display of the advantages of Revelation over 
Reason, in our prospects beyond the grave. He who can write thus, one 
wishes should write more.

Finished Fielding's Amelia. There is a still stronger and more 
disgusting taint of vulgarity, in this novel, than in Joseph Andrews. 
The authors' grand agent in all his women, but his heroines, seems the 
furor uterinus;<126> whose prurience, when insufficient for his purpose, 
he elegantly and ingeniously contrives to exasperate by cordials and 
philters!—Fielding, after all, is but a Dutch painter of manners: he 
cannot soar higher than the lowest scenes of high life; and he appears 
to descend, con amore, into the vilest and most blasted depths of low 
life.—Yet, whilst I deliver this censure, I must forget (for its other 
merits) Tom Jones.

Looked over Dr. Parr's strictures on Dr. Combo's Horace, in the British 
Critic for Jan. Feb. March and April, 1794. They evince great force of 
mind, and depth of erudition; but are evidently dictated by a spirit of 
personal and exceptious hostility, which, however warranted by 
circumstances, and however becoming in a separate and specific attack, 
but ill accords with the air of dignified impartiality and judicial 
candour which should pervade every article of a Work professing to sit 
in judgment, indiscriminately, on all the literary productions of the 
day. His character of Horace at the outset (p. 48.) is exquisitely 
finished: and what he alleges (p. 122.) in defence of verbal criticism 
in general, and closes (p. 423.) with saying of Bentley in particular, 
towers into tranacendant excellence.

FEB. the 16th

Finished the 1st Book of Dr. Hey's Lectures in Divinity. His manner 
struck me as stiff and perplexed, at first: but this wears off, as I 
advance.—Hey understands (c. 12, sect. 15.) what Mosheim affirms of the 
Platonists—that they asserted the innocence of maintaining truth by 
fraud—as applied to the Platonic Christians: I incline to think the 
ecclesiastical historian means, the revivers of the Platonic philosophy 
in general. What Hey says, in a note immediately afterwards, of 
Warburton's talking of the roguery that is apt to mix with enthusiasm, 
relates, I suppose, to that passage in the D. L.<127> (B. 3. sect. 6.) 
which maintains the mixture of enthusiasm and policy in all great 
conquerors and founders of states,—though it hardly sustains this 
charge. —The exposition (c. 13.) of the inconceivable difficulty of 
forging narratives which shall pass as true, as applied to the 
Scriptures, has great force indeed.—The principles on which (cs. 15. and 
16.) he defends the credibility, of miracles, and with respect, to which 
he seems to have been misled by Hume, leave the question more involved, 
and the mind more dissatisfied, than they found it. Twice he intimates 
(sect. 22, c. 15, and sect. 10, c. 16.) that, after all, we must refer 
something to the same powers of judging that we unconsciously exercise 
about prudence, beauty, virtue, &c; of which we scarcely know the 
nature, nor can well describe the action: though we must not rest in 
these feelings, where it can be avoided; but should endeavour to analyse 
them, and to regulate their operation by reason and utility. Ultimately, 
no doubt, belief must be referred to inexplicable feeling; but the 
farther we can advance in simplifying and classing the principles on 
which this feeling is produced, the better.—He denies (c. 18, sect 11.) 
that Christians, as such, are intolerant: I still think, however, that 
Gibbon's imputation of a tendency to intolerance in the very nature of 
the Christian faith, is perfectly well founded.—Morality, he considers 
(c. 19, sects. 3 and 12 ) as nothing but a set of rules conducive to 
happiness, established and recognized by the moral sense; that this 
moral sense is generated by degrees; and that these rules must arise 
from experience. He distinctly lays it down (sect. 14.) that he who 
performs his duties from any principle which extends not beyond mankind—
as rectitude, honour, benevolence, prudence, moral sense, the general 
good, the law of nature, or the fitness of things—acts from motives of 
virtue; he who performs them from any view to God, acts from motives of 
religion. I perfectly concur in this distinction.—That part of the 
Appendix, which developer the effects that the general principles of 
human nature, and the particular character of different states and 
stages of society, would naturally have, in modifying the Christian 
religion as delivered to us by its Founder, is uncommonly able.

FEB. the 21st

Read the 2nd Book of Hey's Theological Lectures. Controversy, he wishes 
(cs. 1. and 2.) to be conducted on the principle, of the two parties, 
not decidedly differing, but having doubts in common, which they desire 
to have cleared up by the assistance of two advocates and a judge 
properly qualified for their respective offices. He, is not (c. 3.) for 
excluding, but limiting, the use of the great characteristic of man—
ridicule; a topic which he treats very felicitously. The whole evinces 
great candour, and refined discernment. To ridicule a subject (c. 3; 
sect. 11.) he defines, to be the exhibiting two different views of it, 
at the same time; one, which shall excite some sort of respect; the 
other, an opposite and predominant feeling: and on the propriety of 
employing this test, he enquires, at the close of the chapter, whether 
it is not the part of a larger proposition, That we should correct our 
reason by our feelings, and our feelings by our reason?—Under the 
limitation, that the topics of ridicule should be drawn from the subject 
itself, or from some matter with which it stands naturally and strictly 
connected, there seems no just exception to the application of this 
criterion: but otherwise, it is surely possible, by a mischievous 
dexterity, to reflect derision and disgrace, on any theme, however 
serious, and however true—and indeed the more solemn its character, the 
more easy will be to effect this injustice.—Stating (sect. 12, c. 2.) 
the object of controversy to be truth, he appends, in a note, "Truth or 
justice; either word might do: all virtues have been considered, as 
species of truth; and also, as reducible to justice".—Hey's general 
seriousness, is occasionally chastised by a festivity which is highly 
pleasing; and not the less so, for being unexpected.

FEB. the 25th

Finished the 3rd Book of Hey's Lectures. In the first five chapters he 
contends for the propriety of Articles of Faith, as promotive of unity 
of doctrine, which unity conduces to public worship, which mode of 
worship tends (through the principles of association and sympathy, from 
which, he thinks, most of our sentiments and affections may be deduced) 
to cultivate religious sentiments, which sentiments actuate our 
conduct:—something after the manner of "The house that Jack built". He 
then proceeds to prepare the way for his construction of the Articles of 
our Church, by maintaining, That (cs. 6. 7. and 8.) the sense which the 
Church, for the time being, entertains of its Articles, though it be a 
new one, is the sense in which they should be taken; That (c. 9.) in 
regarding their primitive sense, the circumstances under which they were 
imposed—as the heresies they were designed to guard against—should be 
particularly considered; and, That (c. 10.) unintelligible Articles may 
with propriety be subscribed, the object here, being, not truth, but 
utility, in not neglecting the revelation of God though at present 
obscure, and preserving that uniformity of worship by which devout 
sympathy is heightened—a proposition which savours a little of "la 
morale des Jesuites".—Superstition (c. 15. sect. 1.) Hey grounds in 
fear; and places it, in seeing the immediate agency and design of the 
Deity in external phaenomena: enthusiasm, in presumption; and places it 
in seeing the same agency and design in the internal affections of the 
mind: the joint and undetermined influence of both, he thinks, properly 
constitutes fanaticism: mysticism he regards as the result of inordinate 
devout affections.

FEB. the 28th

Finished a perusal of Ovid's Metamorphoses: a most extraordinary 
contexture of strange tales undoubtedly, and woven one into the other 
with exquisite and inimitable address, but of which it is surely 
impossible to think, with Warburton, (D. L., B. 3, sect. 3.), that it 
was constructed on a grand and regular plan, as a popular history of 
Providence; inculcating, by a methodical series of fables founded on a 
corruption of Pagan history from the creation of the world down to his 
own times,—that the Gods punished impiety!—a discovery, in all respects, 
worthy of its, author.—Ovid, one would think, must have known best; but 
surely the fulsome adulation paid to Augustus, in the close, at the 
expense of Julius Caesar, never could have flattered. The friend of 
Horace, Virgil, and Maecenas, must have had a better taste.—From the, 
"impleratque uterum generoso germine", B. 9, v. 280; and again, 
"ingentique implet Achille",<128> B. 11, v. 265, Milton probably caught 
his "Filled her with thee a daughter fair".—Ovid's exuberant imagination 
often carries us delightfully away; but I am afraid, with all its 
charms, we shall search in vain, in the Metamorphoses, for those great 
characteristics, which Hume, in his Essay on Eloquence, considers as 
distinguishing "a work of genius, from the adulterate beauties of a 
capricious wit and fancy".

MARCH the 2nd

Read the first Eight Chapters (each Chapter corresponding to an Article) 
of the 4th B. of Hey's Lectures. The doctrine of the Trinity, he 
inclines to think (c. 1.), was not reduced into form till the 4th 
century: he confesses that it is perfectly unintelligible, and would 
better be expressed by negative terms; that it is a mere hypothesis 
framed to make the different texts on the subject consistent—as 
gravitation has been assumed to account for the various phenomena of 
nature—and at the same time to guard against the various false 
suppositions which have been started for the purpose; considers 
Trinitarians and Anti-Trinitarians as having formed their respective 
doctrines in a different way, the former consulting the expressions of 
Scripture, and submitting their reason to the result, the latter drawing 
first their conclusions from reason, and then endeavouring to interpret 
Scripture conformably—on some occasions, with so much violence to the 
text, and at the expense of such extrusions from it, as might seem to 
admit that the doctrine is really contained there; and expresses a wish—
a candid and judicious one, I think—that this mysterious topic had been 
suffered to remain in the indefinite state in which it rested before 
Christians engaged in controversy on the subject.—In the 2nd c. he 
applies the same train of observation, but as it appears to me with less 
success, to the 2nd Article: and concludes with suggesting, whether the 
texts of Scripture from which such doctrines are taken, ought to be 
studied scientifically; whether they were not the indefinite expressions 
of strong feeling; and whether, regarding them in this light, Christians 
of different opinions and tastes, might not unite in the same worship, 
and partake of the same spiritual food, as guests of different palates 
join in the same convivial repast? There is something much above the 
mere theologian in these suggestions.—With respect to morals, 
Christianity, he remarks (c. 6, sect. 5.) is not systematical—does not 
describe limits of rights and obligations: it rather enforces what it 
takes for granted, than teaches what is new: but then it searches, 
rectifies, and warms the heart, from which all particular modes of 
conferring happiness, flow; and gives a sanction to virtue of every 
kind, in every stage of its progressive improvement. This is happily 
conceived; and not less felicitously expressed.—Hey considers (c. 7.) 
only the moral part of the Mosaic dispensation, as binding upon 
Christians; but then he seems to think that some of the ceremonial laws 
are moral in substance; and distinctly contends (sect. 13.) that the 4th 
Commandment, enjoining the observance of the Sabbath—(indeed that the 
whole Decalogue)—is of this description.—In treating of the Athanasian 
Creed (c. 8.), he pushes his refinements, till he loses his credit. "No 
minister", he expressly affirms, "has a right to say, you will be damned 
if you do not account my doctrines essential to the Christian faith"; 
yet he zealously defends the damnatory clauses in that Creed. Common 
sense revolts at such a glaring contradiction.

Read the First Book of the Aeneid. There seems to be much the same 
relative difference between Ovid and Virgil, as between Ariosto and 
Tasso: Ovid's fancy, is wild and luxuriant; Virgil's, chaste and 
elevated: Ovid's expression, exuberantly varied; Virgil's, pure, 
elegant, and sometimes exquisitely felicitous—"pleno se proluit 
auro",<129> what can be finer!—: but in force of genius and sublimity of 
invention, I cannot think that Virgil will endure comparison with 
Milton. By the bye—did not Milton catch his

"O! Son,— 
My word, my wisdom, and effectual might!"
—P. L., B. 3, v.170.
from Virgil's "Nate: meae vires, mea magna potentia"<130> Aeneid, L. 1. 
v. 664. Something seems very faulty in the passage beginning "Id 
metuens, &c." v. 24.<131>

MARCH the 7th

Pursued Hey's Lectures, B. 4. In the Introduction to the 2nd Part, he 
very justly remarks, that popular language expresses merely our 
immediate feelings; and that when we expand these expressions into 
general propositions, those propositions will often clash with each 
other.—Original Sin, he construes (c. 9.) into our appearing in the 
world as members of an offending community; and having a corrupted 
nature, derived, as bodily and mental evil is transmitted in the natural 
course of things, by inheritance: and he inclines to ascribe the source 
of both, to Adam's transgression. There appear, says he (sect. 38.) two 
Laws of God's government: one is, "parents by their conduct affect their 
children"; the other, "each man must work out his own salvation": as 
rules of action, these do not clash; the first is for the parent, the 
second for the child.—On a similar principle he endeavours (c. 10.) to 
solve the seeming difficulties and contradictions respecting free-will 
and necessity—spontaneity and divine grace—by remarking the different 
lights in which the same fact is, and ought to be, regarded, in 
different points of view. When we enter into the situation of the agent, 
we speak of his actions as free; when we enter into the situation of the 
spectator, we speak of them as necessary: beforehand, we should consider 
our future conduct as entirely depending on ourselves; afterwards, we 
should refer the good of it, to God: the same offence as instigated by 
Satan, is sin; as suggested by God, a judgment. The fact, is the same; 
the expression of that fact, springs from, and is addressed (in popular 
language) to, the feelings; which are different, according to the 
different relations in which that fact is viewed.: and he employs on 
this subject (sect. 49.) very felicitously, the illustration of a man 
withinside, and another withoutside, of a sphere, disputing on its 
convexity or concavity.—So (c. 11) on the doctrine of Justification: 
looking forward, we must strive to act as if all depended on ourselves; 
looking backward, even on the best course of conduct, we can only hope 
to be justified, in the sight of God, through the merits of Christ:—the 
former view, should stimulate our diligence; the latter, humble our 
pride.

Read to the end of the 6th Book of the Aeneid. I felt far more affected 
than, from recollection, I expected I should have been, with the last 
moments of Dido. Virgil appears to have exerted all his pathetic powers 
on this interesting occasion: yet one may a little question his judgment 
in doing so; for the more we sympathise with the unhappy Queen, the more 
his Hero is degraded. Aeneas, in no instance, makes a respectable 
figure; but in his final interview with Dido, he is contemptible.—The 
Games, in the 5th Book, are admirably conducted; and exhibit a fine 
example of improvement on their prototypes in Homer.—In the 6th Book, I 
do not discover a single trait which warrants Warburton's wild 
hypothesis. Both the topography and economy of the regions below, appear 
perplexed and obscure; and the whole subterraneous scene—even Elysium 
itself—most fearfully gloomy.

MARCH the 12th

Pursued Hey's Lectures, B. 4. On the doctrine of Atonement,—or our 
acceptance with God, notwithstanding our imperfections, in consequence 
of the merits and sufferings of Christ,—he observes (Appendix c. 11. 
sect. 29) that there is nothing in it repugnant to the natural 
sentiments of mankind:—we reward the son of a benefactor, for his 
father's sake; and a whole society may be benefited, on account of the 
services of the head of it.—On Predestination (c. 17.) he observes, that 
the texts in favour of this doctrine, were originally introduced in such 
a manner as to excite some good and pious sentiment; and that we may 
properly refer important events, in a general way, to the purpose of 
God—not as a practical rule, or speculative truth—but with a view to 
excite or assist devotional or moral feelings. We do the same, he 
observes, perpetually, in common language, on common occasions. With 
respect to prescience and free-will, he thinks (sect. 90) it may be 
impossible certainly to foresee how free agents will act; and God has 
only all possible knowledge.—His softenings down, and smoothing, and 
varnishing of the Articles—the 18th, for instance, and the 23rd-are 
infinitely curious.—It appears (c. 22, sect. 4) that the Jubilees at the 
close of the century, were kept in the years 1300, 1400 &c.: Hey thinks 
the preceding year is more properly the last:—he is surely wrong.—"He 
who refuses to admit a doctrine", Hey observes (c. 22, sect. 21), "does 
not of course deny it; and it may be wrong, in some cases, either to 
adopt or reject a notion."-In c. 21. sect. 9, he classes Voltaire and 
Jortin (of whom he had before, B. 4. c. 9. sect 8, spoken disparagingly) 
together, as flippant writers; in some little deviation, surely, from 
his own canons of controversy: and the mode in which he treats Robinson 
(c. 27, sect. 16) skews how the mild and candid Hey can occasionally 
feel and express himself. Such discords, unprepared and unresolved, are, 
from him, quite shocking.

Pursued the Aeneid. In the 7th Book, there is a very perceptible falling 
off; think, in smoothness and finish: Virgil becomes slovenly, harsh, 
and perplexed: the callida junctura,<132> the easy flow, and natural 
transition, are conspicuously wanting; and I am persuaded we have only 
the rough draft of the poet's thoughts, which his correct and exquisite 
taste would afterwards have polished into perfection—all the perfection, 
I mean, of which the productions of his genius are susceptible.—The 
comparison of Amata (v. 378, &c.) agitated into madness by the furies, 
to a whipped top, is surely very puerile and ridiculous: the "Dant 
animos plagae",<133> at the close of this simile, would be no bad 
quotation in favour of birch.

MARCH the 16th

Finished the 39 Chapters (corresponding to the Articles) which compose 
the 4th and last Book of Hey's Lectures. Noticing (c. 28, sect. 10) the 
doctrine of the Romanists, who maintain that Christ's Body is naturally 
at the right hand of God, and sacramentally at other places, he acutely 
remarks, "where ideas are wanting, how useful are words!"—The 32nd c., 
he opens with observing, "That if one could give the natural principles 
of any subject, they would connect all facts; and make the best key to 
the history of men's practice: for all practice is only the operation of 
natural principles in different circumstances":-a remark at once 
profound and just.—Speaking of rites and ceremonies (c. 34, sect 4) he 
eloquently says, "all our best and finest tastes and feelings are to be 
set in motion, and made subservient to religion-our love of truth; our 
relish of order; our taste for beauty, sublimity, harmony, are to be 
solicited, engaged, interested: our passions are to be thrown into a 
devout course; and to have objects presented, which will excite and 
inflame them".—The being "moved by the Holy Ghost" to take holy orders, 
he pares away (c. 36, sect. 17) into "being conscious of good 
intentions" in undertaking the priestly office:—"it may afterwards be 
referred, with other good events, to the influence of the Spirit".—The 
spirit of improvement, he observes (c. 37, sect. 3), with great truth, 
is mild and gentle, when actuated by the good expected to accrue from 
it:—harsh and austere, when goaded by the faults and failures which seem 
to obstruct it. Speaking afterwards (sect. 19) of some of the difficult 
precepts of Christianity, he judiciously remarks, that what is 
desirable, must be limited by, and can only be attained through, what is 
practicable: and that though rules are delivered singly, they must not 
be taken as single rules and applied universally, to the exclusion of 
all others; but, that one rule must limit another; and that all must be 
tacitly limited by considerations of the greatest good.

Perspicacity, and a spirit of subtle and accurate discrimination, appear 
the distinguishing features of Dr. Hey's mind: but it is impossible not 
to perceive and mark, that these qualities are employed, on the subject 
which he treats, rather in the character of an advocate, who most 
ingeniously defends a difficult cause with which he has been entrusted, 
than in that of a sincere enquirer after truth, who impartially delivers 
his best judgment on the merits of a question which he has undertaken to 
investigate.—Putting all arguments on the case aside, is it not the most 
extraordinary thing in the world, that those who settled the doctrines 
of our particular Church, two centuries and a half ago, on questions the 
most abstruse and the most controverted, should, on every occasion, have 
been exactly right!

Perused the "Farmer's Boy"; a rural Poem, by Robert Bloomfield; edited 
by Capel Lofft. Works of mere comparative merit—which derive their claim 
to attention, not from any intrinsic excellence, but the unpropitious 
circumstances under which they were executed—are usually sickening; but 
I confess myself to have been sincerely and highly delighted with this 
pleasing poem, which vividly reflects the series of interesting images 
that, touched the sensibility of a young and untutored observer employed 
in rustic service through the year. Originality, on themes so hackneyed 
as pastoral delights, is invaluable; and we have it here, free from all 
taint of affectation, pure and unadulterate.

MARCH the 19th

Finished Pearson's Remarks on the Theory of Morals. He opens (c. 1.) 
with investigating the foundation of virtue; and defines it "voluntary 
obedience to the will of God"; contending that this, and this alone, it 
is; which constitutes any action virtuous or the contrary:—"what God 
commands, is right, and right because he commands it; what God forbids, 
is wrong, and wrong because he forbids it":—in perfect consistency with 
which principle, when he proceeds, in the next chapter, to consider the 
rule of virtue, he observes, that no one rule or criterion, other than 
one equivalent with the foundation of virtue, can comprehend all 
virtuous actions, or denote in any the quality which alone makes them 
so; but that the different rules which have been proposed on this head, 
though each exclusively inadequate and insufficient, have all their 
value, considered as indicative of the will of God; which consideration 
alone, however, can constitute any action performed under them, 
virtuous.—I object to this theory of my learned and amiable friend, in 
toto. In treating any popular subject, a philosopher has an 
unquestionable right to affix precise limits to the signification of the 
term, by which, in popular language, that topic is loosely and vaguely 
denoted:—he may perhaps venture to extend this signification, in some 
points, where it appears to include too little; and restrict it in 
others, where it appears to embrace too much: but he will exercise this 
power with extreme caution; and will always endeavour to keep distinctly 
and steadily in view, in spirit and in substance, the real subject-
matter which that term, in its customary import, is meant and employed 
to designate. Without this, it is obvious, his speculations, however 
correct in themselves, must necessarily be delusive in application. 
"Obedience to the will of God", may be a better rule of conduct—may be 
derived from a higher source, and present stronger incentives to its 
observance—than any which mere Virtue can boast; but I do most 
strenuously contend, that it is a rule of conduct quite distinct from 
virtue, as virtue is distinct from that; that the quality of actions 
which stands recognized in the sentiments and expressions of mankind as 
virtuous, and which, of necessity, can alone be virtue, involves no 
consideration whatever of the divine will; and, consequently, that the 
System which places the essence of moral distinction in an intentional 
obedience or disobedience to that will, however felicitously descriptive 
of a more exalted principle of action, as a Theory of Virtue, is 
fundamentally erroneous.—Mr. Pearson (c. 1.) very justly objects to Dr. 
Paley's definition of virtue, which, in addition to obedience to the 
will of God, requires our being actuated "by the hope of everlasting 
happiness", that it excludes a multitude of actions approved by all 
mankind as virtuous: but surely the same objection applies, with equal 
force, though in somewhat a less extent, to his own. Will it be 
contended that an atheist is quite incapable of virtue or vice—that 
whether he poisons a kind benefactor to get possession of his wealth, or 
at the imminent hazard of life rescues an oppressor from destruction, 
there is no moral difference whatever in his actions?—If virtue consists 
in intentional obedience to the will of God, vice can consist only in a 
designed disobedience to that will—will this consequence be admitted?—
But without putting extreme cases, I should broadly and unequivocally 
maintain, as a fundamental distinction on the subject, that actions 
performed from a sense of obedience to the divine will, are, in their 
nature and essence, emphatically, not virtuous, but religious. In 
practice, no doubt, these two principles will often be found to 
conspire, in inciting us to the performance of our duties: but for the 
purposes of accurate enquiry, it is essentially requisite that we should 
keep them, in speculation, perfectly distinct.

MARCH the 22nd

Read Hall's Sermon on Infidelity. It is really a most eloquent and 
masterly discourse; and nearly deserves the unbounded and unqualified 
praises bestowed upon it in the last Monthly Review. He has caught much 
from Burke, something from Mackintosh, and a little from myself: but 
what he has thus snatched, he has fairly made his own; and the whole 
composition bears, throughout, that strong impress of original 
character, which always distinguishes the productions of true genius.

Finished the Aeneid. Virgil's excellence, it is obvious, consists, not 
in the daring flights of a vigorous and sublime imagination, but in the 
exquisite art and consummate taste with which he turns, and polishes, 
and refines into perfection, both of sentiment and expression, the 
graceful products of a chaste and elegant fancy. Works of transcendent 
genius, are often rather enfeebled than improved by the last touches of 
the artist; and the rudest sketch of a great master, has power to fill 
us with admiration, by asserting the mighty energies from which it 
sprung: but in compositions whose principal merit is high finishing, the 
want of that finish, is the want of their most engaging charm—of all by 
which they can hope to allure our regard; and decoy us into approbation. 
Had Virgil lived, he would, no doubt, have greatly improved the latter 
portion of his poem: but it is in the subordinate department of the 
epic, that he was alone qualified to shine; and we may be quite sure, 
that his hero, partaking of his own character, would never have been 
great. From his first appearance, in a panic, to his final demolition of 
Turnus—an event ill contrived to set off either his magnanimity or 
prowess—Aeneas exhibits few traits which either conciliate our affection 
or command our respect: and after all the efforts which have been made 
to interest us in his favour, we dismiss him at last from our 
recollection with frigid indifference. Homer's second rate actors, amuse 
and engage us infinitely more than Virgil's principal performers.

MARCH the 25th

Read Godwin's St. Leon. In the preface, he explicitly abjures the 
doctrine of extinguishing the private affections, which he had 
inculcated in his Political Justice; and the subsequent pages bear 
repeated testimony to the sincerity and completeness of his conversion:—
yet he professes to see no cause to change the fundamental principle of 
that work! I flatter myself with having been instrumental in a little 
humanizing him; but the volcanic and blasphemous spirit still peeps, 
occasionally, through a flimsy disguise. His sentiments and expressions 
are often borrowed; and the account of the interrogatories at the 
Inquisition, with the decoy employed there, are directly and impudently 
stolen from Mrs. Radcliffe. In his, struggles to be sublime, there is 
something inexpressibly hideous and revolting:—they are not the 
exertions of mighty power, but the convulsive throes and ghastly agonies 
of a distempered sensibility.—After all, too, though one may be amused 
with the adventures of St. Leon, what impression do they leave upon the 
mind? They do not indoctrinate the unsatisfactory nature of boundless 
opulence and immortal youth, as Nourjahad does,—for St. Leon seems 
rather persecuted by his ill fortune, than by the natural consequences 
of his supernatural acquisitions. What, then, do they inculcate?—I am 
quite unable to tell.

Read Warner's Metron Ariston, reviving Mekerchus' scheme of reading 
Greek and Latin verse according to quantity. This work is teasingly 
written; but it convinces me. If quantity is not observed in recitation, 
why should it be observed in writing? He is certainly right.

Αίγιάλώ μεγάλω βρέμεται σμαρουγεί δέ τε ποντος 
[Aigialo megalo bremetai smarougei de te pontos]<135>


How grandly and expressively does this verse sound, pronounced with the 
emphasis which the measure demands! And who that has read it thus, will 
read it again in the common fashion, under the direction of those severe 
sticklers for quantity, whose chaste ears affect to be struck with pious 
horror at a false accent, while by those very accents they are for ever 
violating the only rational purpose for which the rules of prosody, 
enjoining the observance of that quantity, could possibly have been 
framed!

MARCH the 27th

Read, after a long intermission (April 27th, 1797) the 2nd Volume of 
Gregory's Essays. The distinction which he labours to establish, between 
the relation of motive and action, and that of cause and effect, and on 
which he endeavours to found the liberty of human action, is this, that 
in the mind there is a self-governing, self—determining power (properly 
denominated force of mind, he thinks), which enables it to act in 
opposition to any motive presented to us.—That such a distinction exits, 
and that we possess such a power, his most striking illustration is, the 
case of a porter assured of a certain reward for going in one direction, 
and of another reward for going in another. Were intellectual motives, 
like physical causes, irresistible, and constantly conjoined with 
actions as the latter with effects, then, Gregory contends, he must take 
a diagonal course between the two; or else there would be an effect 
wholly or partly without a cause, or a cause wholly or partly without an 
effect:—for, that motives which do not exactly concur do not directly 
oppose each other, is not only contrary to physical analogy, but to 
experience; since we often do really act from combined motives of this 
kind, differently from what we should have acted from the influence of 
either separately. If it be urged, that the stronger motive, only, is 
conjoined with its proper action, and all weaker and opposing motives 
separated from theirs, then if two equal and opposite motives are 
applied to a person at the same time, he cannot act at all: and if a 
small inclining motive to superadded, it follows, that a person must act 
from that superadded motive alone, however trivial, precisely as he 
would have been compelled to act from the greater motive, either applied 
alone, or opposed by an equal motive and assisted by the additional one 
in question; which he considers as a reductio ad absurdum<136>.—To the 
advocate for necessity, who contends, that the will is determined by the 
judgment of the understanding, and the judgment by the case presented to 
it, Gregory seems to reply, that our judgments are by no means 
involuntary, since attention, on which they are founded, is in a great 
degree voluntary; and that we frequently act in dire& opposition to our 
judgment—as, he maintains, would perpetually he the ease, were it not 
for that very self-determining power on which he founds the freedom of 
our actions. This power—this force of mind—he admits, is different in 
different persons: but though we should allow that it might be 
overpowered in all, it would not therefore be annihilated in any way.—
The relation of evidence and belief, (where no such power obtains), 
bears, he thinks, a nearer affinity to cause and effect, than that of 
motive and action does but even these, he contends, are manifestly 
different.—Gregory is so abundantly slow and cautious in all his steps, 
and so tediously prolix in descanting as he crawls along, that it is 
often difficult to collect a just sense of his meaning; and I am not 
sure of having extracted the rectified spirit of his voluminous labours 
correctly.

MARCH the 31st

Looked over Dionysius Halicarnasseus Περί συνθέσεως ὀνομάτων [Peri 
syntheseos onomaton]<137> in which there is an infinite deal about 
nothing—great preparation and little advance—pompous display of learning 
and trifling instruction. The distinction he makes (sects. 10 and 11.) 
between τό θ' 'ηδύ [to th'edu] and τό χαλόν, [to chalon] might, I once 
thought, throw light on Horace's "non satis est pulchra esse poemata, 
dulcia sunto";<138> but it would be endeavouring to illustrate "obscurum 
per obscurius."<139>—In the 17th and 18th sects. he gives a good account 
of the different feet in prosody. If the observance of these, was so 
essential (as he makes it) to constitute a good discourse, they must 
have been observed in speaking:—it is impossible that their sole effect 
should have been (as it now is), to please the eye upon paper, or the 
fancy on reflection.

Finished Moore's Mordaunt. It has no pretensions in point of fable, but 
it pleases me more than any of his novels. All the personages brought 
forward, are spiritedly and characteristically sketched; and the 
poetical justice of the piece, is exemplarily observed:—it is impossible 
not to be delighted at the appropriate retribution to Grindill and Lady 
Deanport, springing out of their own flagitious principles and conduct. 
I will not dwell on the defects of this Work: they are but few.

APRIL the 6th

Read Cicero De Inventione.<140> After vast parade of preparation, but 
little (as might be foreseen) is effected. The exercise of invention, is 
a fit subject of regulation; but of all the prerogatives of genius, 
invention itself, seems the least capable of being communicated, or 
materially assisted, by art; and even the prolific vigour of Cicero, 
appears to sink under the exhausting and hopeless attempt to impregnate 
a barren fancy.—Under the head of "probabilia in opinione",<141> he 
gives as examples (L. 1, c. 29.), "Impiis apud inferos poenas esse 
praeparatus: Eos, qui philosophise dent operam, non arbitrari deos 
esse"<142>:—what are we to make of this?—In considering (L. 2, c. 22.) 
the origin of Law, he defines "jus naturae", "quod nobis, non opinio, 
sed quidem innata vis afferat";<143> though he seems to think, that 
independently of these dictates of nature, we are led to the enactment 
of laws, sometimes by the perception of utility, and sometimes by the 
force of custom.—"Res expetendae" he divides (c. 52.) into the 
"honestum", the object of virtue, which, "sua vi nos alliciat, et 
propter se est petendum",—as science, truth, &c; and the "utile", which, 
"non propter suam vim et naturam, sed propter fructum, petendum est",—as 
money;<144> and objects combined of both—as friendship, fame, &c.—There 
is a strange similitude (in treating of this and the former subject) 
between passages in c. 22, and others in cs. 53 and 54: the same 
sentiment is repeated in nearly the same terms—a mark of carelessness, 
which I do not remember to have observed before in any of Cicero's 
compositions.—In the last paragraph of c. 54, he remarks, that it is not 
merely the opposite to virtue, which is vice; but that which appears to 
be near, though it is in fact remote: thus "fidentiae contrarium, est 
diffidentia, et ea re vitium est; audacia, non contrarium sed appositum 
est ac propinquum, et tamen vitium est".<145> This observation, however 
acute, is perplexing as Cicero puts it: but the subject clears up, on 
reflecting, that virtue consists in the possession of a certain degree 
of any quality; and that the excess or defect of it, are equally faulty. 
A certain degree of confidence in the professions of mankind, is 
essential to the maintenance of social intercourse: an excess of this 
quality, in a rash reliance on those professions; or a defect of it, in 
a temper for ever suspicious and distrustful, are both, in nearly the 
same proportion, culpable: the supposed opposition and propinquity are 
merely verbal or ideal:—The commonplace topics by which Cicero 
endeavours to prompt invention, in this piece, display astonishing 
fertility of fancy on his part; but they must be consulted, rather than 
retained.

APRIL the 9th

Looked into Marsh's Michaelis. Michaelis reckons 292 Mss of the whole or 
a part of the New Testament, in Greek, which have been wholly or 
partially collated; to which Marsh adds 177 more, making in the whole 
469: of these, only two, the Montfortianus and Ravianus, and those both 
modern, contain the disputed passage in the 1st Epistle of John, c. 5, 
v. 7. The four fundamental printed editions, from which all the rest, 
with one or two exceptions, are taken, are, the Complutensian (Editio 
Princeps), Erasmus', Beza's, and Stephens'. It appears (Vol. 2, p. 780) 
that a Ms copy which belonged to Cromwell, is deposited, with his other 
Mss, in the Bodleian Library.—Marsh (Vol. 2, p. 892) mentions a Greek, 
who, in reading verse, distinctly marked both accent and quantity; 
raising or depressing his voice, according to the former; and shortening 
or prolonging it, according to the latter; and this independently of 
each other. We, he observes, reject the Greek accents, and pronounce it 
as if it were Latin; which we again pronounce, not according to 
quantity, but accent—in dissyllables, accenting the first syllable, 
whether long or short; in polysyllables, the penultimate, if long; if 
short, the antepenultimate, whether long or short: so that there is only 
one case in which the accent and quantity must necessarily coincide—
which is, where the penultimate is long. It is to this mixture of 
coincidence and disagreement, that he ascribes the harmony of Latin 
verse; which is greatest, he conceives, where this mixture most obtains; 
while the effect, he asserts, would be intolerable, did accent and 
quantity always coincide—instancing an hexameter consisting of six 
words, of which the first five are dactyls. But suppose two or three of 
those words to be, not real dactyls, but trisyllables which we dactylise 
in defiance of quantity:—here the effect, on the ear, would be precisely 
the same; yet the mixture he talks of, complete. From what authority, 
too, I should wish to ask, is our mode of accenting Latin as we do, 
derived?

APRIL the 12th

Read Frend's Animadversions on Prettyman's Theology:—more temperate and 
chastised than I expected; though the spirit of this bold reformer still 
shines through him. The Bishop has unquestionably brought himself into 
an awkward scrape, by requiring implicit assent to the Articles from 
others, while he withholds it from them, in some instances, himself.—
Baptism, and the Lord's Supper, Frend regards as merely temporary 
rites:—the former, for new converts, in compliance with Jewish 
prejudices; the latter, for the Apostles merely, so long as they 
observed the Passover.

Finished Parson's Letters to Travis, on the disputed passage in 
John:<50> displaying uncommon robustness of judgment, keenness of 
perspicacity, and vigour of argumentation. In the consciousness of 
transcendent superiority, he dandles Travis as a tiger would a fawn; and 
appears only to reserve him alive, for a time, that he may gratify his 
appetite for sport, before he consigns his feeble prey, by a rougher 
squeeze, to destruction.—The whole argument is ably summed up at the 
close of the last Letter.

APRIL the 16th

Finished a perusal of Warton's Essay on the Genius and Writings of Pope. 
Invention, he regards as the characteristic of a Poet; and therefore 
looks upon Burnet (the cosmogonist—not the Bishop), and Addison in his 
prose works, as displaying a truly poetic, i.e., creative genius: Pope, 
though an excellent improver, he esteems no great original inventor; and 
rests his pretensions to immortal fame as a poet (as he afterwards 
narrows those of Dryden to his Fables) on his Windsor Forest, the Rape 
of the Lock, and Eloisa's Epistle to Abelard—observing, that wit and 
satire, are transitory and perishable; but nature and passion, eternal.—
The fine arts, he thinks (p. 182.),—poetry, painting, music—naturally 
flourish in the luxury of monarchy; but the sciences, eloquence, 
history, and philosophy, demand the freedom of a republic to raise them 
to their full vigour and growth. I doubt exceedingly whether this 
distinction can be sustained either by reason or experience. At first 
glance, I should suppose, that such productions as most powerfully 
agitated strong feeling, would be most in request, and most likely to be 
supplied, in a republic; those which administered gratification to a 
delicate and refined taste, in a monarchy:—but this is a very hasty view 
of the subject.—In enquiring into the causes, why genius declines as 
taste improves, he asks, at the close of the 3rd sect., "whether that 
philosophical, that geometrical and systematical spirit, so much in 
vogue, which has spread itself from the sciences even into polite 
literature, by consulting only reason, has not diminished and destroyed 
sentiment; and made our poets write from and to the head, rather than 
the heart?" This is just, as far as it goes: but why, as knowledge, 
civilization, and refinement, advance, reason should thus encroach upon 
sentiment, is not so obvious. Partly, no doubt, it arises from the 
dissipation of those illusions by which, in times less knowing, 
sensibility was excited and cherished; partly, from the difficulty with 
which a fastidious taste can be satisfied by what remains to be 
presented to it from the regions of imagination: but much, I think, must 
be ascribed to the discovery, that in a settled and quiescent state of 
things—a state rather of speculation than action-we are far more 
uniformly and steadily accessible to what is addressed to our reason, 
than our feelings; to be gratified with what is rational, than to be 
amused with what is pleasing, or touched with what is moving. Nature and 
passion, it is true, are eternal; and just representations of them will 
ever continue to delight: but addresses to our understanding, we find, 
are more constant, and sure, and appreciable in their effects; and they 
accordingly rise, with the progress of society, in our esteem.—The use, 
the force, and the excellence, Warton observes (sect. 10.) of language—
an excellence essential to poetry—consists in raising clear, complete, 
and circumstantial images; and thus turning readers into spectators: the 
prevailing fault in poets, is the dwelling in generalities; and Homer 
was fortunate in writing before general and abstract terms were 
invented. Tacitus, on this occasion, he calls a great Poet; and soon 
afterwards pronounces Pain's-Hill, and Persefield, fine examples of 
practical poetry; and Brown, a great painter:<146>—vivid and forcible 
expressions.—Of Pope's Preface to the Iliad, he speaks in very different 
terms Vol. 1, p. 115; and Vol. 2, p. 475: a change of opinion, which may 
in some measure be explained by the length of time which elapsed between 
the publication of these volumes.—He sums up and concludes, with 
ascribing to Pope, in a tone more subdued (I think) than that with which 
he started, the characteristic excellence of judgment rather than 
invention.—The multifarious erudition and exquisite taste which Warton 
displays in his critiques, the various productions he takes occasion to 
perstringe in his progress through Pope's Works, and the curious 
anecdotes with which he occasionally seasons his remarks, render this 
Essay one of the most interesting and delightful compositions in the 
English language.

APRIL the 17th

Read Pope's Preface to the Iliad. He makes invention the grand 
characteristic of genius, of poetical excellence, and of Homer. It is 
Homer's superiority of invention, that renders his fable, so extensive 
and copious; his manners, so lively and forcibly marked; his speeches, 
so affecting and transported; his sentiments, so warm and sublime; his 
images and descriptions, so full and animated; his expression, so raised 
and daring; and his numbers, so rapid and various.—Pope could at least 
enthusiastically praise, the quality which Warton imagines be did not 
eminently possess.—As Homer's peculiar excellence is invention, so 
Virgil's, in Pope's estimation, is judgment. He is certainly right: 
though one always listens with some scruples of caution, to a 
comparative estimate of poetical merit by a translator of one of the 
parties.

Looked over Price's Three Essays on the Picturesque; in which he 
attempts the difficult task of reducing his principles, on this subject, 
to practice. In the first, on Artificial Water, he is more successful 
than I expected. In the 2nd, on the Decorations near the House, be 
contends, very forcibly, for the spirited effect here, of symmetrical 
abruptness, in graves, parapets, balustrades, statues, fountains, &c, 
after the old Italian style of gardening; as, in the distance, he would 
have the picturesque effects of irregular abruptness, in rocks, broken 
ground, and nature unreformed; employing the modem style of landscape 
gardening, to form a gradual and easy transition between them.—The 3rd 
Essay, on the Picturesque in Architecture, is very unsatisfactory.

APRIL the 20th

Read again Hurd's Dissertations, on Universal Poetry, and The Provinces 
of the Drama.—In the former, on the ground that the end of poetry is 
pleasure, to which use itself must submit, as in all other kinds of 
literary composition pleasure is subordinate to use, he infers the 
necessity of an ornamented, figurative, and numerous style;—of fiction, 
to represent the fairest objects only, and in the fairest lights; and of 
verse, to charm the ear; for the want of which latter requisite, 
apparently, he blazes out into an outrageous fury against novels and 
romances. The principle he takes up, it is obvious, is much too general 
and vague to support the specific conclusions he deduces from it; and 
the whole disquisition has more the air of a mere trial of skill, than a 
serious exercise of critical sagacity.-.On the "Provinces of the Drama", 
he makes the object of tragedy to be, the excitation of the passions of 
pity and terror; of comedy, the gratification arising from a just 
exhibition of the human character, with its specific shades of 
difference; and of farce, the mere provocation of laughter. Tragedy, he 
infers, requires for its subject, actions rather than manners; important 
actions; and the actions of important personages: Comedy, manners rather 
than actions; these not too interesting; and of private persons. Both, 
demand a plot; an unity and even simplicity of fable; and that the 
characters exhibited, should neither be perfectly good or bad: but 
differ in this, that a good plot is most essential to comedy; that 
tragedy succeeds best when the subject is real, comedy when it is 
feigned; Tragedy requires more particular characters, comedy more 
general—so that a. sameness of character is tolerable in the former, but 
not in the latter; and, that comedy is most successful when the scene is 
laid at home, tragedy when abroad. The genius of comedy, he considers to 
be humour, or the just expression of character without design-a happy 
definition! This expression may, or may not, be enlivened with ridicule; 
and the drama, in consequence, may take the complexion of serious or 
pleasant; or it may unite both: but when the qualities common to human 
nature at large, are overcharged in the exhibition; or when, instead of 
the peculiarities of particular characters and times, some real 
individual is personated, the representation degenerates into the lower 
province of farce.—Hurd's qualifications as a critic, are obviously 
subtlety and acumen, rather than sensibility and taste; but we must 
allow that he makes the most of the powers with which he has been 
gifted.

APRIL the 23rd

Finished Marsh's Tract on the Politics of Great Britain and France, from 
the Conference at Pilnitz, to the Declaration of War; in which he 
demonstrates (as far as such a subject is susceptible of demonstration) 
from authentic documents, that we were reluctantly forced into the 
present contest by a series of unprovoked and intolerable injuries. The 
whole is conducted in a very temperate, but dignified, and masterly 
manner; and appears conclusive on the subject. I do not envy Mr. Erskine 
his feelings on the perusal of this Work:—it operates as the most 
complete extinguisher that could possibly be placed on the doctrines of 
his pamphlet.—Whether, in point of policy, it might not have been 
prudent, as we had borne so long, to have endured with patience our 
wrongs a little longer, just when things were drawing to a crisis; so 
that we might have extorted conviction of our moderation and forbearance 
froth the most obdurate, and heaped coals of hotter fire on the heads of 
our frantic aggressors—may perhaps admit of question: but that we were 
fully justified, by the law of nature and nations, in the measures we 
did pursue, preliminary to the rupture, is a point which Mr. Marsh 
appears to have put beyond all contestation.—One is surprised that a 
work of this nature should not have been exhibited to the public, 
before: it has been delayed, till the period for its immediate efficacy 
is past; and it becomes principally valuable, as an historical memorial.

APRIL the 27th

Read again, and with more attention, Hurd's Discourse on Poetical 
Imitation. He considers what is called invention, in criticism, as 
being, in philosophical language, simply an imitation of natural 
objects: that these objects, from which it is the office of genius to 
select its sentiments and images, fall under the heads, either of, 1st 
the material world; 2ndly, the internal workings and movements of our 
minds; or, 3rdly., those internal operations that are made objective to 
sense, by gesture, attitude, or action: and, that, being by the 
constitution of our common nature, 1st, sensible to the same beauties in 
external objects; 2ndly, subject to the same passions, affections and 
sentiments; and, 3rdly, expressing our internal feelings by the same 
outward signs,—mere resemblance in subject-matter between two single 
images or sentiments, is no sufficient proof that one was copied from 
the other. This respects the matter of poetical composition: and with 
regard to the manner, he thinks that common principles may determine us 
to adopt, not only the same general form of composition, but even 
similar constituent members—as episodes, descriptions, and similes; and 
that peculiarities of expression, are the surest tests of imitation. 
Having thus reduced the criteria for detecting plagiarism, within as 
narrow a range as possible, he proceeds to vindicate imitation itself, 
by maintaining, that we are naturally led to regard the copies rather 
than the originals; and that the two great faculties, of Judgment and 
Invention, are exercised in the highest degree, in selecting from, and 
improving upon, these.—Nothing can equal the exquisite subtlety which 
Hurd displays in spinning the texture of his Theory:—an awkward 
assailant would find himself entangled in a web, from which extrication 
would be rendered hopeless, by the multitude, and tenuity, and 
involution, of the filmy threads that compose it.—The comparison (P. 1, 
sect.) of the influence of certain sentiments on the human form, to the 
gentle breathings of the air on the face of nature, is wonderfully fine, 
and highly wrought up. Parr's vivid description of the effect of these 
isolated passages, of bright and unsullied lustre, on his feelings, 
flashed instantly and forcibly upon my mind, on the occasion.

MAY the 2nd

Looked into Hurd's Notes on Horace's Art of Poetry.—On v. 94, he 
remarks, that figurative language is not to be rejected in dramatic 
writing; but only such images to be given to the speaker, as the passion 
by which he is affected naturally suggests to the human mind. This is 
very just: the prevailing fault of dramatic writers in this respect, is, 
the imparting to their characters under the agitation of the passions, 
not such images as passion rouses in the mind immediately subject to its 
fervour, but as the observer is prone to indulge on contemplating this 
spectacle and aiming to describe it.—On v. 244, he ascribes the pleasure 
derived from pastoral poetry, to its addressing itself to the three 
leading principles in human nature, the love of ease, the love of 
beauty, and the moral sense; by exhibiting the tranquillity, the 
scenery, and the innocence of rural life:—a happy example of a solution 
exact and complete in all its parts; and which leaves nothing wanting, 
to give absolute and entire satisfaction to the mind of the enquirer.—On 
v. 317, he contends, that both in poetry and painting, an artist may 
confine himself too much to individuals, and thus fail in exhibiting the 
kind; or, in giving the general idea, he may collect it from an extended 
view, of real life, instead of taking it from the nobler conception 
existing only in the mind: and that by deviating from particular, he 
more faithfully imitates universal truth—on which principle, Aristotle 
affirms fiction to be φιλοσοφω τερον χαι ςπυδαιο τερον [philosopho teron 
kai studaio teron](more philosophical and instructive) than history.—On 
v. 410, he remarks, that of Longinus' five sources of the sublime; two—a 
grandeur of conception, and the pathetic, come from nature; three—a just 
arrangement of figures, a splendid diction, and dignity of composition, 
are the province of art:—but, even in this view of it, it is impossible 
to conceal, that Longinus' division of the subject, is miserably lame 
and defective.

MAY the 6th

Read Gildon's Essay, prefixed to Shakespeare's Poems; in which he 
largely discusses dramatic poetry. Poetry, he considers as an art; and 
he is a grand stickler for the rules of this art, which he regards, 
rather as the original suggestions of right reason, instructing us how 
to please; than the mere conclusions of experience from what has 
pleased:—a preposterous piece of folly, nearly akin to that which 
attempts to solve the phenomena of nature from the chimaeras of the 
fancy, instead of collecting the materials for this solution from a 
patient investigation of the laws by which nature is really governed in 
all her operations; but as a practical piece of folly, leading to 
consequences still more absurd. According to Gildon, all excellence 
flows from the observance of the rules of composition, and all deformity 
from their violation: to such a taste, Shakespeare's dramas must have a 
most untoward aspect; yet his "wood-notes wild" occasionally extort, 
even from this sturdy champion of the summum jus<147> in critical 
jurisprudence, an approving nod, with—"this is very well".-At the close 
of his Remarks on Shakespeare's Plays, he observes, that "verisimilitude 
in the drama, is more essential than truth, because fact itself is 
sometimes so barely possible that it is almost incredible". Hurd has 
caught this ideas and it is not the only instance in which I fancy I 
have detected him poaching on this ancient and neglected manor.

MAY the 9th

Looked into Prettyman's Theology. The Dedication to Pitt, is 
insufferably fulsome. Fawning adulation, is at all times, and on all 
occasions, surfeiting; but from a bishop to his political creator, such 
cant is peculiarly offensive and detestable.—It is remarked in the 
Preface, that if all religions must be examined, to ascertain the best, 
none could be chosen: nor, on the same principle, could practice of any 
kind be adopted, by him that should teach, or him that should be taught; 
and because we know not everything, we must do nothing.

Read Cicero's Orator: in which he endeavours to exhibit the portrait of 
a perfect orator, according to Plato's notion of an archetypical idea, 
superior in excellence to any existing form: but his figure, after all, 
is strangely patched; and be perpetually slides, from exhibiting, to 
instructing.

Read Hurd's Notes on Horace's Epistle to Augustus. In the Dedication, he 
requires in a perfect critic, reason, or what he calls a "philosophic 
spirit", to penetrate the grounds of excellence in every different 
species of composition; and taste, or what he terms a "strong 
imagination", to feel those excellencies himself, and to impress them 
upon others: Aristotle, he considers as transcendent in the former 
department; Longinus, in the latter: and then—Oh! monstrous adulation!—
he compliments Warburton, as perfect in both; and as exciting jealousy, 
because great to judge as to invent! How could such a sycophant write 
the Note on v. 15.—On v. 63, he observes, that the popular voice, after 
partialities have had time to die away, is sacred; and fixes the 
unalterable doom of authors.—On v. 210, he affirms, that all didactic 
writing, is employed in referring particular facts to general 
principles; and defines criticism, the referring to general rules the 
virtues and the faults of composition. The perfection of criticism, he 
thinks, would consist in referring every beauty and blemish to a 
separate class; and every class, by a gradual progression, to some one 
single principle. Critics, he continues, are properly employed, in 
confirming established rules, which can only be done by referring more 
particulars to them; or by inventing new ones, which implies, 1st, a 
collection of various particulars, not yet regulated; 2ndly, a. 
discovery of those circumstances of resemblance or agreement whereby 
they become capable of being regulated; and, 3rdly, an arrangement into 
one class, according to such similitude: when this is done, the rule is 
completed; and its object is, to direct the caprices of taste by an 
authority which we call reason. Longinus, Bouhours, and Addison, he 
censures as dwelling too much in generals: not only the genus to which-. 
they refer their species, is too large; but the species themselves, are 
too comprehensive. This is as just and philosophical a view of 
criticism, as I have, anywhere met with.

MAY the 13th

Finished Malone's Life of Dryden, prefixed to an edition of his Prose 
Works. By the drudgery of searching deeds, wills, genealogies, 
registers, and records of all sorts, Malone has discovered some new 
facts, and detected a few mistakes, respecting Dryden and his family, of 
very little consequence though they regard so great a character; and the 
whole substance of which, might have been appended, in a few notes, to 
Johnson's Life.—What a contrast between these two pieces of biography! 
Malone admits, indeed, that his is the life of the man, and Johnson's of 
the poet.—In the Preface, Malone states, that Burke greatly admired, and 
had diligently read, Dryden's Miscellaneous Essays; and that his own 
style was perhaps originally formed on Dryden's, it bearing a greater 
resemblance to his, than that of any other English writer. Fox, I am 
told, entertains a similar predilection for Dryden's prose style:—a 
singular coincidence of opinion, in two such men; whose taste, in their 
own compositions, appears to differ so essentially.—In a note (p. 140, 
of the Life) Malone gives to Bacon, an allusion which was intended for 
Hooker;—the passage referred to is the very first sentence of 
Ecclesiastical Polity.

MAY the 15th

Read Daines Barrington's curious Observations on the Notes of Birds. It 
appears, that birds are not prompted by instinct in their song, but that 
they will imitate, as far as their organs allow, the earliest notes they 
hear; and that canary birds, which are naturally silent, are thus taught 
from the nightingale and titlark; that cock birds alone sing; that the 
notes of birds are of a higher pitch than the shrillest instrument can 
reach; that the intervals of these notes, are too minute to be 
appreciated by the gross intervals of our musical scale; that as there 
is no apparent dissonance though a dozen birds are singing different 
tunes, they probably pitch on the same key, which seems to be G. with a 
flat third; that the oldest airs with which we are acquainted (Morva 
Rhyddlan particularly) are composed in a flat third; and, that there is 
a much higher combination of mellowness of tone, sprightliness, 
plaintiveness, compass, and execution, in the nightingale's song, than 
in that of any other bird.

Read Campbell's Pleasures of Hope. Parts of this Poem, are animated and 
fine; but the imagery is frequently obscure, the meaning involved, and 
the connection perplexing. The beautiful allusion with which this poem 
opens, is borrowed from one in Johnson's Collections for the Rambler; 
which I believe he never employed, but which was certainly too good to 
be lost: see Boswell's Life, 8vo. Ed., Vol. 1, p. 180.

Looked into Kirkman's Life of Macklin: he ascribes to Lord Chatham, the 
Speech on the licensing of Plays, which Maty gives as Lord 
Chesterfield's; but, whoever furnished the materials and the name, was 
not the manufacture Johnson's?

MAY the 17th

Began Dryden's Prose Works. In the Preface to All for Love, he contends 
against the judgments of self-created critics; maintaining, that an 
artificer must be the best judge in his own art; that poetry, as a 
picture of nature, must generally please, but that every species of it 
may not please every taste; and that it is not enough to be pleased with 
any species, to be a judge of it; since it is necessary, for this 
purpose, thoroughly to understand in what its excellencies consist. 
Previously to this (p. 17, Vol. 2) he makes an acute remark." that the 
civillest man in company is commonly the dullest".—Morris' definition of 
wit, as quoted by Malone (P. to Albion and Albanius, p. 152, Vol. 2.)—
"the lustre resulting from the quick elucidation of one subject, by a 
just and unexpected arrangement of it with another", seems a good one: 
but when Dryden defines it, "a propriety of words and thoughts", it 
should be recollected, that "wit", in his days, had a much more general 
signification than that to which it is now restricted:—the context makes 
this apparent. Dryden's observation, in the same piece, that the first 
inventors of any art or science, provided they have brought it to 
perfection, are in reason to give laws to it, seems specious, but in 
truth has no foundation. In the republic of genius and letters, hints 
may be supplied, but legislation is out of question: there can be but 
one law on the subject—to attain the ends of composition by the best 
possible means.—As an excuse for the violation of the unities of time 
and place in dramatic poetry, he observes (P. to Don Sebastian, p. 191, 
Vol. 2.), that to "gain a greater beauty, it is lawful for a poet to 
supersede a less";—that "it is better" (P. to Cleomenes, p. 228, Vol. 
2.) "to trespass on a rule, than to leave out a beauty ";—and (P. to 
Love Triumphant, p. 239, Vol. 2.), "that there are not, indeed, so many 
absurdities in their supposition"—(the supposition of the sticklers for 
these unities)—"as in ours; but it is an original absurdity for the 
audience to suppose themselves to be in any other place, than in the 
very theatre in which they sit; which is neither chamber, nor garden, 
nor yet a public place of any business but that of representation": this 
is the germ of the argument so finely expanded and wrought out by 
Johnson, in his Preface to Shakespeare.—The strongest resemblance I have 
yet met with to the style of Burke, is in the paragraph (Dedication to 
Amphytrion, p. 198, Vol. 2.) beginning, "All things of honour, &c".—Much 
of the matter inserted in Malone's Life, is appended in his notes—I 
suspect that the Life was an after-thought. His political rancour, like 
that of most underlings, is extreme.

MAY the 20th

Pursued Dryden's Prose Works. In his Account of Annus Mirabilis, he 
states (p. 260, Vol. 2.) that the composition of all Poems, is, or ought 
to be, wit, which he defines, "the happy product of imagination"; and 
this exercise of the imagination he divides into, 1st, Invention, or the 
finding a thought; 2ndly, Fancy, or the varying, deriving, and moulding 
that thought, as judgment directs; and, 3rdly, Elocution, or the 
expressing it in apt, significant, and sounding words: the quickness of 
the imagination is seen in the first exertion, its fertility in the 
second, and its accuracy in the third. Ovid, if I understand him, he 
considers as personating better than Virgil, and Virgil as describing 
better than Ovid: remarking on Virgil's descriptions (p. 262.) that "we 
see the objects he represents as within their native figures and proper 
motions; but so we see them, as our eyes could never have beheld them so 
beautiful in themselves"—a just thought, though clumsily expressed. The 
proper end of Heroic Poetry, he states (p. 265.) to be, Admiration.—At 
the close of the Preface to Religio Laici (p. 329, Vol. 2.) he observes, 
that for the purpose of touching the passions, objects must be 
represented out of their true proportion—either greater or less; but for 
the purpose of instruction, they must be represented as they are.—His 
statement of the comparative advantages of biography over history, in 
his Life of Plutarch, furnished hints, I think, to Barton in the address 
prefixed to his Edition of Plutarch's Lives—a critical composition of 
very considerable merit, though little known. Dryden's view, in this 
piece (p. 398, Vol. 2.), of the general use of history, as assisting us 
"to judge of what will happen, by showing us the like revolutions of 
former times, * * * * mankind being the same in all ages; agitated by 
the same passions, and moved to action by the same interests", is clear 
and just.—The opening of the P. S. to the History of the League, gives 
us a good idea of the doctrines of divine right and passive obedience.—
Dryden's images are thickly sown; and some of them are wonderfully 
forcible. I am not surprised, that the greatest judges are charmed with 
his style: though debased with many uncouthnesses, it bears, throughout, 
the manly stamp of our genuine vernacular idiom—true English. Yet it is 
difficult to separate the consideration of his style, from the stream of 
thought which it involves: this usually breaks out, at once, in great 
force; and deriving vehemence and expansion, as it flows, from a 
thousand auxiliary rills, hurries us along through a rapid succession of 
ever shifting scenes; which if they fail to inform the judgment, at 
least, by their variegated splendour and beauty, replenish; invigorate, 
and delight the imagination.

MAY the 25th

Finished Dryden's Prose Works. In his Discourse on Satire (p. 73, Vol. 
3.) he wavers strangely, as it was natural he should, in giving his 
preposterous preference to Juvenal over Horace, as a satirist. Whatever 
immediately occupied Dryden's fervid mind, appears to have assumed a 
disproportionate importance there.—By a note appended to the Parallel of 
Poetry and Painting (p. 323, Vol. 3.) it appears, that Aristotle 
accounts for the gratification afforded by imitation, on the principle, 
that to learn (μανθανειν [manthanein]) is a natural pleasure. Burke, in 
his Introduction on Taste, observes, that the mind has a far greater 
alacrity and satisfaction in tracing resemblances than searching for 
differences, because, by making resemblances we produce new images; we 
unite, we create, we enlarge our stock; whereas, by making distinctions, 
we offer no food at all to the imagination:—whence arises our 
inclination to belief, rather than incredulity, It does not appear to 
me, that the passion for mental acquisition, is at all competent to the 
effects ascribed to it by either of these writers:—though indeed, if we 
deduct from the effect of imitations, the pleasure derived from the 
agreeable qualities of the object represented, and the skill and genius 
evinced by the artist in executing the representation, there will be 
little gratification of any kind left, to be accounted for from any 
cause whatever.

MAY the 26th

Read Mrs. Radcliffe's Tour to the Lakes. Much might perhaps be expected 
from this Lady's well known powers of description, exerted on so 
congenial a theme: but to paint from the imagination, and to copy 
nature, are such different achievements, that I was surprised, I 
confess, to find that she had succeeded so well, and failed so little. 
Her pictures, though somewhat overwrought and heavy compared with the 
expressive etchings of Gray, exhibit as clear distinct and forcible 
images to the minds' eye, as it is well possible for words to convey. 
Such a series of them "where pure description holds the place, of 
sense", would probably pall on most palates; but so strong a passion do 
I feel for the keen delights of picturesque and mountain scenery, that I 
was gratified, I own, to the last.—She appears to make the predominant 
character of Windermere, beauty; of Derwent Lake, picturesqueness; and 
of Ullswater, sublimity.

MAY the 28th

Finished the two first Volumes of Soame Jenyns' Works, edited by Cole. 
His poetry does not rise above mediocrity—indeed it scarcely deserves 
the name: but the style of his prose, is smooth and lucid; his turns of 
thought, are neat and unexpected; and when he sports in irony, in which 
he apparently delights to indulge, he is uncommonly playful and airy.—In 
his Essay on Virtue, he inculcates in verse, the same doctrine that he 
propounds in his Origin of Evil, in prose, that virtue consists solely 
and simply in promoting the general good; and promises himself great 
things from the diffusion of this discovery.—In his tract on American 
Taxation, he defends both the right, and the expediency, of taxing the 
Colonies;—the former, by exploding the received theories of political 
representation.—In his Reflections on Parliamentary Reform, he derides 
the projects for securing an independent Parliament; and endeavours to 
prove, that it would be the destruction of our Constitution, if it could 
be obtained.—In his Thoughts on the National Debt, he contends, that as 
the principal borrowed, and the interest raised, from the public, are 
both restored to it, the public wealth cannot be impaired by this 
imaginary burden; and that by enabling us to circulate the prodigious 
sums to which that principal and interest amount—(the circulation of 
money, being money)—it must, of necessity, greatly enhance that wealth;—
it is from this increase of our wealth, that he alone apprehends any 
danger. He makes one remark on this subject, which Burke has borrowed in 
his last-published tract, that the sum raised for interest on a new 
loan, coming again into circulation, is expended in taxed commodities, 
which bring into the Treasury an additional income that goes far to 
discharge the interest on the sum borrowed.—Jenyns has evidently a 
predilection for paradoxical opinions: and why, he might reasonably urge 
in his defence, should a man address the public, who has nothing new to 
offer to it?

MAY the 30th

Read Jenyns' Metaphysical Disquisitions, in the 3rd Vol. of his Works.—
In the 5th, he contends, that God has implanted in the material and 
intellectual world, powers and propensities greatly analogous: by which 
they are enabled and impelled, in a similar manner, to perform their 
appointed parts; to restrain their own excesses; and to call back each 
other, whenever they too far deviate from their respective destinations. 
This is profound and just.—In the 6th, on Rational Christianity, he 
reprobates the plan for reducing the doctrines of religion to the 
standard of our reason, instead of aiming to exalt our reason to the 
comprehension of those doctrines; and observes, that Revelation, in its 
very nature, implies information of something which reason alone was not 
competent to discover. The distinguishing doctrines of Christianity, he 
states to be, That we come into the world in a depraved and fallen 
condition; That we are placed here, to purge off this original guilt, 
and recover our lost state of innocence and happiness; That we cannot 
effect this, without the grace of God; and, That, after all, we can only 
hope for pardon, through the merits of Christ, and the atonement made 
for our transgressions by his sufferings and death. It would be 
difficult, I believe, in the work of any divine, to meet with so clear, 
succinct, and masterly an exposition of the orthodox faith.—In the 7th, 
on Government and Civil Liberty, he combats, with great shrewdness, the 
doctrines, that men are born free and equal; that all government is 
derived from the people; that it is a compact between the governors and 
governed; and that it should be dissolved when not to the equal 
advantage of both parties. To be sure, at first view, it seems very 
preposterous to attempt to regulate authority, and submission to 
authority, on a gratuitous assumption which has unquestionably no 
foundation in fact;—-for except (perhaps) in the case of the American 
States, history records no in in which such a compact was ever entered 
into to; but the divine right to dominion being justly exploded, there 
appears to remain nothing, in the shape of a rational motive, to plead, 
either in support or limitation of government, but mere convenience. 
Now, to give something like form and stability to so very loose a 
principle, there seems no impropriety, where the government is such as a 
wise man would rather choose to abide by than incur the hazard of 
change, in supposing, not indeed that this government was originally 
instituted, but that it continues to subsist, by virtue of a compact 
between the Rulers and the People. Such a doctrine may not have much 
efficacy in instructing governors in their right to rule, or the people 
in their duty to obey; nor, till of late, has any such lesson been 
necessary:—force and prejudice, the two real main-springs of all 
government (though not to be offered, in theory, as rational inducements 
on the subject) will, in ordinary cases, prove amply sufficient, in 
practice, for this purpose: but by the clear, just, and forcible view it 
exhibits, of the true nature and destination of all political authority, 
it can scarcely fail to teach to sovereigns, of whatever denomination, 
the duty of consulting the good of the people in the exercise of their 
power, as the only end for which that power is vested in their hands; 
and to the People, the right of insisting on this attention to their 
welfare, as the only principle on which their submission is due:—a 
species of admonition, which, whatever epidemic fevers of the mind may 
occasionally rage, will probably prove salutary in the main, as long as 
the world endures.—In refutation of the fashionable apophthegm, that the 
People should be their own governors, Jenyns judiciously and acutely 
remarks, that the very essence of government consists in coercion: but 
when he proceeds to observe, that the advocates for liberty are usually 
tyrannical in power, because resistance to their power becomes, in that 
case, an infringement of their liberty, he evidently pushes the 
refinements of speculation too far. The love of power, whatever may be 
the cant of hypocrites, is a natural and indelible passion in the human 
mind: and the more precarious the tenure by which that power is held—as 
precarious, in the hands of demagogues, it ever must be—with the more 
jealousy will it be guarded, and the more impatiently will resistance be 
endured. This forms, indeed, one of the capital objections to popular 
governments; which usually, on this account, infringe far more on 
personal liberty, than constitutions in which the supreme authority is 
stable and secure.—In the 8th Essay, on Religious Establishments, Jenyns 
maintains, That such institutions are necessary, because all religious 
sects seek for power, and Government, for its own security, must espouse 
one; That genuine Christianity can never, on account of its doctrines, 
becomes national religion; and, That as citizens we are bound to accept 
an imperfect scheme of it, though as men should aim to approach as near 
to its original purity as we can—Burke has borrowed from the 7th of 
these Disquisitions; and Hey, from the 6th and 8th.

JUNE the 3rd

Read Jenyns' View of the Internal Evidences of Christianity; in which he 
endeavours to establish the truth of our religion, principally on its 
most singular and extraordinary character—as exhibiting doctrines to our 
faith, which, while they surpass in excellence, are totally unlike in 
nature, whatever before entered into the mind of man to conceive;—and 
enjoining precepts on our practice, which, while they carry all the real 
virtues, to a much higher degree of purity and perfection than any 
preceding moralist had advanced them, scrupulously omit whatever are 
spurious and founded on false principles, and inculcate, in their stead, 
new and peculiar duties exactly corresponding with the new objects which 
this religion opens to our view. The false virtues omitted, he makes, 
valour, patriotism, and friendship;—the two latter, because exclusive of 
universal benevolence: the new virtues added, poorness of spirit, 
forgiveness of injuries, charity to all men, repentance, faith, self-
abasement, and a detachment from the world. Is it likely, is it 
possible, that a religion thus distinguished, should have been the work 
of imposture?—He then proceeds to obviate objections. From the 
sufficiency of reason;—by chewing its insufficiency to construct a code 
of faith and practice comparable to that which Christianity unfolds. 
From the errors and inconsistencies to be detected in the Scriptures;—by 
contending that they are merely the history of God's revelations, and 
consequently subject, like all historical records, to such blemishes. 
From the opposition of Christianity to our natural propensities, and its 
incompatibility with the business of the world;—by maintaining, that its 
universal acceptance was never expected; and that it has performed all 
it was designed to effect, by enlightening the minds, purifying the 
faith, and amending the morals of mankind; while, without subverting the 
policy of the world, it has opened a gate, though a strait one, to the 
kingdom of heaven. From its corruptions;—by proving them to be the 
natural consequence of such a religion, delivered to such a being as 
man. From the incredibility of some of its doctrines;—by evincing the 
inadequacy of reason to the discussion of such topics. And, lastly, from 
its apparent partiality and injustice;—by pointing out the same seeming 
contradictions to our notions of impartiality and justice, in the 
ordinary dispensations of Providence: observing, that this objection 
assumes man to be as wise and perfect as his Creator; whereas, being 
imperfect and ignorant, it is to be presumed that the dispensations of a 
Being of perfect wisdom, justice, and goodness, will appear to us absurd 
and unjust, so as almost to justify the pious rant of a mad enthusiast 
"credo, quia impossibile";<148> on which principle, he conceives, it is, 
that faith is so particularly inculcated as a duty—an injunction which 
is not unreasonable, since belief is in a great measure voluntary, as 
what we wish to believe, we are never far from believing.—Such, on a 
continued, but not, inattentive, perusal, appear Mr. Jenyns' leading 
arguments in defence of Christianity; and I confess myself to have been 
powerfully impressed by their novelty and force. He seems to me to enter 
very fully into the true genius and character of the Christian Religion; 
which all attempts to soften down and rationalize, only render more 
incredible: and by meeting the difficulties it really presents, in their 
entire force, he at any rate takes the surest course to win our 
confidence and our esteem.—I have been told, but I know not on what 
authority, that the whole of this defence is a mere jeu d'esprit; an 
exercise of skill and ingenuity on the part of its author, unaccompanied 
by any serious conviction of the truth of what he professes to 
establish. If so, he has unquestionably carried on the deception with 
admirable address; for, throughout, there appear the strongest marks of 
sincerity and even earnestness: but I should very unwillingly believe 
such an imputation to be true, as it would imply a disingenuous 
imposition on the public, and a cruel mockery of the reason and feelings 
of mankind, on a subject where all but idiots and madmen must be 
disposed co be serious, that from every candid and honourable mind would 
imperiously call for the severest reprobation. An argument, it may.be 
urged, can derive no quality from the quarter whence it proceeds, or the 
spirit in which it is advanced: there it is: if weak, it must be futile, 
however solemnly alleged; if strong, it must be cogent, however 
sportively adduced: "valeat", therefore, "quantum valere potest":<149> 
it can make no difference, nor have we any business to enquire, by what 
motives the author was actuated: provided his proofs are satisfactory, 
that is sufficient; and we are bound to surrender ourselves to his 
conclusions with the same facility, though he should have been prompted 
by no other design than to impose, on our simplicity and to expose us co 
derision, as if he had been stimulated by the sincerest zeal to impress 
us with a conviction correspondent to his own. But let us sophisticate 
as we may, nature will infallibly rebel at such an audacious attempt to 
subjugate her instincts: and there is no man, I suppose, who, if 
apprised of the fact, would listen with complacency to arguments thus 
urged; or who, if unwittingly seduced by their influence, would not 
instantly, on detecting the imposition, withdraw, with scorn and 
indignation, an assent filched from him by so iniquitous a fraud on his 
good faith and understanding.

JUNE the 11th

Dipped into Boswell's Life of Johnson. Johnson pronounces Hume either 
mad or a liar, for having maintained to Boswell, that he was no more 
uneasy to think he should not be after this life, than that he had not 
been before he began to must s yet it is not easy, I conceive, to devise 
a satisfactory answer to an argument which I once urged upon this 
subject.

If ever there was a clear and incontestible proposition, it surely is, 
that an event, of which, and of whose effects, we must ever remain 
unconscious, is one, in which, whenever it takes place, we can have no 
possible interest: and if ever there was a particular ease obviously and 
indisputably referable to a general principle, it is, that annihilation, 
which implies a total extinction of all consciousness, not only of that 
specific event and its consequences, but of all events and all 
consequences whatever, is precisely an occurrence of this nature. To 
compare such a casualty, in point of interest, with what is passing in 
Jupiter or Saturn, would be doing injustice to the argument. So curious 
and exquisite is the concatenation of causes and effects, that it is 
impossible to say how much we may not be affected, while existence 
continues, by incidents apparently the most remote: but the contingency 
in question, instantly places us beyond all possibility of benefit or 
injury from any cause; and ought, therefore, to be regarded as purely 
and absolutely indifferent. It cuts us off, it may be said, from all the 
pleasures of existence, and is therefore an evil: Johnson has (Ought 
this idea—"when he dies, he at least gives up all he has": but what is a 
deprivation, of which we neither are, nor ever can be, in the slightest 
manner sensible? Obviously nothing at all; and little better, indeed, if 
seriously considered, than a contradiction in terms. Put the strongest 
case possible: suppose a being in the full enjoyment of the most 
exquisite delights of which his nature is susceptible, that he promises 
himself a continuance of these joys throughout the endless duration of 
time, and that in the midst of his career he is suddenly extinguished. 
Is he disappointed? He feels no disappointment. Is he injured? He feels 
no injury. It is a loss, you say: be loses eternal happiness! Who loses 
it? We forget that the being whom we suppose to sustain this 
deprivation, is no more. Such an instantaneous disappearance might 
indeed alarm those who witnessed it; but so far as the individual 
disappearing was concerned, there is surely nothing in the event which 
would not be perfectly consistent with the plans of entire and infinite 
benevolence. The "insect of the hour" enjoyed a state of high and 
unmixed gratification, whilst it lived; and the fond illusion of future 
bliss, only vanished with that existence which it so eminently tended to 
exhilarate.—In annihilation, therefore, regarded merely as an 
occurrence, and an occurrence which takes by surprise the object on whom 
it falls, there is obviously nothing either desirable or terrible: but, 
it will be said, that the expectation of this event, is dreadful; that 
the prospect of ceasing to exist, of parting for ever with all that we 
hold dear in the world, of bidding an eternal adieu to all our fondest 
pleasures, our most favourite pursuits, our tenderest connections, by 
arming death with tenfold terrors, must embitter every enjoyment of 
life, and cloud the desponding brow with comfortless despair—

For who would lose, 
Though full of pain, this intellectual being, 
Those thoughts that wander through eternity, 
To perish rather, swallowed up and lost 
In the wide womb of uncreated night, 
Devoid of sense and motion? 
Par. Lost, B 2, v 140 &c.

To such representations, however, just echoes as they may be of the 
natural workings of the human heart on the occasion, the obvious and the 
conclusive answer surely is this, That if annihilation be incontestably, 
in itself, an event of perfect indifference, to expect it with terror, 
must be in the highest degree absurd; since what can be more so, than to 
dread as an evil, what we are morally assured, when it comes, is no evil 
at all? The vainest fear of the most base and abject superstition, is 
sensible and judicious, compared with so groundless an alarm. Whenever 
we look forward to any privation, not involving positive pain—the decay 
of sight or hearing for instance—with dismay, it is because we 
anticipate, that whenever that privation occurs, we shall be conscious 
of our loss. This it is which constitutes that privation an evil, when 
it takes place; and renders it most justly such, in prospect. Remove, 
with the departed possession, all consciousness of what is fled, and as 
the whole evil (which can consist only in regret), disappears, so all 
just apprehensions respecting such a contingency, must necessarily 
vanish with it. It is possible, for may have believed it to be true, 
that, in former stages of existence, we ourselves may have enjoyed 
inlets to gratification, which are now no longer open; or derived 
pleasures from the senses we retain, which they are no longer competent 
to transmit: all memory and knowledge, however, of such, delights, if 
they ever existed, having passed away, it is precisely the same as if 
they had never been: we cannot repine at the loss, of what we never 
remember the possession; and as we are now sensible that it would have 
been absurd, in that previous state of being, if it ever obtained, to 
look forward with anguish to our present condition; au it must be 
equally to anticipate, with sorrow, a partial or a total extinction of 
faculties of enjoyment, whose loss, whenever it takes place, we are 
satisfied we shall be equally unable to feel or to deplore.—All this, it 
may perhaps be said, is very true; but whence, then, proceeds that 
sentiment of horror which does in fact accompany the prospect of 
annihilation. From an illusion, I conceive, on this very point, which 
however obvious, and however simple, it is by no means easy to expel. 
With the loss, whatever it be, which we incur, it is presumed that all 
consciousness of that loss will be extinguished: the whole argument 
rests on this assumption; but the mind, whose "thoughts", as Milton so 
finely expresses it, "wander through eternity",<150> though it admits, 
in terms, with difficulty acquiesces, in spirit, in this supposition. We 
cannot, in speculation, separate the loss, from the sense of that loss, 
nor the feelings with which we conceive that sense must be accompanied. 
In contemplating the fate of others who have undergone any partial 
privations of this nature—a failure of memory and reason for example—
however assured we may be that they are insensible to their deprivation, 
and suffer nothing from it, we cannot, by any effort, refrain from 
entering into their situation, and feeling, by substitution, for them. 
What we are thus irresistibly impelled, in defiance of the plainest 
dictates of reason, to feel for others, it would be strange indeed if we 
did not feel, with a still acuter sense, for ourselves: and in looking 
forward, accordingly, even to a condition, which, from its very nature, 
precludes all possibility of regret—in anticipating a total extinction 
of our existence—the mind finds it impracticable to stop short at this 
natural boundary of hope and fear; but anticipating in imagination, what 
is impossible in fact, obscurely figures to itself, at the termination 
of life, a dark and dismal abyss, a blank and boundless void, into which 
we are condemned to plunge, and where we must ever remain, in a state of 
comfortless solitude and seclusion; cut off from those pleasures to 
which we were once so strongly attached; and disappointed of those 
prospects which we once so fondly indulged; while other and happier 
beings, the productions of unborn ages, are busied in those stations, 
and participating in those delights, which we are no longer in a 
capacity to fill or to enjoy:—not reflecting, or rather, not being 
sufficiently impressed with the reflection, that all consciousness of 
darkness, solitude, and horror, all recollection of past enjoyments or 
future prospects, all knowledge of what is passing in the universe, all 
joy and sorrow, all regrets and disappointments, must, on the supposed 
contingency, for ever cease.

Such, if I remember, was the substance of the argument: but however 
conclusive it may appear in itself, so powerfully is it opposed by the 
illusion just considered, that I should deservedly incur the reproach 
which I have conditionally bestowed on Jenyns, were I seriously to 
propose it, without acknowledging, that it seemed to me exactly to meet 
Hume's description of a truly sceptical argument—that it admits of no 
answer, and produces no conviction.

JUNE the 13th

Began Herder's Outlines of the Philosophy of the History. of Man, of 
which I had heard high praise;—but was soon obliged to desist. He 
appears to write like a great child eager to communicate its late 
acquirements, however trivial and however trite, with wonderment and 
rapture, as new and most important information. His tedious rhapsodical 
method, is, however, by no means peculiar to him. In the writings of all 
the modern German philosophers I have ever met with, there is an 
encumbered heaviness and wearisome prolixity, arising from a generous 
but most fatiguing disposition to leave nothing upon trust, but to 
impart, at full length, and in all the amplitude of ponderous detail, 
the whole mass of whatever they have laboriously collected-which 
gradually extinguishes every spark of curiosity and interest, and 
overwhelms the spirits with lassitude and languor. Something of this, 
may perhaps be ascribed to the particular state of science in that 
country; but much must be owing to the peculiar genius of the people. I 
fancy that in their poetry, I discover a distinguishing cast of 
character somewhat allied to their prosings. We search in vain, in the 
effusions of the German Muse, for what the French emphatically term "la 
spirituelle"—for traits of a delicate and refined sensibility, and 
cultivated imagination: but are struck, at every step, with indications 
of powers, rather clumsily robust, than vigorously active; and feelings, 
rather coarsely strong, than nicely susceptible;—a sort of intellectual 
constitution, which appears to accomplish everything by effort; which 
can neither execute what is trifling, with grace, nor what is great, 
with dignity; but is for ever mistaking rudeness for simplicity, 
violence for pathos, appetite for passion, delirium for fancy, enormity 
for grandeur, and whatever is ghastly ferocious and horrid, for the 
terrible and the sublime.

Met Dr. Garnet at a party in the evening. He was very full of the late 
original and important discovery, that the cold and wet weather we have 
had for some time, is owing to the explosion of gunpowder by the 
contending armies on the continent: calculating that 30,000 men, in 60 
discharges, would disengage 300 cubic miles of air; and descanting 
largely on the consequences of such a sufflation. This foppery of 
philosophy, deriving countenance, I suspect, from an endeavour to 
accommodate science to the taste of the grown scholars of the Royal 
Institution, is surely mighty ridiculous. What sensible and permanent 
effect is it possible to suppose that 300 cubic miles of air of any 
description, received into the vast alembic of the atmosphere, and blown 
about by all the winds of heaven, can produce on whole regions 300 miles 
off! The only chill which these explosions have occasioned, is of a 
quality, I am afraid; which Count Rumford, with all his pyrotechnical 
devices, would find it far above his skill to remedy.—Dr. G. could not 
solve a difficulty I started—Why the Sun's rays, notwithstanding they 
are concentrated to produce a degree of heat one hundred times more 
intense than that of the fiercest furnace, will impart directly no 
perceptible warmth to water; though the same water, enclosed in a vessel 
the most perfectly transparent, and insulated in the completest manner 
from all conductors of caloric, will soon acquire a very sensible degree 
of heat from exposure to a common fire?

JUNE the 19th

Glanced over Pye's Commentary on Aristotle's Poetics. Pye, in his last 
note, discusses the question, whether beauty results from fitness and 
utility; but without coming to any general conclusion: though he 
inclines to decide, in most instances, in the affirmative; and 
controverts Burke's examples in favour of an opposite inference. 
Voltaire, he quotes, as broadly determining in the negative: 
illustrating his argument by a dose of physic, which however obviously 
beneficial to the constitution, is not on that account a whit more 
delectable to the palate: and maintaining, that our moral sentiments are 
universally the same in all ages and countries; but that our sentiments 
of beauty and deformity depend altogether upon habit, and will of course 
vary, at different times, and in different regions, as different habits 
prevail.

JUNE the 20

Had a long conference with Mr. M—He maintained pretty nearly the same 
political sentiments as when I last saw him—June 13th, 1799; except, 
that he spoke more despondingly of the revival of the spirit of freedom 
in this country.—Of—he observed, that, with all his wisdom, he was 
foolish enough to be factious; and from an aversion to the present 
administration (in common with himself) as enemies to freedom, to lend 
his countenance and support to a party, who were prepared to introduce a 
domination ten times more formidable. Expressed a vehement disgust at 
the intolerance of these bigots for pretended liberality —Exhibited, in 
a very striking point of view, the difficulty of the return of order, 
combined with liberty, in France, in consequence of the enormous 
confiscations which had taken place there; and which he computed at not 
much less than nine tenths of the whole landed property of the country: 
and remarked on this subject, that a similar proceeding was felt, to 
this very hour, in producing a fund of discontent and disaffection, in 
Ireland.—Mentioned, that upon asking Fox's opinion of what he had 
observed, of the necessary compexity of all free governments, from the 
various elements out of which they must arise, and the various interests 
with which they must be charged, Fox said, that nothing certainly could 
be more true; nor anything more foolish, than the doctrine of the 
advocates for simple forms of government. In addition to his History of 
this Country from the Revolution, had talked of preparing Memoirs of his 
own Times—to be published after his death. His mind perfectly composed 
now, and resigned to the dereliction of power.—M. recited some passages 
he had extracted, at Cambridge, from a work of Leibnitz, de Jure 
Gentium; in which that acute philosopher seemed to place Virtue, simply 
in promoting the good of mankind; and to account for the motives to it, 
by considering the interests of others as in some way incorporated with 
our own:—illustrating his notion on this subject, by the interest which 
we are naturally led to take in sublime and beautiful objects.—Had 
received a Letter from L., remonstrating on his calling Rousseau a 
sophist; which L. construed, a propagator of sophisms for hire: M. 
answered, that he considered a "sophist" as a promulgator of specious 
but false doctrines, whatever were his motives; and that the term 
applied most pertinently to Rousseau.

JUNE the 23rd

Looked in at the House of Commons, in the afternoon. The Question, the 
third reading of the Bill for Restricting Monastic Institutions in this 
Country. The principal speakers—Mr. Wyndham, colloquial and ingenious, 
but desultory and ineffective;—Mr. Ryder, precise and affected;—Sir 
William Scott, solemn, neat and elegant;—Mr. Johnes, coarse and 
ridiculous;—Mr. Hobhouse, plain and inexpert. The first and last, 
against the bill, as unnecessary. Left the House at eight, when Erskine 
was speaking for it. After having listened, term after term, with 
delight and exultation to this pride of the English bar, in his place, I 
confess I never hear him, above stairs, but with some emotions of shame 
for my profession. The constant habit of advocating private suits before 
a superior tribunal, generates a species of eloquence, which, however 
excellent in itself, appears to cruel disadvantage in a deliberative 
assembly of legislators and statesmen, debating, as equals, seriously 
and in earnest, the most important interests of the Empire. Bearcroft, 
indeed, whom I once heard on Erskine's Libel Bill, appeared to suffer 
little by the change of station: hut then, with a vein of the driest and 
happiest humour I ever met with, there was a solemn gravity in his 
deportment, and a didactic energy in his manner, which, even at the bar, 
removed the advocate from sight; and frequently rendered the argument of 
the counsel, more dignified and impressive than the judgment from the 
bench.

JUNE the 24th

Read a very elegant piece of criticism, intituled "A Letter to the Rev. 
Mr. T. Warton, on his late Edition of Milton's Juvenile Poems"; 
ascribed, and I believe truly, to the late Rev. Samuel Darby, of 
Ipswich. In most of the strictures, I very heartily concur; there is 
one, however, from which I am disposed to dissent more vehemently, 
perhaps, than the occasion may seem to warrant.

"Towered Cities please us then." 
MILTON: Allegro.
"Then, that is, at night!" 
WARTON.

"An odd time, surely, for TOWERED cities to please, when they 
cannot be seen. It is not Milton's wont to throw about his epithets 
thus at random. I remember, indeed, a party of young students from 
the University, who skated down the river to Ely, and, arriving 
there late, would view the cathedral by candle and lantern. But the 
fact is rather singular; and it may be said in their excuse, that 
they were educated—juncosi ad littora Cami.<151> THEN serves only, 
I apprehend, to shift the scene from the country to the town. The 
description of the morning is inimitable; and Milton must have been 
a very early riser, as well as an excellent poet, to mark its 
progressive beauties so distinctly and minutely as he has done. The 
lark startling the dull night with his song—the dappled dawn—the 
cock with lively din scattering the rear of darkness, and strutting 
out before his dames—the poet stealing forth to take his walk by 
hedge-row elms or hillocks green, to meet the sun (as Gray 
expresses it) at his Eastern Gate—robed in flames of amber, the 
clouds dight in a thousand colours, (forgive his liveries)—the 
ploughman, the milkmaid, the mower, the shepherd, all with their 
proper attributes—the eye catching new pleasures as the sun 
advances—the discovery of the lawns, fallows, nibbling flocks, 
clouds resting on the breast of the mountains, meadows, rivers, 
towers and battlements bosomed high in tufted trees—form, in the 
whole, a picture which is unequalled, and would give new force and 
spirit to the glowing pencil of Rubens. I think the words, v.67.—
"Every Shepherd tells has tale," are well explained, as in this 
interpretation (which I own is new to me) the time is precisely 
marked. The description of the day is carried on with the same 
spirit, and the evening closes with a display of rural amusements 
and rural superstition. We are then carried to town amidst the busy 
hum of men. We are not to expect here the same entertainment we met 
with in the country. There is, however, a day-piece and a night-
piece; and the evening is passed in a manner most agreeable to a 
man of taste and reflection, with Johnson and Shakespeare, or in 
hearing soft Lydian airs, married to immortal verse." P. 7.

This is certainly ingenious and acute; and evinces a very delicate 
perception, and just relish, of the beautiful and appropriate imagery 
which Milton has employed, with such exquisite taste, in the most truly 
delicious and engaging, perhaps, of all his compositions: I cannot help 
thinking, however, that the reasons for excepting to Warton's, and (as I 
conceive) the ordinary, interpretation of the passage, are far from 
conclusive; and I must confess, at the same time, that I should very 
reluctantly submit to their authority, if they were, as infinitely 
preferring an agreeable illusion, to an unacceptable truth.

The only objection expressly alleged against the obvious construction of 
the line in question, is derived from the epithet "towered", regarded as 
inapplicable to a night-piece but there seems an indirect reference to 
another—the description of "the busy hum of men"—as a circumstance 
equally unsuitable to such a season; and an oblique glance at a third—in 
a supposed allusion (I conceive) of the poet to tilts and tournaments, 
as forming part of the amusements of the town—which, if it could be 
fairly established, would, no doubt, fix the period to the day. Let us 
examine each of these objections in its order.

I. The epithet "towered" is manifestly employed to denote populousness 
and opulence-

"Huge Cities, and high-towered, that well might seem. 
The seats of mightiest monarchs"— 
Par. Regained, B. 3, v. 261.

—such qualities, as would fit the imagined Capitals for those splendid 
scenes with which the Poet was preparing to enliven them; and which are 
by no properties more emphatically indicated, than by the clustering 
turrets, and aspiring battlements and pinnacles, of castles, churches, 
palaces, and public buildings. These, no doubt, are august and striking 
objects to the eye: let them be ever so imposing, however, it is not on 
their account that the poet, on this occasion, exhibits cities as 
delightful; but for considerations of a very different order, which 
these symbols of magnificence, thus slightly suggested to the 
imagination, merely serve to introduce. This, I conceive, would be a 
satisfactory answer to the objection, were the epithet in question 
altogether inapplicable, as depictive of the effect of such objects in 
the night: but there is no necessity for any such concession. Everyone 
who has entered a considerable town, by moonlight, or amidst the glare 
of high rejoicings, must have been struck with the sublime effect of its 
loftier edifices, either majestically reposing under the pale but 
resplendent tint which "sleeps" (as Shakespeare so exquisitely describes 
it) upon the face of nature; or partially illumed, in vivid gleams, by 
the immediate blaze of lamps and torches. Such objects may be more 
picturesque and pleasing, viewed at a distance—(Milton had before so 
viewed them)—gilded by the morning sun, or trembling in the haze of 
noon; but they are incomparably more grand and impressive, when 
approached—(and the Poet here evidently supposes them near)—under either 
of the former aspects.

II. But what shall we say to the circumstance by which this proximity is 
so strikingly marked—to "the busy hum of men"? Does not such a 
description instantly suggest the noontide buzz of populous cities—the 
indefatigable murmur of Cheapside and the 'Change; and can such an image 
possibly comport with the stillness and solitude of night? Certainly, 
not with stillness and solitude: but are these the necessary 
accompaniments of the close of day? Are they such accompaniments as the 
inhabitants of crowded capitals are accustomed to witness? Are they the 
accompaniments of such an evening as, I contend, the poet is about to 
introduce? To secluded peasantry, indeed, the objected image might well 
appear unsuited to the evening; but a frequenter of the parties of 
gaiety and fashion, will surely attest its admirable adaptation to 
express the first effect upon the ear, of a scene, however late the 
hour,

"Where throngs of knights and barons bold, 
In weeds of peace, high triumphs hold; 
With store of Ladies"—.

The busy bee may close his labours with the day: but Man, intent on 
pleasure, holds another language—

Rigour now is gone to bed, 
And Advice, with scrupulous head: 
Strict Age, and sour Severity, 
With their grave saws in slumber lie. 
We that are of purer fire, 
Imitate the starry quire; 
Who in their nightly, watchful spheres, 
Lead, in swift round, the months and years. 
* * * * * * * 
What hath night to do with sleep? 
Night hath better sweets to prove. 
Venus now wakes, and wakens Love. 
—Come! Let us now our rites begin. 
Comus, 107 &c.

III. The last objection, appears at first view by far the most 
formidable of the three; and, could it be substantiated, would 
undoubtedly be decisive of the question. If tilts and tournaments are 
really introduced as parts of the entertainment in the town-scene, the 
time is irrevocably fixed to day. Let us view the passage, then:

Where throngs of knights and barons bold, 
In weeds of peace, high triumphs bold; 
With store of ladies, whose bright eyes 
Rain influence, and judge the prize 
Of wit or arms, while all contend 
To win her praise whom all commend.

Here is a manifest and direct allusion, indeed, to jousts and 
tournaments; but surely nothing which determines them to be passing at 
the time. On the contrary, there are three expressions which seem 
purposely introduced to obviate such an interpretation:—the knights and 
barons are emphatically stated to be clad "in weeds of peace"; whereas a 
tournament was, in all respects, and particularly in dress and 
accoutrements, the express image of war:—the occasion of assembling, is 
denominated a "triumph"; which Steevens, in a note on Shakespeare's 
expression (1st P. of King Henry the 4th, Act 3, scene 3.) "O, thou art 
a perpetual triumph, an everlasting bonfire-night", defines to be "a 
general term for any public exhibition, such as a royal marriage, a 
grand procession, &c, which commonly being at night, were attended by a 
multitude of torch-bearers":—and the prize of wit is adjudged on the 
occasion, as well as arms. Whatever interpretation explained, in an easy 
way, these apparent inconsistencies, would merit attention, if not 
reception, on that consideration alone. Now it appears from M. De St. 
Palaye's Memoirs of Chivalry, that it was customary to close these 
martial exhibitions of our ancestors, with a solemn banquet—a supper—
called the Feast of Tournaments; that at this high festival, this 
"triumph", all the guests, the dames, the barons, knights, and squires, 
appeared in their robes of state and ceremony; that, in the course of 
it, the prize of arms was frequently adjudged; that the parties 
afterwards engaged in contentions of wit and games of skill; and that 
the splendour of the evening was often still farther heightened by the 
introduction of masques and pageants, after the taste and fashion of the 
times:

"There let Hymen oft appear, 
In saffron robe, with taper clear; 
And pomp, and feast, and revelry, 
With masque, and antique pageantry".

We have only to conceive ourselves transported to a festival of this 
nature, and every circumstance of Milton's description will correspond 
exactly with the scene into which we are ushered:—there can be little 
difficulty, therefore, in conceding; that this is the scene which the 
Poet designed to exhibit.

That Warton's construction, then, is at least admissible, I trust, may 
safely be assumed; and that, if admissible, it is incomparably the most 
poetical, is surely past all dispute.—Milton's design in the Allegro and 
Penseroso, has perhaps been regarded with too much refinement by 
Johnson, when he considers it as being—not what Theobald, with still 
more refinement, supposed, "to show how objects derived their colours 
from the mind, by representing the operation of the same things upon the 
gay and the melancholy temper, or upon the same man as he is differently 
disposed"—but rather "to illustrate, how, among the successive variety 
of appearances, every disposition of mind takes hold on those by which 
it may be gratified". To me, the poet's aim appears simply, to exhibit a 
succession of such appearances as are best adapted to interest and 
cherish a cheerful or pensive disposition. But however this may be, his 
conduct, in the pursuit of what must be regarded as his leading object, 
under any supposition, is clear and admirable. He personates, in turn, 
both characters; and conducts himself through a series of scenes and 
images congenial to each. These scenes and images are not promiscuously 
thrown together: they are exhibited in the order in which they naturally 
occur—in the succession in which they might actually have been witnessed 
and enjoyed; and thus essentially contribute to the vivacity and 
dramatic effect of the piece. In the Penseroso, the scene commences in 
the evening, and is pursued through the next day: in the Allegro, it 
opens in the morning, when first 

"* * * the lark begins his flight, 
And singing startles the dull night";

and is continued, through periods marked by the most characteristic 
imagery, true to nature and exquisitely touched,

"Till the live-long day-light fails":

But the recreations of a country life are not yet exhausted: the spicy, 
nut-brown ale is introduced; and the rustic beverage is accompanied with 
appropriate tales of village superstition, till the hour of rest (an 
early hour) arrives, the whispering winds lull all to slumber, and 
universal stillness closes up the evening. Then—at this pause—if 
Warton's interpretation be received, the poet shifts the scene; and from 
the sequestered hamlet, hushed in silence and repose, transports us 
suddenly, and by an unexpected and awakening contrast, into the midst of 
luxurious cities, now revelling in the height of their festivities; 
where he mingles with whatever is most crowded, and brilliant, and 
exhilarating—the sumptuous feast, the gorgeous pageant, the splendid 
drama, and the inspiring concert. A transition more truly animating and 
delightful, never was conceived: it has the same effect, as when, in 
some entrancing symphony, after a minor movement gradually softened by a 
lentando and diminuendo to a close that dies away upon the ear, the 
whole force of the orchestra abruptly breaks forth in the original key 
and to brisk measure. The transition it not only exquisite in itself, 
but its introduction is infinitely happy. It possesses perfectly both 
the requisites of that "curiosa felicitas"<152> which constitutes the 
fondest wish of the aspirer to elegance of composition;—it has all the 
ease which seems the gift of fortune, with all the justness which forms 
the triumph of art. After having chased the delights of the country 
through the day, the poet is naturally led to resort in the evening to 
cities; and cities, at this juncture, readily furnish those glittering 
spectacles which contrast so admirably with the tranquil pleasures of 
the day. Destroy this continuity—suppose a total break in the scene—
conceive that the poet, after having left us to slumber through the 
night, goes over again the next day, in the town, the same circuit which 
he had, the evening before, completed in the country, and—I will not say 
that the spirit of the piece is gone—but I am sure it is miserably 
impaired. Every reader of taste, must forcibly feel the difference: he 
will abandon, if he be compelled to abandon, the illusion arising from 
the obvious interpretation of the contested passage, with sincere 
regret: and will be tempted to exclaim, with the enthusiast in Horace, 
to the sturdy disciplinarians who should compel him to such a measure-

* * * * * * * Pol, me occidistis amici, 
Non servastis, ait; cui sic extorta voluptas, 
Et demptus, per vim, mentis gratissimus error. 
L. 2, Epis. 2, v. 138, &c.

NOTES
Notes to A Diary of a Lover of Literature

1. Sæva indignatio. "Savage indignation"–taken from Swift's epitaph.
2. chiaro, oscuro: "Brightness, darkness."
3. Finis coronat opus: "The ending crowns the work"
4. 30 millia passuum: 30 Roman miles, or about 28.5 English miles or 46 
Km.
5. sub sinistra: "On the left"
6. Ipsæ res verba rapiunt: "The words hurry on the subject" (Cicero, De 
Finibus, 3.19)
7. dalle 20, alle 24 ore: From 20 to 24 hours.
8. Monebant &c.: "They warned him not to allow the growing custom of 
expelling kings to go unpunished. Liberty was sweet enough in itself. 
Unless the energy with which nations sought to obtain it were matched by 
the efforts which kings put forth to defend their power, the highest 
would be reduced to the level of the lowest; there would be nothing 
lofty, nothing that stood out above the rest of the state; there was the 
end of monarchy, the noblest institution known to gods or men." [Perseus 
Digital Library http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/] 
9. Nisus: attempt, endeavour.
10. L'Homme au Masque de Fer: "The Man in the Iron Mask."
11. Je suis a vos ordres: "I am at your command."
12. Io non giudico etc.: "I neither do, nor ever shall judge it a fault, 
to support opinion by arguments, where it is not sought to impose them 
by violence or authority" [N. H. Thomson]
13. Me tabula sacer etc.: "As for me the votive tablet that hangs on the 
temple wall reveals, suspended, my dripping clothes, for the god, who 
holds power over the sea." 
[http://www.poetryintranslation.com/PITBR/Latin/HoraceOdesBkI.php]
14. Cuius in verbis etc: "He inspired men's minds to enthusiasm, when 
speaking, but when writing, he lost all force, and the effect of his 
oratory was extinguished like a flame." (Cicero, Brutus, 24.93)
15. Artis est, celare artem: "The art is, to conceal art."
16. Si Pergama &c.: "If Pergama [Troy] could be defended by a right 
hand, indeed it would have been defended by this one." (Virgil, Aeneid 
bk. II l. 290-1)
17.Illi, quos tibi dempserit adponit annos: "It [Time] will add to her 
the years it takes from you." (Horace Odes Bk. II Ode 5. l. 14-15)
18. Dum dubitat Natura &c.: "While Nature hesitated whether to make a 
boy or a girl, She made you, boy, as beautiful as a girl." (Pseudo-
Ausonius, A Pretty Boy)
19. Swift's Burlesque: Its full title is –An argument to prove that the 
abolishing of Christianity in England may, as things now stand, be 
attended with some inconveniences, and perhaps not produce those many 
good effects proposed thereby.
20. Proeliis audax: "daring in battle" (Horace, Odes, Bk I Ode 12 l. 
21.)
21. Phasis: Aspect or appearance.
22. Si figit &c. "If dire necessity seizes your rooftop with its claws 
of adamant" (Horace, Odes, Bk III Ode 24 l. 5-8.) Substituting "sic" for 
"si," would change If dire necessity . . . to Thus dire necessity . . .
23. Simul calentis &c.: "Once the shameless god had warmed me violently, 
With the wine that discovered where my secrets were hidden." [A. S. 
Kline]
24. Quis non &c.:"What does drunkenness not accomplish? It discloses 
secrets"
25. Ah! une grande perte: voila un orateur de mains!: "Ah! A great loss: 
he was an orator with his hands!"
26. Partridge's critique upon Garrick: From Tom Jones by Henry Fielding. 
Tom has taken Partridge to see Garrick play Hamlet.–
Little more worth remembering occurred during the play, at the end 
of which Jones asked him, “Which of the players he had liked best?” 
To this he answered, with some appearance of indignation at the 
question, “The king, without doubt.” “Indeed, Mr Partridge,” says 
Mrs Miller, “you are not of the same opinion with the town; for 
they are all agreed, that Hamlet is acted by the best player who 
ever was on the stage.” “He the best player!” cries Partridge, with 
a contemptuous sneer, “why, I could act as well as he myself. I am 
sure, if I had seen a ghost, I should have looked in the very same 
manner, and done just as he did. And then, to be sure, in that 
scene, as you called it, between him and his mother, where you told 
me he acted so fine, why, Lord help me, any man, that is, any good 
man, that had such a mother, would have done exactly the same. I 
know you are only joking with me; but indeed, madam, though I was 
never at a play in London, yet I have seen acting before in the 
country; and the king for my money; he speaks all his words 
distinctly, half as loud again as the other.--Anybody may see he is 
an actor.”
27. Illuc, unde abii, redeo: "I return to the point I first made" [A. S. 
Kline]
28. Et mihi res, non me rebus, submittere conor: "To try to change 
things to suit me, and not change myself to suit things as they are."
29. Epistle to the Pisos: Another name for Horace's Ars Poetica (or De 
Arte Poetica, as Green calls it).
30. Imo est &c: "I quite believe that if you set about it, you will be 
making two marriages for me out of one." [H. T. Riley]
31. Hinc illæ lachrymæ: "Hence these tears."
32. Buffon: Georges-Louis Leclerc, Comte de Buffon (7 September 1707 – 
16 April 1788) was a French naturalist, mathematician, cosmologist, and 
encyclopédiste. He published thirty-six quarto volumes of his Histoire 
Naturelle during his lifetime; with additional volumes based on his 
notes and further research being published in the two decades following 
his death. His works influenced the next two generations of naturalists, 
including Jean-Baptiste Lamarck and Georges Cuvier. [Wikipedia]
33. Verum illis, quidem, gratulemur, sine labore, sine ratione, sine 
disciplina, disertis: "Let us congratulate these people for becoming so 
competent without effort, method, or training"
34. Gratulemur illis, quidem, sine litteris, et sine disciplina, 
disertis: "Let us congratulate these people for becoming so competent 
without books or training"
35. Ducem naturam: "The lead of Nature"
36. Vox et preterea nihil: "Sound and nothing more"
37. Cito scribendo non fit, ut bene scribatur; bene scribendo fit, ut 
cito: "Write quickly and you will never write well; write well, and you 
will soon write quickly"
38. Vix enim bona fidei viro convenit, auxilium in publicum polliceri, 
quod in prasentissimis quibusque periculis desit: "For it is scarcely 
decent for an honourable man to promise assistance to the public at 
large which he may be unable to provide in the most serious 
emergencies."
39. Qui stultis videri eruditi volunt, stulti eruditis videntur: "He who 
wishes to seem wise to fools, will seem a fool to the wise."
40. Ille se profecisse sciat, cui Cicero valde placebit: "He knows he 
has progressed (in oratory) when Cicero greatly pleases him."
41. In litteris ipsi se sciant plurimum profecisse, quibus Burkius valde 
placuerit: "They will know they have greatly progressed in literature, 
when Burke greatly pleases them."
42. Melius de hoc nomine sentiant, credantque, Attice dicere, esse 
optime dicere.: "It would be better for these people to think and 
believe, that the Attic style of speech is the best."
43. Sed melius de hoc nomine sentiant * * * *: Burkium si quis imitetur, 
eum credant et Attice dicturum et optime.: " It would be better for 
these people to think, * * * that whoever strives to imitate Burke, must 
believe that Attic style of speech is the best."
44. Qui nihil potest tranquille &c.: "He who can say nothing calmly, 
nothing gently, nothing clearly or definitely, will seem a madman 
amongst the sane or a drunkard among the sober"
45. Qui nihil solet leniter &c.: "He who is accustomed to say nothing 
gently, nothing clearly, nothing definitely, will be seen to speak from 
his stomach rather than his brain, and (his hearers) will stay away from 
this insane oratory."
46. Qu'est-ce qu'une pensée neuve &c.: "What is a new, brilliant, 
extraordinary thought? It is not, as the ignorant believe, a thought 
that no one has ever had before: it is, on the contrary, a thought that 
must have come to everyone, and that one person is the first to express. 
A good word is a good word only when it says something that everyone 
thought, and who says it in a lively, fine and new way."
47. Lycophron: 3rd Century BC Greek poet, whose only surviving full work, 
a poem called Alexandra or Cassandra, is notorious for the difficulty of 
its style, full of obsolete words, references to obscure myths, and 
neologisms of his own invention.
48. Garth's Dispensary: The link is to an edition published in Germany. 
The preface and notes are in German, but the poem is in English.
49. Voulant former de l'homme &c.: "In order to educate the natural man, 
it is not a question of making him a savage, and of relegating him  to 
the depths of the woods; but that, surrounded by the whirlpool of 
society, it is enough not to be dragged into it, either by the passions 
or the opinions of men; so that he sees through his eyes, feels through 
his heart, that no authority rules him except his own reason."
50. This passage from I John 5:7-8 which reads "For there are three that 
bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost: and 
these three are one. And there are three that bear witness in earth, the 
Spirit, and the water, and the blood: and these three agree in one," is 
regarded by many commentators as a spurious insertion. See Wikipedia. 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comma_Johanneum 
51. Emollit mores, nec sinet esse feros: "makes the spirit gentle, and 
reduces its harshness" Ovid, Letters from the Black Sea, II. 9.47.
52. Il Barbiere di Seviglia: The Barber of Seville. Originally a play by 
Beaumarchais. The opera Greene saw was not the well-known version by 
Rossini, which was first performed in 1816. It would have been one of 
the two previous versions, by Nicolas Isouard (1796) or Giovanni 
Paisiello (1782).
53. There was a rebellion in Ireland in the summer of 1798. See 
Wikipedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Irish_Rebellion_of_1798 
54. Yarmouth: On the Isle of Wight, not Great Yarmouth in East Anglia.
55. Curule chair: An ornate chair inlaid with ivory, used as an official 
seat by the most important Roman officials. 
56. Purpureum lumen: "Ruddy brightness."
57. Magna componere parvis: "To compare the great with the small"
58. Horresco referens: "I shudder to say it"
59. Duke of G—: Augustus Fitzroy, Duke of Grafton. The book is 
apparently not available online.
60. Proh pudor!: For shame!
61. The link is to an English translation. Green probably was reading 
the Greek version https://catalog.hathitrust.org/Record/009717064
62. Comme dans un etat libre &c.: As in a free country every man who is 
supposed to have a free soul must be governed by himself, it is 
necessary that all the people have the legislative power."
63. Η Δημοχρατιχ &c.: "Democracy is government for the lower orders."
64. Un peu herissé de merveilles: "a little overstuffed with miracles."
65. Que le bien particulier doit ceder au bien public: "That the good of 
the individual must give way to the good of the public."
66. Siècle de Louis le 14me: The Age of Louis XIV. The link is to an 
English translation. The original French, which is what Greene was 
reading, can be found at 
https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.c022698019 
67. D'approfondir des doses, en paraissant les effleurer: "To go deeply 
into matters, while seeming only to touch on them"
68. l'esprit republicain &c.: "The republican spirit is at bottom just 
as ambitious as the monarchic, and there are undoubtedly just as many 
virtues in a monarchy as in a republic. There is less enthusiasm in a 
monarchy, but more of what is called honour."
69. Judicium veri et finem bonum: "True justice and the greatest good"
70. "Extremum et ultimum bonorum, quo omnia referantur: "The final and 
ultimate good to which all things are referred."
71. Neque tamen istas quaestiones: "And not only these questions."
72. Jamais les principes &c.: "Never are the principles and actions of 
men more different than when the principles are opposed to the natural 
sentiments of humanity: the heart corrects errors of the mind."
73. Que les deux Lettres &c.: "that the two Letters on paternal love and 
jealousy are those of a profound philosopher; he develops a chain of 
instinctive beliefs linked to our being, necessary to our happiness, and 
intended by the Supreme Being to stand in the place of a reason too 
elevated for the common man, and which would never have had been strong 
enough to make us act."
74. Il voyoit bien &c.: "He saw how far the consequences of his 
principles could be taken, but he did not wish to describe this."
75. Quid sit finis &c.: "What is the end, the object, the standard to 
which all the ideas of living well and acting rightly are to be 
referred?
76. Omne animal &c.:"Every animal the moment that it is born seeks for 
pleasure, and rejoices in it as the chief good; and rejects pain as the 
chief evil, and wards it off from itself as far as it can; and that it 
acts in this manner, without having been corrupted by anything, under 
the promptings of nature herself, who forms this uncorrupt and upright 
judgment" [C.D.Yonge]
77. Natura ducente: "Guided by nature."
78. Voluptas: Pleasure.
79. Honestum: Virtue
80. Summum bonum – Greatest good; Honestum – Virtue; Summum malum – 
Greatest evil; Turpe – shameful behaviour.
81. Bona et mala: "Good and bad"
82 Secundum naturam: "According to nature."
83. Utilitas: Utility.
84. Essai sur l'Etude de la Littérature: "An essay on the study of 
literature." The link is to an English translation. The original French, 
which is what Greene was reading, can be found at 
https://catalog.hathitrust.org/Record/008615335
85. L'art de juger &c: "The art of judging writings and writers; what 
they said, whether it is well said, and whether it is historically 
true."
86. L'esprit philosophique: "The philosophical spirit."
87. À pouvoir &c.: "To be able to rise from simple ideas, and to take 
and combine the first principles." 
88. Que la beauté &c.: "That beauty is perhaps founded only on use. The 
human form is beautiful only because it is so well suited to the uses 
for which it is destined."
89. Atque haud scio &c.:" I do not even know, if we cast off piety 
towards the Gods, but that faith, and all the associations of human 
life, and that most excellent of all virtues, justice, may perish with 
it." [C.D.Yonge]
90. A deméler: To disentangle
91. Bon naturel: Naturally good disposition
92. Speen: A village near Newbury in Berkshire
93. πορφυρεος Θανατος.[porphyreos Thanatos]: "Dark-hued Death."
94. Facies hippocratica: "Hippocratic face"—the gaunt and pale face of a 
person very near death.
95. Con amore: "With love."
96. Laudari a laudato viro: "To be praised by a praiseworthy man."
97. Utile: "Advantage."
98. Communis utilitas: "Common good."
99. Ne cui noceatur—at communi utilitati serviatur.: "That no-one should 
be harmed, and the common good should be served."
100. Solum: "only;" summum bonum: "greatest good."
101. Utilitas vicit honestatem: "Advantageousness overcomes virtue": 
honestas utilitatem sequitur: "Virtue follows from advantageousness".
102. Est istuc quidem honestum, verum hoc expedit: "That this is the 
virtuous thing to do, but this (other) is the advantageous one."
103. Turpe: "Shamefulness".
104. Viris equisque: "With infantry and cavalry".
105. Est nihil utile, quod idem non honestum: "Nothing which is not 
virtuous, is advantageous"
106. Quod valde utile sit, id fieri honestum: "that which is truly 
advantageous, therefore becomes virtuous"
107. Nec quia utile, honestum est; sed quia honestum, utile: "A thing is 
not virtuous because it is advantageous; rather, it is advantageous 
because it is virtuous."
108. Ut enim tutela, &c.: "The administration of the state, like the 
guardianship of a minor, is to be carried out for the benefit of the 
whole people, and not for the rulers."
109. Non verbis sunt &c. "They should be dealt with by chains and 
dungeons, not words and the chop-logic of philosophers."
110. Quanquam utilitates &c.:"Although many and great advantages did 
ensue from our friendship, still the beginnings of our love did not 
spring from the hope of gain" [W.A.Falconer]
111. Non igitue &c.: "It is not the case, therefore, that friendship 
attends upon advantage, but, on the contrary, that advantage attends 
upon friendship." [W.A.Falconer]
112. Contenant le vrai tableau &c.: "Containing the true picture of my 
character, and the true motives of all my conduct."
113. Ceteris paribus: "Other things being equal"
114. Pro tumulo ponas orbem, pro tegmine coelum: "You have made the 
world your tomb, and the sky your canopy."
115. Sidera pro facibus, pro lachrymis maria: "The stars are your 
torches, and the seas are tears for you"
116. The cause: Parsloe v. Sykes (Note in the original)
117. Nul ne peut faire &c.: "No one can do any good deed except when he 
expects to get some advantage from other people; so that consequently, 
those who believe in virtue are only fools, and those who practice it, 
dupes.
118. Experimentum crucis: The Critical Experiment i.e. that which 
definitively proves or disproves the proposition. See Wikipedia 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Experimentum_crucis.
119. Comment pourrois-je &c: "How can I not be touched by kindnesses 
done to me, I who must take in good part all the harm which men do to 
me."
120. Je ne vois plus &c.: "I see nothing in virtue but an attractive 
name for foolishness"; Ce'st un son &c.: "It is a noise in the ear, and 
nothing more."
121. A mon avis, le sang d'un seul homme, est d'un plus grand prix que 
la liberté de tout le genre-humain.: "In my opinion, the blood of a 
single man is worth more than the freedom of all mankind".
122. Petitio principii: Using a circular argument, which implicitly 
assumes a proposition in order to prove it.
123.  She never told her love, &c.: Twelfth Night. Act 2, Scene 4
124. Membra disjecta: "Scattered fragments"
125. Deliquium: A swoon or melting sensation.
126. Furor uterinus: Literally, "Frenzy of the womb." An imaginary 
malady held to affect women, and described as follows:
"This disease comes on with melancholy, lascivious casting about of 
the eyes, and frequent sighing; and, as it increases, the face 
becomes red and flushed, and the woman makes use of libidinous 
gestures and speeches, and shows an immoderate desire for coition. 
It frequently arises either from inflammation of the pudenda, or 
from an acrimony in the fluids of the parts. In most instances it 
ought, says Dr. Thomas, to be considered as a high degree of 
hysteria." 
—"Smith's Family Physician", by William Henry Smith, 1873
127. D. L.: Warburton's Divine Legation.
128. Impleratque uterum generoso germine: "Filled her womb with noble 
fruit"; ingentique implet Achille. "Filled with the great Achilles"
129. Pleno se proluit auro: "He washed himself with the brimming-over 
gold." Aeneid Bk. I. l. 739.
130. Nate, meae vires, mea magna potential: "O son, my strength, my 
mighty power."
131. Id metuens: "Dreading this"
132. Callida junctura: "Skilful workmanship."
133. Dant animos plagae: "The give their souls to the lash."
134. Nourjahad: The History of Nourjahad, by Frances Sheridan. 
https://quod.lib.umich.edu/e/ecco/004886550.0001.000?view=toc 
135. Αίγιάλώ [Aigialo] &c.: "The waves roar on the long beach." Homer, 
Iliad, Bk. II, l. 210
136. Reductio ad absurdum: A proof of a proposition by assuming the 
contrary and showing that it leads to an impossibility.
137. Περί συνθέσεως ὀνομάτων [Peri syntheseos onomaton]: "On the art of 
Composition."
138. Non satis est pulchra esse poemata, dulcia sunto: "It is not enough 
for poems to be beautiful; they must be sweet" Horace, Art of Poetry, l. 
99.
139. Obscurum per obscurius: "(to explain) obscurity by obscurity."
140. Cicero De Inventione: "On Invention."
141. Probabilia in opinione: "Commony believed to be probable".
142. Impiis apud inferos poenas esse praeparatus: Eos, qui philosophiae 
dent operam, non arbitrari deos esse: "The wicked await the punishment 
of Hell: philosophers are atheists."
143. Jus naturae: "Natural law"; Quod nobis, non opinio, sed quidem 
innata vis afferat: "Which comes to us, not from opinion, but from our 
inner nature."
144. Res expetendae: "Desirable things"; honestum: "virtuous"; Sua vi 
nos alliciat, et propter se est petendum: "it attracts us by its own 
worth, and is desired because of that"; utile: "useful"; non propter 
suam vim et naturam, sed propter fructum, petendum est: "Which is 
desired, not for its innate worth, but because of the advantage which 
can be got from it".
145. Fidentiae contrarium &c.: "Diffidence is the opposite of 
confidence, and is therefore a vice; temerity is not opposite to 
courage, but borders on it, and is akin to it, and yet is a vice." [H. 
M. Hubbell]
146. Painshill, Piercefield: Landscaped estates; Painshill, near Cobham 
in Surrey, is still extant and open to the public. Piercefield is near 
Chepstow in Monmouth. The house is in ruins; the landscaped estate 
survives, but is closed to the public. Brown: Lancelot "Capability" 
Brown (1716-1783), landscape architect.
147. Summum jus: "The greatest force of the law"
148. Credo, quia impossibile: "I believe it, because it is impossible."
149: Valeat quantum valere potest: "It has as much force as is possible"
150. Wander through eternity: Paradise Lst Bk . II, l. 148
151. Juncosi ad littora Cami: "On the rushy shores of the Cam." i.e at 
Cambridge University.
152. Curiosa felicitas: Happiness of expression which comes from taking 
pains. The source is Petronius (Satyricon c. 118), speaking of Virgil 
and Horace.
153. Pol, me occidistis amici &c.:"'By Pollux, my friend,' said he, 'you 
have slain me, not helped me, by taking away my pleasure, and forcibly 
removing a most sweet delusion.'" Horace, Letters Bk II, Letter 2, to 
Julius Florus, ll. 138-140.

THE END
