THE NEWGATE CALENDAR


Edited by Donal Ó Danachair

Supplement 2


Published by the Ex-classics Project, 2016
http://www.exclassics.com
Public Domain



GERALD FITZGERALD
Executed For Murder, 24th of December, 1703

GERALD Fitzgerald was the son of a respectable farmer near Limerick,
in Ireland, where he was born in the year 1671, and educated in the
Protestant religion, his father being of that persuasion.

At the age of fifteen he came to London to learn the art of peruke-
making under a relation of his father's: but soon associating
himself with bad company, he ran away from his kinsman at the
expiration of three years, and entered into the service of Sir Henry
Johnson, and had the direction of the domestic affairs of his new
master. However, he had not been long in this service when his old
associates persuaded him to leave it, on which he entered on board a
man of war, and was soon advanced to the station of steward to the
captain.

He made some voyages to the East and West Indies, and on his return
to England was married to a relation of the captain, a young lady
whose singular good qualities were admirably calculated to give
happiness to any man who had possessed wisdom sufficient to have
known in what true happiness consisted.

He had not been married many months before he went out as purser to
a man of war bound to the East Indies; but this ship being lost on
the coast of China, he returned to England in a merchantman, and
afterwards sailed as a purser in a ship of war, which took some
prizes, of which Fitzgerald received his share.

Being again in London, he began to grow neglectful of his wife,
engaged in the vices of the town, kept the worst company, and
frequented houses of ill-fame. In one of these he quarrelled with a
gentleman named Pix, respecting a woman of the town, and a violent
contention arising, Fitzgerald killed the other on the spot with his
sword.

For this offence he was tried at the Old Bailey, and, being
convicted on full evidence, he was hanged at Tyburn, on the 24th of
December, 1703, dying a sincere penitent for his crimes, which,
though aggravated in their nature, had been but of short
continuance.

The fate of Fitzgerald should afford a lesson of caution to youth in
general never to associate with women of abandoned characters; and,
in particular, this resolution ought to be impressed on the minds of
married men. This unhappy malefactor was united in wedlock with a
young lady, whose relation to him demanded his protection, and whose
superior virtues had every claim to his tenderest regard: yet, in a
rash quarrel about a woman of the town, could he murder his friend,
make his relations wretched, and bring destruction on his own head.

Fitzgerald had been educated in a strict regard to the duties of
religion; but this wore off by his being a constant witness of that
dissoluteness of manners which too frequently prevails on board our
ships, when it often happens that no chaplain attends to perform
that duty for the discharge of which he is paid out of the wages of
the seamen: a shameful abuse, which calls for redress from those
whose station includes the superintendence of naval affairs.



JOHN BIGG
Convicted of Altering a Bank Note

On the 2d of June, 1715, John Bigg was indicted at the Old Bailey,
on two indictments, the one for erasing, and the other for altering,
a bank note of 100l.

On the trial it appeared that the bill in question was drawn in
favour of James White or bearer, and had been signed by Joseph Odam,
for the governor and company of the Bank of England: that this bill
having been brought to the bank, 90l. was paid and endorsed on it:
that it was afterwards brought again, when 25l. was paid and
endorsed as before; and the clerks finding that this bill, among
others, had been overpaid, were surprised to think how it could have
happened, till one Mr. Collins informed them that the prisoner had
tempted him to be concerned with him in taking out the letters of
the red ink on the notes, by means of a certain liquid; and had even
shown him in what manner it was to be done.

It appeared likewise that the prisoner had discovered this secret to
Mars, who had seen him make the experiment, had received money for
him on the altered notes, and was promised a third part of the
profit for his share in the iniquity.

The prisoner did not deny the charge; but his counsel pleaded that
Mr. Odam was not a servant properly qualified to make out such
bills, unless he had been authorized under the seal of the
corporation. They likewise insisted that writing with red ink on the
inside of the bill could not be deemed an indorsement; and even if
it were so accounted, the fact with which the prisoner was charged
could not be called an altering or erasing.

After some altercation between the king's counsel and those of the
prisoner, the opinion of the court was that Mr. Odam was a person
properly qualified to make out such bills; but a doubt arising
respecting the other articles, the jury gave a special verdict.

The judges meeting on this occasion at Sergeants'-inn Hall, Fleet
Street, the case was solemnly argued; after which the unanimous
opinion of the reverend sages of the law was given, that the
prisoner was guilty, within the meaning of the act of parliament; in
consequence of which he received sentence of death in December,
1715, but afterwards obtained a free pardon.

From the case of this malefactor we may see the tenderness with
which Englishmen are treated in matters which concern their lives.
In cases of special verdicts prisoners have the advantage of the
opinions of two juries: the first not knowing in what light to
consider the crime, the learned bench of judges form a kind of
second jury, where, all partiality being set aside, the supposed
criminal is judged according to the strict meaning of the law; and,
even after conviction, has a chance of obtaining the royal mercy, as
happened in the case of the offender in question.

Hence, then, let Englishmen learn the value of those laws by which
they are protected, and be devoutly thankful to that Providence
which hath cast their lot in a country, the wisdom of whose
legislature is the envy and admiration of the universe.



JOHN GORDON, WILLIAM KERR AND JOHN DORRELL
Jacobites Executed for High Treason

ALL the particulars we have been able to learn respecting these men
are as follows. They had all of them served as officers in the army
during the wars in the reign of Queen Anne, but they were zealous
friends to the cause of the Pretender.

Having learnt that the rebels had got as far as Lancashire, they
appear to have been animated with the hope that success would attend
the enterprise; whereupon they held meetings at a public house in
Shoe Lane, London, where they agreed to set off for different parts
of the country, to enlist some men to promote the undertaking; and
they bound themselves to each other by the most solemn oaths to keep
their transactions secret.

But they defeated the effects of these oaths almost the moment they
took them; for they met so often, and were so careless of what they
said, that they were heard by persons who listened at the door of
their room; in consequence of which information was given, and they
were taken into custody, tried, and, being convicted on full
evidence, were hanged and quartered at Tyburn, on the 7th of Dec.
1716.

They were the first persons that suffered on account of the
rebellion, professed themselves Roman Catholics, and died denying
the justice of the sentence against them.



JOHN MATTHEWS
Executed for High Treason in Printing a Jacobite
Pamphlet

John Matthews was the son of a printer in Aldersgate Street, to whom
he was apprenticed; but, his father dying, he continued to serve
with his mother. Having made connections with some persons of 
Jacobitical principles, he printed some papers against the
government, for which he was once taken into custody; but, the
evidence being incomplete, he was dismissed.

Encouraged by this escape, he was induced to print a pamphlet,
entitled 'Ex Ore tuo te Judico: Vox Populi vox Dei.'(That is,' Out
of thy own mouth will I judge thee: the voice of the people is the
voice of God.') For this offence he was brought to his trial on the
30th of October, 1719, when it appeared that he had composed the
pages of the pamphlet in question, but locked them up, lest they
should be found, and made use of to his prejudice.

An elder brother of Matthews, apprehending that the youth might
endanger himself by his propensity to the printing such pamphlets,
directed a journeyman, named Lawrence Vezey, to lock up the door of
the printing-office every night, and bring him the key: but Vezey,
like a villain as he was, first suffered the young fellow to print
the supposed treasonable matter, and then gave evidence against him.

A general warrant being granted by the secretary of state, for the
search of Mrs. Matthews's house, the messengers of government found
a number of the supposed libel in a room which the prisoner
acknowledged to belong to him; on which he was carried before the
secretary of state, who committed him to Newgate, on his refusing to
give up the author.

When Matthews was arraigned at the bar, Vezey swore that the
prisoner brought the form, containing part of the book, to the
press, and bid him pull a proof of it, which he did; and that the
prisoner afterwards came down to him, and said that the pages had
been transposed, but he had now put them right; and he then pulled
him another proof: he said that then the prisoner desired this
evidence to come early in the morning to work off the sheets, saying
that he himself would take care of the paper, and that everything
should be ready.

Accordingly Vezey went early next morning, intending to call up
William Harper, the apprentice; but the prisoner came to the door,
let him in, and called Harper, who assisted Vezey in working off the
sheets, Matthews standing by, and taking them from the press, for
the greater expedition: and, when the work was done, the prisoner
paid Vezey for his trouble. This evidence was likewise confirmed by
Harper, as far as he was concerned in the transaction, and he added
that he saw the prisoner composing the matter from the manuscript
copy. (Note: 'Composing the matter' is a term with printers, which
signifies picking up the letters and arranging them in proper order
for their being worked off by the printing-press.)

The counsel for the crown exerted their utmost abilities to
aggravate the crime of the prisoner, and, the king's messengers
swearing to as much as they knew of the affair, Matthews was found
guilty, and sentence of death was passed on him.

After condemnation he was attended by the Reverend Mr. Skerrett, who
also accompanied him to the place of execution. His whole behaviour
after sentence was such as might be expected from one who had too
much sense to expect favour from the people then in power; for it
was not customary with the ministers of George the First to extend
mercy to persons convicted of treasonable offences: but perhaps
their seeming want of humanity will appear the more excusable if we
reflect on the fatal consequences that might have ensued from the
rebellion in 1715.

But nothing can excuse the method they took to obtain evidence in
this case. It is but of late years that the issuing of general
warrants has been legally condemned; and Englishmen are not a little
obliged to the man who procured the condemnation of those warrants.
Happily, we can now sit quietly, and write our sentiments in our own
houses, without being liable to have our papers seized by the
arbitrary mandates of a secretary of state. While we recollect that
we are obliged for this favour in a great degree to the perseverance
of Mr. Wilkes, we should not forget that the judicial determination
of Lord Camden perfected the plan so happily begun, and so steadily
pursued.

The above-mentioned John Matthews was executed at Tyburn on the 16th
of November, 1719, before he had completed the 19th year of his age;
and was pitied by everyone who had not lost the common feelings of
humanity.

From the fate of Matthews young gentlemen in the same line of
business should be taught to be cautious bow they engage in the
printing of political pamphlets; for though, to the credit of the
good sense and humanity of the present age, there is now much less
danger than there formerly was, yet recent experience his taught us
that great trouble and
expense may ensue, where all risk of life is out of the question.

We should all pray that we may live to see the time when the liberty
of the press will be established in its fullest extent, and when no
villain will dare to be guilty of an atrocious action, lest some
honest man should reproach him with it in public. By this, however,
we do not mean to encourage the licentiousness of the pressdetested
be the heart that should dictate, and the hand that should write, a
line to destroy domestic happiness, or corrode the mind of one
worthy individual: but the public villain should be ever held up as
the object of public scorn and censure!



FRANCIS BRIGHTWELL AND BENJAMIN BRIGHTWELL
Tried For a Highway Robbery

As it is one professed design of this publication to give trials, in
extraordinary cases, on which the parties accused have been
acquitted; in compliance with this rule we insert the following,
though it will be seen that the supposed offenders, so far from
being thieves, were an ornament to human nature.

In the month of August, 1724, Francis Brightwell and Benjamin
Brightwell were indicted for assaulting John Pargiter on the
highway, and robbing him of three shillings.

It was sworn by Mr. Pargiter that he had been robbed, on the road to
Hampstead, by two fellows dresssed in soldiers' clothes; and that,
being on the same road a few days afterwards, he was showing some
farmers the spot where he had been robbed, at the very time when the
Brightwells came in sight; on which he declared that they were the
persons who had robbed him; whereupon they were immediately taken
into custody; which was a work of no great difficulty, as the
surprise, on being charged with a crime of which they were wholly
innocent, deprived them of all idea of resistance.

These brothers were soldiers in the grenadier guards; and, when they
were carried before a magistrate, though Mr. Pargiter swore
positively to their persons, Francis alleged that he was on guard at
the time of the robbery, and Benjamin said that he was at home.

On the trial, the sergeant produced the regimental book, from which
it was evident that, when the robbery was committed, Francis was on
guard at Kensington; and several persons of reputation proved that
Benjamin was at his lodgings in Clare Market, and likewise gave him
an excellent character.

With regard to Francis, Mr. Hughs, a clergyman, delivered his
testimony in the following words: 'I have known Francis Brightwell
near twenty years. He was always reputed to be a person of the
fairest character for sobriety, piety, and justice. He was, to an
extraordinary degree, accomplished with Latin and Greek literature,
and had good skill in Roman antiquities; and, in a word, he carried
so great a share of exquisite learning under his grenadier's cap,
that I believe there is not such another grenadier in the universe.'

This testimony of Mr. Hughs was confirmed by a number of military
officers; and the Court and jury considering that Mr. Pargiter must
have been mistaken in the parties who robbed him, the brothers were
honourably acquitted.

On the 22d of the month in which he was tried, Francis Brightwell
died at his lodgings at Paddington, as supposed, of the gaol
distemper. He was attended, during his short illness, by the late
eminent Sir Hans Sloan; but the malignity of his disorder defied the
power of medicine.

The following curious letter, respecting Francis Brightwell, is
extracted from The British Journal of the 5th of September, 1724:

"SIR,Finding that all our public papers, from the 4th of August to
this day, have omitted to make honorable mention of some very
remarkable circumstances relating to a very private person, I desire
his memory may be deposited in your journal. The person I mean is
Francis Brightwell, the grenadier, who was tried and acquitted at the
Old Bailey, for a robbery sworn against him; and who, since his
coming out of prison, died, as 'tis said, of the gaol distemper.

"When evidence was given against him in Court, Brightwell, by several
witnesses, proved that he was upon the king's guard, at Kensington,
at the time that the robbery (if a robbery) was committed. Hereupon
the Court went into an inquiry concerning the reputation and
character of the prisoner. Some officers who had known him long in
the service gave testimony to his sobriety and diligence in the duty
of a soldier. As to his honesty, a lady (present in Court) declared
she had intrusted him with a thousand pounds at a time; and a
gentleman, that he had committed his house and goods, to the value of
60001. to his keeping: in both which trusts Brightwell had acquitted
himself to the satisfaction of the parties concerned.

"These ample testimonies, concurring to the honour of a man in so low
a condition of life, gave, you may imagine, no small surprise to all
that were present; when a clergyman added to their astonishment by
declaring that he had long known the prisoner to be not only a person
of sobriety, but likewise of very excellent learning, and
particularly in Latin and Greek; for that Brightwell had often
consulted him upon difficult passages in Virgil and Horace.

"Thus much for what appeared at the trial of this grenadier. I shall
only remark upon his learning, that I am amazed that scholarship is
not very common among military men, considering their profession
admits of more leisure hours than any other. Perhaps these gentlemen
are afraid of knowledge, from a celebrated maxim delivered by John
Dryden:'The learned all are cowards by profession:' yet Alexander
and Caesar were scholars, they did not seem to want courage.

"But, to pursue what further particulars I have learned of this
deceased grenadier. He was contented in his station, studious of
leisure, and ambitious only of knowledge. He had offers of being
promoted to the rank of corporal or sergeant, which he declined, that
he might have as few avocations as possible from his studies. Neither
did he ever covet money; and, I am apt to believe, had he been at the
sacking of a town, he would not have thought of carrying off any
other plunder but a valuable book or two. Take the following instance
of his disregard of gain:He had an excellent manner of cleaning and
furbishing arms, for which he had his settled prices. An officer,
whose arms he had brightened, was so well pleased with his work, that
he sent Brightwell (over and above the usual price) a guinea, for a
present. The philosopher took his price, and returned the guinea by
his servant. Some time after, when the gentleman saw him, 'Why,' said
he, 'would you not accept the guinea I sent you?' 'I am paid for my
work,' replied the sentinel, 'and desire no more.' 'Accept of a
crown, then, if your modesty makes you think a guinea too much,' said
the officer. 'Excuse me, sir,' answered the veteran, 'and do not
think it vanity or affectation, when I refuse your kindness; but,
indeed, Sir, I don't want it; but I am thirsty, and have no money
about me; so that if your honour will be pleased to give me
threepence to drink your health, I will thankfully accept of it.'"

This last particular of our grenadier runs so very parallel with a
story in Sir William Temple's Observations of the United Provinces,
that I think it proper to transcribe it on this occasion. Vol. i. p.
50.

"Among the many and various hospitals that are in every man's
curiosity and talk that travels in Holland, I was affected with none
more than that of the aged seamen at Enchusyden, which is contrived,
finished, and ordered, as if it were done with a kind intention of
some well-natured man that those, who had passed their whole lives in
the hardships and incommodities of the sea, should find a retreat,
stored with all ease and conveniency that old age is capable of
feeling and enjoyment. And here I met with the only rich man that I
ever saw in my life: for one of these old seamen, entertaning me with
the plain stories of his fifty years' voyages and adventures while I
was viewing this hospital and the church adjoining, I gave him, at
parting, a piece of their coin, about the value of a crown: he took
it, smiling, and offered it me again; but, when I refused it, he
asked me what he should do with the money. I left him to overcome his
modesty as he could; but a servant coming after me saw him give it to
a little girl that opened the church-door as she passed by him: which
made me reflect on the fantastic calculation of riches and poverty
that is current in the world, by which a man that wants a million is
a prince, he that wants but a groat is a beggar, and this was a poor
man that wanted nothing at all."

The case of these brothers offers an admirable lesson to prosecutors
to be cautious how they swear to the identity of persons. It is
better that the guilty should escape than that the innocent should
be punished.

It likewise affords us an instance of the mysterious providence of
God. Two innocent men are charged with a crime; and the consequence
of imprisonment, and possibly of grief, ends in the death of one of
them. We may presume that be was too good for this wicked world; and
that the Almighty chose this method of calling him to a better!



ANTHONY DRURY
Executed for Highway Robbery

This offender was a native of Norfolk, and the son of parents in
reputable circumstances, who imprudently neglected to bring him up
to any business; so that, when he arrived at years of maturity, he
wandered about the country curing smoky chimneys, which procured him
the appellation of 'the smoky doctor' among those who knew his
profession.

At length he married a woman who was said to possess a very
considerable fortune; but, whatever this fortune was, Drury never
received more of it than 500l. He now lived some years with his wife
at Andover, but occasionally ranged the country in search of that
business in which he seemed to place his chief delight. His wife
used every argument to prevail with him to remain at home; but her
solicitations were without effect.

Sometimes he would stroll to London, and bring with him valuable
articles for his support; and on one of these occasions he pawned
some plate for twenty pounds, dissipating the money in company with
women of abandoned character.

By degrees he stripped his wife of great part of what should have
supported her, so that she was obliged to the friendship of her
relations for a maintenance. By a continued course of extravagance,
he grew daily more and more vicious, and at length determined to
commence highwayman.

In London he made an acquaintance with Robert King, the driver of
the Bicester waggon. This King was a fellow of most execrable
character, whose practice was to inform the highwaymen when he had
any persons to travel in his waggon who possessed any considerable
sum of money, or valuable effects, that they might be robbed on the
road; on which occasions a share was always given to the driver.
[Note: Formerly people of great property used to travel in waggons;
but the frugal manners of our ancestors are abolished, and post-
chaises and flying machines take place of the other carriages.]

Drury, being in company with this King, was told by him that a
gentleman named Eldridge would travel in the waggon on the following
day, and that it would be prudent to rob him before he got far from
town, as he would have with him a very considerable booty.

Our adventurer listened eagerly to this tale, and the next day
robbed Mr. Eldridge of two hundred and fourteen guineas. As he took
money only, he had very little apprehension of detection: but
another traveller in the waggon, happening to know him, repaired to
London, and gave information against him; whereupon he was taken
into custody, and, being brought to trial, was convicted on full
evidence.

After he received sentence of death his behaviour was consistent
with his unhappy situation. He was a regular attendant on divine
worship, and a constant peruser of books of religion: but at the
same time he did everything in his power to procure a respite of the
fatal sentence.

Some people of consequence exerted themselves to obtain the royal
mercy for Drury, but in vain: his character and crime militated too
forcibly against him.

After conviction he repeatedly wrote to his wife, desiring her to
come to London; and, among other motives to prevail on her, told her
that she might redeem the plate he had pawned: but all he could say
had no effect; she lent a deaf ear to all his entreaties.

He appeared to be greatly disturbed in mind at this unfeeling
indifference of his wife, which prevented the calmness of
disposition that was requisite towards a proper preparation for his
approaching exit.

Two days before his death he received the sacrament with every mark
of real contrition. On the evening preceding his execution a
gentleman sent a woman to inquire what declaration be would make
respecting the waggoner; to whom he answered, that he had no idea of
committing the crime till King proposed it to him; and that his life
was sacrificed in consequence of his taking that advice.

When at the place of execution he appeared to possess more courage
than he had done some time before, and again declared that the
waggoner had seduced him to commit the robbery. He earnestly
exhorted young people to avoid bad company, as what would most
infallibly bring them to destruction.

This malefactor suffered at Tyburn, Nov. 3, l726, in the twenty-
eighth year of his age.



JAMES CARNEGIE, ESQ.
Tried for Murder

MR. Carnegie was a gentleman of fortune, whose estate being
contiguous to that of Charles, Earl of Strathmore, a considerable
degree of intimacy subsisted between the parties, which was
increased by the similarity of their political sentiments, both of
them being favourers of the claims of the Pretender.

Lady Auchterhouse, who was sister to Mr. Carnegie, having invited
some of the neighbouring gentry to visit her, there went among the
rest John Lyon, Esq. a young gentleman who paid his addresses to
another sister of Mr. Carnegie. Mr. Lyon's view in this visit was to
ask Carnegie's consent to the match; but this the latter absolutely
refused, and treated Lyon with so much asperity, that a quarrel
ensued, and swords were drawn by both parties. The Earl of
Strathmore, anxious to prevent bloodshed, exerted all his influence
to reconcile the contending parties; and at length so far succeeded,
that all animosity seemed to have subsided, and the company sat down
and drank together, as if no quarrel had arisen.

The conversation now took a political turn; and, as the company were
of different sentiments, high words of altercation arose; and the
King and the Pretender were abused in a manner equally illiberal.

At length the passions of the parties were so inflamed that they had
recourse to blows; and some of them quitting the house, among whom
were Lyon and Carnegie, the former pushed the latter on the ground,
which enraged him so much that he arose and drew his sword; but Lyon
had consulted his safety by flight. Carnegie followed him a little
way, but, falling in the pursuit, was lifted up by some of the
company; when, turning about with the fury of a madman, he ran his
sword into the body of Lord Strathmore.

This melancholy event had no sooner taken place than the company
returned to Lady Auchterhouse's, except the Earl of Strathmore, who
was carried home by his servants, and died, after languishing two
days.

A neighbouring magistrate, being informed of what had happened, went
to the house and demanded the gentlemen's swords, which were
delivered: but Mr. Carnegie having been concealed under some flax in
an outhouse, it was required that Lady Auchterhouse should tell
where he was, which she did; and the magistrate, having received his
sword, sent him to the prison of Forfar.

Some weeks afterwards he was removed, to be tried before the Court
of Justiciary at Edinburgh, which is somewhat similar to our Court
of King's Bench in England. [Note: There are no grand juries in
Scotland; the king's advocate draws the indictment. The judges
determine if the crime be capital; and the fact is tried by a petty
jury.]

It was fully proved upon the trial, that Lyon had behaved in the
most insulting manner to Carnegie, who did not draw his sword till
he had been pushed down, as above mentioned. It was likewise proved,
that Lord Strathmore had lived on terms of the utmost friendship
with Mr. Carnegie; and that, on other occasions, when the latter had
been insulted by Lyon, the earl had protected him.

A witness swore that Mr. Carnegie had proposed Lady Strathmore's
health when in company, and that he sat next the earl. It was sworn
also that Carnegie, since his confinement, had regretted the
melancholy issue of the quarrel, as it had deprived him of one of
his most valuable friends, and a person whom he could have had no
thought of injuring.

Another evidence deposed that the behaviour of Mr. Lyon to Mr.
Carnegie was insupportably aggravating; that he pushed him on the
breast, and otherwise ill-treated him; and that he had seized Lady
Auchterhouse by the hand, and struck it so violently on the table,
that she cried out through the extremity of pain.

On the other hand, one of Lord Strathmore's servants swore that Mr.
Carnegie stabbed his master twice in the belly; but the surgeon who
examined the wound gave a more favourable account of the matter than
the servant.

The trial lasted a considerable time, when the jury, considering on
the whole matter, gave a verdict that the prisoner was Not Guilty.
These transactions took place in the month of July, 1728.



MARTIN NOWLAND
Executed for High Treason

This traitor was a native of Ireland, and, while a youth, was
decoyed from his parents, conveyed to Dunkirk, and entered into the
regiment of Dillon. In this station be continued fourteen years, at
the end of which time he was sent to London, to enlist men into the
French service; and was promised a promotion on his return, as a
reward for the diligence he might exert.

On his arrival in London he endeavoured to connect himself with
people of the lower ranks, whom he thought most likely to be seduced
by his artifices; and one day going on the quays near London Bridge,
he met with two brothers, named Meredith, both of them in the army,
but who occasionally worked on the quays, to make an addition to
their military pay.

Having invited these men to a house in the Borough, be treated them
with liquor; represented the emoluments that would arise from their
entering into the French service; and, among other things, said
that, exclusive of their pay, they would receive four loaves of
bread weekly.

When they were thus refreshed Nowland prevailed on them to go to his
lodgings in Kent Street, where he farther regaled them, and then
said he hoped they would enter into the service. They expressed
their readiness to do so; and said they could aid him in enlisting
several other men, if he would spend the evening with them at a
public house in the Strand.

This proposal being assented to, they took him to a famous alehouse
near the Savoy, called the Coal hole, where Nowland was terrified at
the sight of several soldiers of the Guards; but the Merediths
saying they were their intimate acquaintance, the parties adjourned
to a room by themselves, Here the brothers asked Nowland how much
they were to receive for enlisting, which he told them would be four
guineas; and that he was commissioned to pay their expenses till
they should join the regiment.

The intention of the brothers seems to have been to obtain some
money of Nowland; but, finding it was not in his power to advance
any while they remained in England, one of them went to the sergeant
at the Savoy, informed him of what had passed, and asked him how he
must dispose of Nowland. The sergeant said he must be detained for
the night, and taken before a magistrate on the following day.

On the soldiers' return to the public house Nowland produced a
certificate, signed by the lieutenant colonel of the regiment, as a
proof that he was actually in the service of France. He likewise
said that the soldiers must dispose of their clothes, and purchase
others, to prevent their being detected at Dover; and he repeated
his promise of the bounty-money, and other accommodations proper for
a soldier, on their reaching the regiment.

When the Merediths, and the other men, had drank at Nowland's
expense till they were satisfied, they conveyed him to the
roundhouse, and on the following day took him before a magistrate,
to whom, after some hesitation, he acknowledged that he had been
employed to enlist men for the Irish brigades in the service of
France. Inquiry being made respecting his accomplices, he
acknowledged that a captain belonging to his regiment was in London,
and that some other agents were soon expected in the kingdom: on
which he was informed that he should be admitted an evidence if he
would impeach his accomplices, He replied, that he was a man of
honour, and would never be guilty of hanging any other person to
save his own life.'

He was committed to Newgate in consequence of this confession, and,
being brought to his trial, was convicted at the following sessions
at the Old Bailey, and received sentence of death.

Nowland being of the Roman Catholic persuasion, it is not possible
to give a particular account of his behaviour after conviction, as
he declined holding any correspondence with the Ordinary of Newgate.
When he came to the fatal Tyburn tree, on the 4th of February, 1742,
he performed his devotions in his own way, and, being executed, his
body was carried to St. Giles's, and soon afterwards buried in St.
Pancras churchyard by some of his Roman Catholic friends.

The folly of a man's attempting to recruit the French army in London
is more to be wondered at than the commission of the crime. This
man, before he attempted to corrupt the allegiance of an Englishman,
must surely have been apprized of the conviction and execution of
Thomas Hennings, for enlisting a man for the King of Prussia, which
took place just before he accepted a French commission to commit a
similar crime. Little more can be said of Nowland's case than that
it is treasonable in the highest degree, aiming a mortal blow at the
constitution of our country, by enticing us to join our enemy. Yet
we cannot, however, pass over the particulars, without expressing
admiration at the loyalty of the soldiers whom he endeavoured to
corrupt.



JAMES ANNESLEY, ESQ, AND JOSEPH REDDING
Tried for Murder

MR. ANNESLEY was the son of Arthur, late Lord Baron of Altham, of
the kingdom of Ireland, by his wife, Mary Sheffield, (natural
daughter of John, Duke of Buckingham,) to whom he was publicly
married in the year 1706, contrary to the inclination of his mother,
and all his relation, particularly Arthur, late Earl of Anglesea,
who entertained an inveterate hatred to the duke; and for that
reason did all in his power to set the marriage aside; but, finding
that impossible, he never would be reconciled to lard Altham, who
was presumptive heir to his estate.

After a cohabitation of something more than two years, a separation
took place between Lord Altham and his lady; and his lordship,
having involved himself in debt by a life of dissipation, thought it
prudent to retreat to Ireland, where he had a good estate; and,
after some time, he and his lady were reconciled, through the
influence of the Duke of Buckingham.

At the end of about a year from this reconciliation, Lady Altham was
brought to bed of a son, whose singular life and adventures we are
now to record. When the child was about two years of age, a second
quarrel arose between his parents, and a second separation ensued;
on which Lady Altham came to England, and lived in London, in the
most retired manner, till the year 1729, when she paid the debt of
nature.

In the interim Lord Altham lived at Dublin in the most extravagant
style, kept the worst company, and paid little regard to the
education of his son, who would have been deprived even of the
common necessaries of life, but for the intervention of some
farmers, who supplied him with sustenance. Occasionally, indeed, his
father would send for him; but was generally so intoxicated when he
saw him, that the child reaped no advantage from these visits, and
was soon reduced to a state of absolute penury.

Lord Altham dying, in the year 1726, a sacrifice to his own
irregularities, his brother, Captain Richard Annesley, formed a
scheme of succeeding to the Anglesea castle, by secreting the right
heir; and for this purpose he made use of many artifices to get the
youth into his possession: these failed for some time, as he was
boarded and protected by a butcher named Purcel. The youth having
acquainted Purcel that he was the son of lord Altham, his story
began to engage the public attention, and a counsellor at law took
him into his protection, with a view of obtaining for him a legal
claim to his hereditary possessions.

The youth had not been long in this station when he was found by the
diligence of those who were employed to search for him, who forcibly
dragged him on board a ship bound for Newcastle, on the Delaware
River, in America, where he was generally kept to hard labour, but
occasionally indulged with the liberty of diverting himself with
fishing and fowling.

One day, on his return from shooting, he met two Irishmen, to whom
he communicated the particulars of his birth and connections and
they, happening to remember several circumstances relating thereto,
prevailed on the captain of a trading vessel to interest himself to
procure his release from slavery.

This being effected, he hired himself as a common sailor in a
trading vessel bound to Jamaica; and these, being entered on board
one of his majesty's ships under the command of Admiral Vernon,
openly declared his parentage and pretensions. This extraordinary
claim made a great noise in the fleet; and one of the midshipmen,
hearing of it, said 'he had been schoolfellow with Lord Altham's
son; and should know him again, if not greatly altered, as he still
retained a perfect idea of his countenance.'

Hereupon it was proposed that the experiment should be tried; and
the midshipman going on board the ship that the claimant was in for
that purpose, all the sailors were assembled on deck, wheat the
midshipman, casting his eyes around, immediately distinguished Mr.
Annesley in the crowd; and, laying his hand on his shoulder, said,
'This is the man;' affirming, at the same time, that while he
continued at school with him the claimant was reputed and respected
as Lord Altham's son and heir, and maintained in all respects
suitably to the dignity of his rank. Nay, he was in like manner
recognised by several other persons in the fleet, who had known him
in his infancy. These things being reported to the admiral, he
generously ordered him to be supplied with necessaries, and treated
like a gentleman; and, in his next dispatches, transmitted an
account of the affair to the Duke of Newcastle, among the common
transactions of the fleet, Mr. Annesley arriving in London towards
the latter end of the year 1741, intelligence of this circumstance
was immediately sent to Ireland, on which his uncle, who had
heretofore treated him in so unworthy a manner, came to England, in
order to carry on the scene of oppression which lay nearest his
heart; but a gentleman, named M'Kercher, having taken Mr. Annesley
under his protection, sent him to board at the house of a farmer
near Staines, in Middlesex. Mr. Annesley had not been long in this
situation before an accident happened which greatly contributed to
render his future life unhappy. Being passionately fond of sporting,
he obtained leave of the gentlemen of Staines to permit him to shoot
on their estates; and as he was what is called a fair sportsman, and
a professed enemy to poachers, he went into the fields with Joseph
Redding, who was gamekeeper to Sir John Dolben, in search of such
people as might be found offending against the game-laws. They did
not meet with any poachers for game; but, seeing Thomas Egglestone
and his son fishing in a river belonging to the manor, they ran to
the spot, in order to seize the net; when Egglestone opposing them,
Mr. Annesley's gun went off accidentally, and killed him on the
spot.

The son, having witnessed the death of his father, hastened to
Staines, and informed the inhabitants of what had happened, several
of whom went out in search of Annesley and Redding, whom they found
at a farmhouse in the neighbourhood. The supposed offenders, being
taken into custody, were sent to London, and lodged in the New
Prison, and arraigned at the next sessions at the Old Bailey in
consequence of bills of indictment which had been found against them
by the grand jury.

After the trial had been put off one day, at the request of the
counsel for the prosecution, the Court ordered it to be brought on.
It is not in language to describe the unworthy part that his uncle,
now become Earl of Anglesea, acted in this business. Exclusive of
procuring an attorney to offer five hundred pounds to young
Egglestone to swear that Annesley pointed the gun at his father and
pulled the trigger, he even appeared in person on the bench at the
trial, in order to browbeat the unfortunate prisoner. It is asserted
that the earl spent above a thousand pounds in this prosecution.

In his defence Mr. Annesley informed the Court that his education
having been greatly neglected by those whose duty it was to have
taken every possible care of it, such
a defence as might suit his birth was not to be expected: but he
said that the gun went off by accident; and, whatever might be the
verdict of the jury, he should consider that unhappy accident as the
greatest misfortune of his life.'

Redding urged in his defence that it was his duty, as gamekeeper, to
seize all nets within the bounds of the manor.

The instructions given by the Court to the jury were, that, if they
thought the gun went off accidentally, they should bring in a
verdict of chance-medley; but that Mr. Annesley would be deemed
guilty of manslaughter, unless it appeared that he was engaged in a
lawful act. With regard to Redding it was observed, that as he
seized the net under the protection of the law, as gamekeeper, it
was but just that he should be protected by the law.

On Mr. Annesley's case four counsel argued several hours; and when
the jury were possessed of all the requisite information, they went
out of Court, and, having maturely deliberated on the affair, they
returned with a verdict of Chance-medley,' which of course
acquitted both the prisoners.

This singular transaction took place in May, l742; but it may not be
unentertaining to our readers to learn something of the future
occurrences of Mr. Annesley's life.

Mr. M'Kercher, the disinterested friend of Annesley, now determined
to exert his utmost endeavours to obtain for him the state which was
his undoubted right; and, with that view, took him to Ireland, where
Mr. Annesley granted a lease to a person named Campbell, that the
affair might be determined in a legal way. Campbell, taking
possession of the estate of which he had thus obtained a lease, was 
driven from it by Lord Anglesea; on which a writ of ejectment was
brought against the earl.

The cause was tried by a special jury of gentlemen of property,
before the barons of the Exchequer in Ireland. More than a hundred
witnesses were examined respecting the legitimacy of Mr. Annesley's
birth, and the trial lasted fifteen days. Two servants who had lived
in Lord Altham's family swore that Annesley was the son of a servant
girl, who had been debauched by Lord Altham; and a popish priest
swore that he baptized the child as a bastard: but, to invalidate
this last evidence, another priest swore that the former had
received two hundred pounds as a gratuity for what he had sworn.

Mr. Annesley's being the son of Lady Altham was proved by the
evidence of three women servants, who lived in the family at the
time of his birth; and above ten persons who were present at his
christening swore to several circumstances respecting his birth. Two
ladies proved on oath the reconciliation of of Lord and Lady Altham,
who had resided at the house of the father of one of the deponents
several months; and from thence the lady went into the country to be
delivered.

It was sworn by a farmer that the child had been placed with him by
Lord Altham as his son and heir; and that the farmer had boarded
him, though he had never been paid; which, indeed, he attributed to
the extravagant manner in which his lordship lived.

The attorney who had been employed to tamper with the witnesses
against Mr. Annesley, on his trial at the Old Bailey, being brought
to Ireland by Mr. M'Kercher, a doubt arose whether an attorney
should reveal his client's secrets, when, after a debate of a whole
day among the counsel, it was determined by the judges that the
examination of the attorney ought to take place.

In consequence of this examination it appeared that several persons
had been engaged to swear against Mr. Annesley at his trial in
London; and at the singular trial in Dublin, of which we are now
speaking, the judges remarked that there was oath against oath: at
length, however, the jury determined that Mr. Annesley was the real
son of Lord and Lady Altham. Notwithstanding this determination, the
right heir could not take possession of his estate; for a writ of
error was brought against the verdict, and writs of appeal were
lodged in the Houses of Peers of England and Ireland, as the estates
in question were situated partly in each kingdom. Mr. M'Kercher,
having spent a considerable fortune in support of the claim of the
injured party, was at length arrested for debt, and remained several
years in prison; and, in the mean time, Mr. Annesley was married to
the daughter of a farmer in whose house he had lodged, and lived 
afterwards in a most retired manner, being utterly disqualified, by
his education and former way of life, from obtaining any decent
support as a gentleman.

The Earl of Anglesea lived but a few years after the affair we have
recorded, and left his estate greatly involved.

Mr. M'Kercher's situation now rendered him unable to minister to the
necessities of Mr. Annesley, who occasionally obtained some small
gratuities from the nobility, and died in the year 1761, after
lingering out a life of perpetual anxiety and fruitless expectation;
but he never took a gun in his hand from the time of his unhappily
killing the poor man.

Of all the extraordinary characters we have had occasion to remark
on in the course of this work, that of Mr. M'Kercher is one of the
most singular and valuable. He took up the cause of an unfriended
youth, of whom he knew nothing but from report, and supported him
through a long, an arduous, and an intricate business; not, indeed,
to the restitution of the sufferer, but to his own essential injury:
for he spent more than ten thousand pounds in this pursuance of the
rights of another.

Seldom shall we hear of so much disinterested benevolence as was
displayed by this man; seldom hear of greater, and more undeserved
injuries, than were sustained by Mr. Annesley!



RICHARD BIGGS
Executed near Bath for the Murder of his Wife, 14th
September, 1748

On the 14th day of September, 1748, was executed at Old Down, near
Bath, Richard Biggs, for the murder of his wife, with horrid
barbarity. Her head, breast, arms, thighs, and legs, were full of
bruises and wounds. After having beat her to death, he carried the
body and threw it into the river near Bath, He was convicted on the
evidence, shocking to relate! of his own son, a boy only eleven
years of age. When on the ladder, and before the rope was affixed to
the fatal tree, he jumped down and lay flat on the ground, refusing
to stir. He made great opposition, and long struggled for life.
Thus, though he had so inhumanly deprived his wife of existence, he
showed how sweet life was to himself by his reluctance to yield it
up, though forfeited to the laws of his country.



JOHN LANCASTER
Executed for Housebreaking, 24th September, 1748

We could wish, seriously, to caution all young people against a
habit of attending fairs. They constitute an assemblage of idle
people, where are indiscriminately mixed thieves and pickpockets,
who go from fair to fair; loose women, strolling players, and
vagabonds of every description, waiting to plunder the honest part
of the people. Saint Bartholomew's fair, from its long continuance,
is a school of vice which has initiated more youth into the habits
of villainy than even Newgate itself. Some time since a numerous
gang of infant thieves, of both sexes, were detected in committing
depredations of every description which they could accomplish. They
had, in imitation of Macheath's gang, their captain, and the
receiver of the stolen property, who, though the oldest of the
confederacy, were not more than thirteen or fourteen years of age!

The parents of John Lancaster were poor but honest people, who put
him to school to be instructed in reading, writing, and arithmetic,
and, when about fourteen years of age, apprenticed him to a velvet-
weaver, who, as well as his parents, lived in Whitechapel. After the
term of his servitude had expired, he for some time followed his
trade as a journeyman. He was naturally inclined to vicious
practices, and constantly associated with the most profligate
company. He was known to have committed several offences against the
laws, for one of which he was apprehended and secured in Newgate,
where he contracted an acquaintance with a man named Lewis. They
were both acquitted in the same sessionsLewis in defect of
evidence, and Lancaster because no prosecutor appeared.

They went together to Rumford, predetermined to obtain money by
violence. At Stratford they stopped a gentleman, and robbed him of
his watch, a guinea, and some silver. Their success in this attempt
giving them a greater flow of spirits, Lewis (who had long been a
notorious thief) said, 'Come along with me, my boy, and we shall
soon get money enough to live like gentlemen;' and they agreed to
seek no means of support but that most dangerous and unjustifiable
one of making depredations on the public. They now determined to go
lo Smithfield, it being the time of Bartholomew fair, and met there
a boy of their own iniquitous profession, who, being acquainted with
them, produced a silver mug, which he informed them he had stolen,
at the same time offering to allow them a share in the booty.
Leaving the fair, they went to Duke's Place, in order to sell the
mug to a Jew named Levi Chitty; but he not being at home, they
adjourned to a neighboring alehouse to wait till his return: but
they had not long been there before Lancaster broke open a drawer,
and from thence stole several valuable articles. They now paid for
the beer they had drank, and escaped without suspicion. Having
disposed of their booty, Lancaster and Lewis determined to divide
the whole produce, in exclusion of the boy who had stolen the silver
mug, and therefore they sent him to a public house in Bishopsgate
Street, where they promised to meet him, but with a resolution to
forfeit their word. On the following day they stole a quantity of
brass candlesticks, which they sold for fifty shillings to the Jew,
who told them that he would not have given so high a price but that
he was desirous of encouraging them to steal articles of greater
value. They made a booty of a number of silk handkerchiefs, and the
money received for them from the Jew they spent in the company of
several prostitutes, among whom was Sarah Cock, the widow of George
Cock, whose memoirs we have already recorded.

Lancaster, Lewis, and Sarah Cock, went the following evening to the
Royal Exchange, where they picked the pockets of several passengers
of watches, pocket-books, purses of money, and other property. They
frequented all places of public resort; and, during divine service
on a Sunday evening at the Foundery, near Moorfields, they picked
the pockets of several of the congregation. On their return from the
place of worship they came to the house of a velvet-weaver; and,
Lancaster knowing him to be reputed as a man of considerable
property, it was determined to break open and rob the house. Having
effected an entrance, they secured a quantity of plate, and then
went into the warehouse, whence they stole velvet to the amount of
more than one hundred pounds. Having obtained this considerable
booty, they went to Sarah Cock, and, giving her the velvet,
adjourned to an alehouse in Houndsditch, to wait till she had
disposed of it to the Jew.

The sum Cock demanded for the velvet the Jew said was more than he
could really afford to give, as the colour was very indifferent, and
he should be put to expense in sending it to Holland, where all his
stolen goods were exported for sale. During their conversation they
were observed by a weaver and a constable, who suspecting the velvet
to have been stolen, the woman was interrogated as to the manner of
its coming into her possession. She acknowledged having received the
property from Lancaster and Lewis, and mentioned the house where
they were then waiting; in consequence of which they were both
apprehended, and secured in Newgate. Lewis being admitted an
evidence for the crown, Lancaster was convicted of stealing the
silver mug and other property, and sentenced to die.

While under sentence of death the Ordinary endeavoured to give him a
proper idea of his duty to his Creator; but to the very moment of
his death he obstinately persisted in a refusal to make what
atonement was yet in his power for the many offences he had
committed. On the 24th of September, 1748, John Lancaster was
executed at Tyburn. Lancaster was bred to a business that would have
procured him a comfortable livelihood; but, instead of supporting
himself in a reputable manner, he indulged a disposition to
indolence and a fondness for the company of dissolute people, which
led him to transgress the laws, whereby he was doomed to a violent
and ignominious death. We shall conclude in the words of the
Rambler: 'He that does his best, however little, is always to be
distinguished from him that does nothing. Whatever busies the mind,
without corrupting it, has at least this use, that it rescues the
day from idleness; and he that is never idle will not often be
vicious.'



SAMUEL HILL
Executed for Murdering his Landlady, 23d of March,
1762

This malefactor was a native of Buckeridge, in Staffordshire,
received a decent education, was apprenticed to a shoemaker, and
served his time with fidelity. At the expiration of his servitude he
came to London, and worked as a journeyman till he had saved about
ten pounds: and this instance of his industry and frugality coming
to the knowledge of his aunt, who lived at Hawkehurst, in Kent, she
bequeathed him fifty pounds by her will

On the death of the aunt he received the money, married, and
commenced business as a master in Kent, where he unfortunately got
connected with some smugglers, who dealt with him for shoes, for
which they paid him in smuggled articles. This connexion was very
pernicious to Hill; for a party of dragoons attacking the smugglers,
and Hill taking part with the latter, he was desperately wounded. In
the end the smugglers were victorious; but Hill, being wounded, was
obliged to get on board a cutter, which carried him to France, where
he put himself under the care of a surgeon, and was perfectly cured.

When restored to health he returned to England with a quantity of
contraband goods; but the custom-house officers soon afterwards
attacked him and another smuggler, and took them into custody. They
continued seven months in prison; and were then released by an order
from the Exchequer. Hill and his associates now bought a quantity of
prohibited goods, and proceeded towards London to sell them; but,
being attacked by several custom-house officers on the Deptford
road, an engagement ensued, in which one of the officers was wounded
in the leg, and the smugglers got off, and sold their goods in
London. Not long after this the smugglers paid an officer a sum of
money to connive at their proceedings; instead of which he laid an
information against them; whereupon they pulled down his house, to
testify their revenge. Thence they went to Sandwich, and at tempted
to land some run goods; but a party of dragoons attacking them, one
of the smugglers was killed on the spot, on which the rest galloped
off with the utmost precipitation.

Not long after this affair the officers made an attack on the
smugglers near Bromley, when one of the latter was wounded, and
three horses were killed belonging to the opposite party. The
smugglers now vowed revenge against the custom-house officers, one
of whom they seized, and, conveying him to the house of Hill,
treated him, for ten successive days, with the utmost barbarity. At
length they consulted whether they should murder the unhappy man;
but, some of them advising that he should be sent to France, he was
conveyed to the sea-side, and proposals made to take him on board a
cutter: but the master of the vessel, having been formerly punished
for receiving a person on board in a similar situation, refused to
accept him, unless he would declare that it was his free will to go;
and this declaration not being made, the smugglers beat him
severely, and then permitted him to depart.

Soon after this transaction Hill grew tired of his connexion with
the smugglers, and retired to the practice of his own business; a
circumstance that exasperated his late associates to such a degree,
that they robbed his house of effects to a considerable amount, and
a hundred and fifty pounds in cash. Distressed by this circumstance,
and apprehensive of farther consequences, Hill determined not to
remain longer in the country, and therefore wrote a letter to his
sister in London, who took a house for him, whither he removed, and
soon afterwards buried three children, who had died of the small-
pox.

Hill went to visit a smuggler who was confined in Newgate, but had
formed a design of effecting his escape, which he communicated to
Hill, and offered him a hundred pounds to assist him in putting it
into execution. The proposal was, that some other smugglers should
come to Newgate, with offensive weapons hid under their clothes,
and, having seized the keepers, should set the prisoners at liberty.
Hill endeavoured to engage the smugglers to take a part in this
affair; but they were too cautious to embark in so hazardous an
undertaking. Hill, however, was daring enough to afford assistance
to the prisoner, who effected his escape, but was not generous
enough to give even a single shilling to his agent. After this Hill
was promised a sum of money to assist another smuggler in making his
escape from Newgate; in consequence of which he did all in his power
to forward the plan, but never obtained the least gratuity for his
trouble.

Hill's wife dying about this time, he seemed to decline all farther
thought of acquiring money in a dishonest way; and, boarding in the
house of a widow woman at Poplar, obtained his living by working as
a journeyman at his own business: but at length he became in debt to
his landlady, who seized a new suit of clothes for what he owed her.
Exasperated by this circumstance, Hill, on the following morning, at
tempted to wrest the keys of the house from the woman's hands: but,
on her making resistance, he seized a rope that lay by him, with
which he strangled her so that she expired immediately. This being
done, he robbed the house, and put the stolen effects on board a
boat, which went down the river: but, being pursued, he was soon
taken, and carried before a magistrate, who committed him to
Newgate.

Being brought to trial at the next sessions at the Old Bailey, he
was capitally convicted, and received sentence of death; after which
he submitted with the utmost patience to his fate, confessing that
he was highly deserving of the ignominy that his complicated crimes
had brought on him. He was hanged at Tyburn on the 23d of March,
1752, after cautioning the surrounding multitude to take warning by
his fate. A few words only will be necessary by way of remark on the
case and fate of this malefactor. His unhappy connexion with the
smugglers stems to have hardened his mind, so as to have rendered
him capable of the commission of any crimeeven of the greatest.
From his unhappy end, then, we ought to learn to be cautious how we
violate the laws of honesty in the smallest degree, since such
violation too often leads to the perpetration of the most enormous
offences.



JOHN ANDREWS
Executed for Forgery, 23d of March, 1752

This offender was born in Essex, and, having commenced grazier, sent
a number of cattle to Smithfield market; but, after a series of
trade in this way, he sailed to the East Indies, where he acquired a
sufficient sum to enable him to deal in seamen's tickets on his
return to England. This business, sufficiently oppressive to the
poor sailors, he carried to the height of extortion, and frequently
obtained of them fifty per cent, on the advancing money on their
tickets. After thus lending money for some time, he adventured on
the dangerous practice of forging the wills of seamen, in order to
defraud their widows; and met with a narrow escape at Maidstone, on
a charge of publishing a forged letter of attorney. Andrews employed
some women of his acquaintance in London, to whom he used to give
small gratuities to personate the widows of seamen; and by their
perjuries he frequently acquired considerable sums of money.

This mode of practice at length brought him to destruction, as will
appear from the following narrative. Quarrelling with a woman named
Elizabeth Nicholls, with whom he was connected, blows ensued, and
the woman determined to be revenged, but disguised her sentiments
till she had an opportunity of injuring him in the most essential
manner. He applied to her on a particular occasion to personate the
widow of a seaman to whom thirty pounds were due, and to swear that
she had a will in her favour. The woman, with a view first to make
an advantage of Andrews, and then to betray him, did as she was
directed, and signed her name to a forged will in Doctors' Commons,
in consequence of which Andrews received thirty pounds at the Navy-
office, and became possessed of the seaman's ticket for fourteen
pounds. This ticket he offered for sale to a man who kept an
alehouse in Oxford Road; but the latter refused to buy it, unless
the woman would sign the receipt for it, which she readily did,
expecting Andrews would give her a good part of the money thus
illegally obtained; but, on his refusal to give her more than half a
guinea, she determined on immediate revenge. To carry her scheme
into effectual execution, she went to another woman with whom
Andrews was connected; and, both of them having given information
against him, he was taken into custody, and lodged in Newgate. As it
was presumed that his offences had been numerous, the following
scheme was adopted to find full evidence of his guilt. The lord
mayor commissioned a person who had formerly known him to go to
Newgate, and hint to him that a warrant would be issued to search
his lodgings. Andrews, having papers which he thought it of great
consequence to conceal, desired his supposed friend to pack them in
a basket, and leave them with an acquaintance in the Minories.
Hereupon the prisoner gave the man his keys, and he went and packed
up the goods, and carried them as directed. This was done to
discover, if possible, whether Andrews had any accomplices; that, if
he had, his guilt might be the more clearly ascertained by procuring
strong evidence against him. When the papers were deposited in the
Minories, the lord mayor issued a search warrant, in consequence of
which his officers found sixty-four forged wills and powers of
attorney; but no proof arose that he had any accomplices, except the
women whom he had employed as his agents. One of these women,
however, deposed that she had received above five hundred pounds for
him, by swearing to forged wills; but that half a guinea for each
perjury was all the gratification she received. Andrews, who was in
possession of a considerable sum of money when he was committed to
Newgate, had no idea that sufficient evidence could be adduced of
his guilt; but, when he was brought to trial, the testimony of the
two women was so positive against him, that the jury did not
hesitate to convict him, and sentence of death passed of course. His
behaviour after conviction was remarkably morose, reserved, and 
untractable. He absolutely refused the good offices of the Ordinary
of Newgate, which at first caused a suspicion that he was a Roman
Catholic; but, as he was not visited by any priests of that
persuasion, this suspicion wore off, and his refusal was attributed
to the obstinacy and gloom of his own mind. He refused to
acknowledge the justice of the sentence by which he was condemned;
alleging, in excuse for his conduct, that, having lost large sums of
money by some seamen, he was justified in endeavouring to make
others pay the deficiency. He seemed agitated in the highest degree
when he was put into the cart on the morning of execution. His whole
frame was convulsed; and, when at the fatal tree, despair seemed to
have taken possession of his soul. He only said a short prayer, but
refused to address the surrounding multitude. He was hanged at
Tyburn on the 23d of March, 1752. The crimes of this man were of the
greatest magnitude, a continued series of fraud and robbery,
supported by the perjuries of ignorant creatures whom he employed:
and it is hardly a breach of charity to say that he was equally
guilty of those perjuries with the poor wretches who actually
committed them: perhaps more so, as his knowledge must be supposed
to have been superior to theirs.

If the crime of forgery was less enormous than it is, one would
think the excess of danger attending it would prevent any man from
being guilty of it. Fatal experience, nevertheless, too frequently
proves the contrary. Let us hope, however, that the fatal examples
of the many unhappy victims to the rigid (and in this case
necessary) justice of their country will have a good effect in
future; and that this crime may decrease in proportion as, for some
years past, it has unhappily increased, to the injury of many an
individual, and the utter ruin of many a worthy family. It is
dreadful to reflect on the vast numbers who have become widows and
orphans through the horrid prevalence of this practice; which, as it
is generally committed by persons in a rank of life above the
vulgar, it is to be hoped those who may be tempted to the commission
of it will have sense and virtue enough to make the proper use of
these admonitions, and to consult their own safety, while they have
a due regard not to infringe on the property of their neighbours.



JOHN POULTER ALIAS BAXTER
Executed For Highway Robbery

This malefactor was the son of honest people, in indigent
circumstances, residing at Newmarket, in the county of Cambridge;
who, when he had nearly completed his seventh year, put him to a
day-school, which he continued to attend till he was about thirteen
years old, when he was engaged as an assistant to the grooms in the
service of the Duke of Somerset. Having remained in this situation
six years, he was hired by Lord John Cavendish, whose horses he
attended about three years, and then entered into the service of
Colonel Lumley, brother to the Earl of Scarborough. He was sent by
this gentleman three times with horses to France, and was considered
as an honest and industrious servant. Being of a temper that
delighted in a change of situation, he entered on board a trading
ship belonging to Bristol; and he discovered no inclination to
vicious courses till he had made several voyages to the West Indies
and North America.

The ship to which he belonged being paid off on the conclusion of
the peace of Aix-la-Chapelle, he connected himself with Mary Brown
and Mary Davis, women of abandoned characters; and they, in
conjunction with John Brown, persuaded him to join them in
committing depredations on the public. They directed their course
towards Litchfield, and, upon their arrival there, went into a
public house for refreshment. Being introduced to a parlour, Mary
Brown observed a chest; and, the lid not being close, she put in her
hand, and stole a sum of money, and several other articles of value.
Having obtained the above booty, the gang proceeded to Chester,
where Poulter stole some plush, and sent for a tailor to make it
into a suit of clothes. While the tailor was measuring him a pistol
that was in his pocket accidentally went off, but fortunately no
damage was done by the ball. The tailor carried the plush home, and
then went to the mayor, to whom he communicated his suspicions.
Officers were dispatched to examine Poulter and his companions; but,
being apprized of their approach, they embarked on board a packet-
boat, which conveyed them to Dublin.

Soon after his arrival in Dublin Poulter hired a public house, where
be sold on an average five barrels of ale weekly, and other liquors
in proportion. His great success in business induced him to make a
resolution of entirely declining illegal pursuits; and to this he
would, in all probability, have strictly adhered, had he not been
unluckily compelled to renew his acquaintance with abandoned people.
General Sinclair had his pocket picked of a valuable gold watch,
either in going into or departing from Leicester House; and two men,
named Harper and Tobin, were suspected to be guilty of the fact, and
committed to the Gate-house. A desperate gang of twenty-four
Irishmen rescued Harper; in consequence of which a proclamation,
offering a reward for apprehending them, was issued; but they all
escaped to Ireland. One of the above gang, named James Field, who
had been acquainted with Poulter, went up to him while he was
standing at his door; and, after some conversation, they drank
together. On the following day Field took the whole gang to
Poulter's house. He requested them to depart, and at other times
endeavoured to dissuade them from frequenting his house, urging that
their visits might be productive of very disagreeable consequences
to him; but they disregarded what he said, and continued their
meetings as usual. At length they were observed in the house by a
messenger that had been dispatched in search of them from London,
and taken into custody. In consequence of the above affair Poulter
absconded from his house in the night, and his stock of liquors and
other effects were seized by the magistrates.

Poulter now intended to reside at Cork; but, not being able to get a
house there that he thought would answer his purpose, he went to
Waterford, and took a public house, which he kept about three
months. His brewer in Dublin wrote him word that he might return
without the least danger of molestation; and therefore he departed
from Waterford, and took a house about two miles from the city, at a
place called the Shades of Clontarf. His house being adjacent to the
sea, he purchased a boat, and applied himself with so much industry
to the business of a fisherman, that his weekly profits seldom
amounted to less than three pounds. 	Thomas Tobin being acquitted
of the charge of stealing General Sinclair's watch, through defect
of evidence, and learning that Poulter had struck into an
advantageous line of life, he determined to visit him. In pursuance
of this design, Tobin and a woman with whom he cohabited travelled
to Holyhead, and there embarked in the packet for Dublin. Poulter
received them with great kindness, and entertained them with equal
generosity; but entreated, in the most earnest manner, that they
would not repeat their visits too frequently, nor make his place of
residence known to their accomplices. Though they had faithfully
promised to comply with his request, they in a few days introduced
several of their associates to Poulter's house, which, before many
weeks had elapsed, became the receptacle for thieves of every
denomination, by whom Dublin and its environs were infested. Poulter
still adhered to his resolution of gaining a livelihood by honest
labour, and informed his unwelcome guests that he would permit them
no longer to frequent his house.

In revenge for this they concerted and put in practice a plan for
effecting the ruin of Poulter. Six pounds of smuggled tea being
procured, one of the gang privately conveyed it into Poulter's boat,
and then lodged an information against him; in consequence of which
the boat was seized and condemned; and Poulter, though innocent,
judged it expedient to abscond. He embarked for Bristol, and on his
arrival there was entirely destitute of money. From Bristol he
proceeded to Bath, where, he met with his former acquaintances,
Richard Branning and John Roberts, who prevailed upon him to join
them in committing depredations on the highway. They mentioned a man
of property who lived at Towbridge, and frequently came to Bath to
change bills; and it was resolved to attempt robbing him. They met
at Roberts's house, where the plan of the intended robbery was
concerted, and then they repaired to the public house which was
frequented by the gentleman of Towbridge; and observing him counting
money, they concluded that they could not fail obtaining a
considerable booty. However, they were disappointed; for the
gentleman, suspecting their design, returned by a road which he had
not been accustomed to travel, and by that measure luckily preserved
his property.

They now proceeded into Yorkshire, and in their way committed
several robberies. At the inn where they alighted at Halifax they
were joined by a clergyman, whom they seduced to prick in the belt,
by which stratagem they defrauded him of twenty-five guineas. They
now went to Stockport, in Cheshire, where they lay one night, and
then travelled to Chester.putting up at a house kept by one James
Roberts, who had formerly belonged to the gang, he informed them
that the pack-horses with Manchester goods would pass in the
evening; and it was resolved to steal one of the horses and the
goods he carried. As the horses passed, Roberts pointed to that
loaded with the most valuable effects, and advised his companions to
go about a mile from the town, and drive the beast into the fields,
adding that he would scarcely be missed by the carrier in less than
two hours, in which time they might secure the goods and escape. The
horse they seized was not that pointed out by Roberts; and their
booty consisted only of callimancoes. Finding himself separated from
his companions, the horse neighed so loud and frequent, that they
judged it necessary to gag him, lest the noise should lead to a
discovery. They reached Whitchurch, in Shropshire, the same night;
and, after refreshing themselves at a house notorious for the
reception of robbers, cut the marks from the goods, and exposed them
for sale in the market. Having sold the callimancoes, they proceeded
to Grantham, in Lincolnshire, and defrauded a farmer of that place
of near sixteen pounds by pricking in the belt; immediately after
which they set out for Nottingham, where they stole a silver
tankard, and, after selling it to a shopkeeper in the town,
proceeded to York. Having stolen some plate from the inn where they
put up, and committed several robberies in different parts of
Yorkshire, they deemed it prudent to remove from that part of the
country, lest they should be apprehended, and came to the resolution
of joining their former associates at Bath.

Soon after their arrival at Bath the whole gang set out for Sandford
Peverel, in Devonshire, in order to be present at a great fair for
cattle; and during their residence there they obtained considerable
sums by pricking in the belt, and other infamous practices. They
next went to Great Torrington, where they defrauded a farmer of
twenty pounds. Enraged by the imposition that had been practised
upon him, the farmer took every opportunity of relating the
particulars of the fraud; so that the whole neighborhood was
alarmed, and in pursuit of the sharpers; and they were therefore
under the necessity of dispersing. Poulter and Brown directed their
course to Exeter; and, having defrauded an inhabitant of that town
of five pounds, proceeded to Crookhorn, in expectation of meeting
their associates: but on their arrival they learnt that two of them
were in confinement, charged with fraudulent practices. This
information occasioned the rest of the gang to make a precipitate
retreat; and in their way to the north of England they obtained
several sums by a variety of infamous stratagems. 	They remained
some months at York, Durham, and Newcastle; and, after defrauding a
number of farmers, and some other persons, of money, they went to
Bath, where they assumed the character of smugglers. They had not
been long at Bath before they determined to go to the next Blandford
races in search of adventures. During the races one party attended
the cock-pit each morning; some were upon the course in the
afternoon; and others were employed in cheating the keepers of the
booths. They were so successful in their respective departments of
villainy as to amass a very considerable sum; and, on the conclusion
of the races, they ordered an elegant dinner at the Crown tavern, in
Blandford, whence they stole a portmanteau, containing eighteen
guineas, four broad pieces, a large sum in Portugal pieces, some
silver coin, a gold repeating watch, with superb appendages, several
necklaces set with diamonds and other jewels, a great quantity of
rich clothes, a pair of gold shoe-buckles, a gold girdle-buckle, a
gold coral, and many other articles of value. Immediately after the
above robbery Poulter and Brown set out for London, and, having sold
the effects to some Jews in Duke's Place, they joined their
accomplices at Roberts's house at Bath, where the produce of their
booty was divided.

The next expedition was to a fair held at Corsham, where Poulter
stole a silver tankard, which he carried to Roberts's house. They
now went to Farringdon, in Berkshire, in order to wait there for the
Coventry carrier, whom they had determined to rob. After waiting two
days the carrier arrived; and when he left the town in the morning
they followed him, and robbed him of effects to a considerable
value. They next rode to Newbury, where they fraudulently obtained
four guineas, his horse, and watch, from an unsuspecting countryman;
and then returned to their rendezvous at Bath. They endeavoured to
force open a house at Bath; but being observed by a man in a state
of intoxication, who was casually passing, he exerted the utmost
strength of his voice to alarm the neighborhood, which occasioned
the villains to decamp without effecting the intended burglary. On
the following morning Coulter and some of his companions went to
Bristol, where they joined company with a countryman, and defrauded
him out of twenty guineas, which he had borrowed of an acquaintance,
who kept a shop in the neighborhood.

Their villainies had now rendered their characters so notorious, and
their persons so well known, throughout the west of England, that
they determined to decline their former practices, and adopt that of
horse-stealing. To avoid detection, they were careful not to offer
horses to sale in that part of the kingdom where they had stolen
them; and they still continued to travel occasionally to Bath, where
they spent a great part of their money in Roberts's house. A
customer to Roberts showed him twenty pounds, saying he had just
received it; and Roberts immediately pointed out the man to Poulter,
informing him at the same time of the booty he might acquire by
robbing him. Towards night the countryman mounted his horse, and was
followed by Poulter, who, holding a tinder-box to him instead of a
pistol, demanded his money, which was delivered. Soon after the
above robbery the gang went again to Bristol, and, watching an
opportunity of lifting up the parlour sash of a gentleman's house,
they stole several silver spoons, and some other articles. One of
the gang got unperceived into a watchmaker's house in the same city,
while his accomplices waited without, in order to rescue him if he
should be detected. He brought from the upper apartments many
articles of value, besides a quantity of wearing apparel; and it was
some hours before the robbery was discovered. On the following night
Brown secreted himself in a shed adjoining to a barber's house, into
which he made a forcible entry about midnight, and was carrying off
some wearing apparel, when he was heard by the barber and his
apprentice. Upon the family being alarmed Brown got through the
garret window to the roof of the house, and remained three hours
concealed behind a stack of chimneys. Unable to escape by any other
way, he at length resolved to attempt passing through the house;
but, while upon the stairs, he was heard by the boy, who ran towards
him with a knife in his hand, crying 'Thieves!' Alarmed by the boy,
the barber's wife came; and, upon Brown assuring her that he had 
taken shelter in the house in order to avoid the pursuit of
bailiffs, she informed him that he might remain there till he could
go home in safety; but he deemed it prudent to seize the opportunity
of making an immediate retreat. During the ensuing fair at Bristol
they robbed and defrauded several clothiers, and other dealers, of
property to a very considerable amount. The produce of these effects
being expended in Roberts's house, the gang determined upon an
expedition into Staffordshire. While they remained in Staffordshire
they stole several horses, which were taken to Roberts, who sold
them at different fairs held at places adjacent to Bath.

An Irishman, named Bush, an intrepid and desperate fellow, who had
acted as hostler to Roberts, was at length admitted to the gang; and
soon afterwards he set out in company with Poulter towards
Towbridge, in Wiltshire, with a determination of committing
robberies. Meeting a chaise, Bush declared he would rob the
passengers; but Poulter objected, thinking his companion inclined to
commit murder. At length he consented to rob the chaise, after it
had been agreed that no cruelty should be exercised. It being nearly
dark, Poulter thrust his hand through the glass of the chaise, not
knowing that it was drawn up, and, it being terribly cut, he hastily
withdrew it, and his pistol went off by accident. Bush, supposing
the fire to proceed from the gentleman in the carriage, discharged
his pistol, but without any particular aim. Poulter now called to
his companion to desist; and, after taking out of the chaise a
child, which he kissed, and carefully set upon the ground, he robbed
Dr. Hancock, of Salisbury, of a guinea and a half, six shillings, a
gold watch, some child-bed linen, and wearing apparel belonging to
his lady. After the above robbery the villains adjourned to a public
house, that had been long frequented by the gang, and produced the
stolen effects to the landlord and his wife; and the latter supplied
them with a bag for packing the clothes in. The landlord then drew
the charge from a fowling-piece, to furnish them with powder; after
which they melted a pewter spoon, and cast two bullets. Bush asking
the woman if she was not terrified at seeing them load their
pistols, she said that many pistols had been loaded in her kitchen,
without giving her the least alarm; adding, that they would do right
to travel as far as they could before break of day, and, if they
would inform her where they put up, she would transmit them news
from Bath. Leaving this house, they stole a horse at an adjacent
farm, and proceeded to Exeter, where they sold the stolen effects to
a man who had long carried on an illegal traffic with the whole
gang.

In a short time after the above Poulter was apprehended in a public
house on suspicion of having robbed Doctor Hancock; and, being taken
before a magistrate, he gave information against his accomplices,
mentioning the several places to which they resorted, and
recommending the most effectual measures for taking them into
custody; particularizing those who had been sentenced to
transportation, and returned before the expiration of the term of
their exile. While he was under examination he advised that the
discoveries he had made might be kept profoundly secret, observing
that many persons connected with the gang lived in a reputable
manner; and he particularly requested that the messenger who was
ordered to make inquiries at Bath might carefully conceal his
business from every person excepting the mayor. Notwithstanding this
precaution, the messenger had not been at Bath more than an hour
before the names of all the villains were universally known; and, on
the following morning, printed lists of them were hawked about the
streets. In consequence of this imprudent conduct Poulter's
accomplices escaped, and the good effects which the public might
have derived from his discoveries were, in a great measure,
defeated. Great part of the property stolen from Doctor Hancock was
restored to that gentleman, who visited Poulter in prison, and
assured him that he would not be a severe prosecutor; and told him
that, if he should be convicted, he would, in all probability, be
deemed an object deserving the royal clemency. Notwithstanding the
doctor's promise, he used his utmost endeavours to procure the
conviction of Poulter; and even waited upon the judge, to prevent
the time of his execution being prolonged. However, he was respited
for six weeks. During his confinement he wrote accounts of a great
number of robberies in which he had been concerned in divers parts
of the kingdom. His discoveries were judged to be of such public
importance, that the corporations of Bristol, Bath, Exeter, and
Taunton, and many private gentlemen, exerted their utmost interest
in his behalf; and it was generally expected that he would receive a
pardon, or that the sentence of death would, at least, be mitigated
to that of transportation. He was examined by a gentleman of the
law, to whom he related the particulars of the robberies committed
by himself and his accomplices, with but very trifling variations
from his confession before the magistrate, and what was recited in
the papers written by him after his commitment.

Poulter behaved with a decency and moderation becoming his unhappy
circumstances; but he was, notwithstanding, an object of the
implacable enmity of the gaoler. Though he had paid an extraordinary
price for the use of a bed, this inhuman villain would allow him
only straw to lie upon, even in the most rigorous season of the
year, when he was in a state of health that threatened his speedy
dissolution. The cruelty of the gaoler's treatment occasioned some
gentlemen to write to him, desiring he would allow the prisoner a
bed. It was imagined that the malicious representations of the
gaoler induced a gentleman of great interest at court to intercept
the royal mercy, which, it was generally believed, would be extended
to Poulter. A report being circulated that Poulter was to be
executed on the 1st of March, he wrote to a gentleman from whom he
had experienced many instances of humanity, requesting to be
informed whether it was founded in truth, and complaining that the
gaoler added to his distress by perpetually reminding him that he
must inevitably fall a victim to the law.

Poulter's dread of being executed daily increasing, he determined to
attempt breaking out of prison; and, having communicated his design
to one of the debtors, on Sunday, the 17th of February, they forced
an iron bar out of one of the windows, and escaped. Poulter
travelled as far as Glastonbury with one of his irons on; and, after
disengaging himself from that incumbrance, he continued walking all
night, although he was extremely weak through long illness, and his
legs were galled and swelled in a terrible manner. In the day they
concealed themselves in a hayrick, and agreed to direct their course
towards Wales; but, being ignorant of the road, they on Tuesday
morning found themselves at Wookey, near Wells. Poulter was so
excessively fatigued as to be unable to pursue his journey, and it
was therefore agreed that they should take some repose. They went 
into an alehouse, where they slept till two o'clock; and they were
preparing to depart, when a mason, who lived in the neighborhood,
came to the house for some liquor, and, recollecting the person of
Poultcr, called to his journeymen to assist in apprehending him. He
was secured till the next day, and then conducted back to
Ivelchester gaol.

When he was lodged again in prison nine days of the time for which
he was respited remained unexpired; but an express was dispatched to
a member of parliament, requesting him to use his interest to obtain
an order for his immediate execution. In consequence of this an
order was issued, commanding the high sheriff to cause the sentence
of the law to be inflicted on Poulter within twenty-four hours after
the receipt of the express. Poulter was greatly shocked up on
learning that the warrant was received for his sudden execution; but
he soon recovered his spirits, and endeavoured to atone for past
offences by a sincere repentance. After receiving the sacrament in a
very devout manner, he prayed with an appearance of great fervency,
and expressed strong hopes of obtaining pardon from the Almighty,
whose displeasure he had not incurred (however great his offences in
other respects) by the spilling of innocent blood. He behaved in a
very penitent manner, but still preserved a decent fortitude, at the
place of execution. He solemnly declared to the truth of all he had
related respecting his accomplices; and, after warning the
surrounding multitude to avoid such practices as had proved the
cause of his destruction, he prayed some time in a composed and
fervent manner, and was then turned off. John Poulter was hanged at
Ivelchester on the 25th of February, 1755.

It is to be lamented that Poulter, through the villainy of his
former accomplices, was deprived of the advantage that would have
necessarily resulted from a reformation of conduct. Denied the
opportunity of supporting himself by honest means, he was, in a
manner, compelled to join in the iniquitous practices of his former
associates; for he was conscious that, had he been hardy enough to
oppose their designs, they would have effected his destruction.
Though this man's offences were great, we cannot but regret his
being subjected to the utmost rigour of the law; since, to that
public he had so highly injured, he made no inconsiderable
reparation, by causing the most dangerous set of villains that ever
infested these kingdoms to be dispersed. Doctor Hancock visited the
prisoner, and gave him hopes of life; but afterwards used every
possible endeavour to hasten his execution. Thus he seduced the
unhappy man to neglect a preparation for eternity, to which he
labored to precipitate him ' with all his imperfections on his head.

The conduct of the gaoler cannot be mentioned in terms of sufficient
abhorrence. What character can more provoke our hatred than the man
who, instead of alleviating, insults distress; instead of calming a
perturbed spirit, adds to the poignancy of affliction; and in
capacitates a miserable wretch, tottering on the verge of eternity,
for appealing to the Almighty with that steady and fervent zeal by
which alone he can obtain forgiveness? As a contrast to this inhuman
villain of a gaoler, we shall mention Mr. Dagg, who was keeper of
Bristol prison during the confinement of the unfortunate Richard
Savage, Esq. He was a man of strict integrity and universal
benevolence; and his behaviour to Savage gave the ingenious
biographer of that unhappy poet occasion for the following
reflections: 'Virtue is undoubtedly most laudable in that state
which makes it most difficult; and therefore the humanity of a
gaoler certainly deserves this public attestation; and the man whose
heart has not been hardened by such an employment may justly be
proposed as a pattern of benevolence. If an inscription was once
engraved to the honest toll-gatherer, less honours ought not to be
paid to the tender gaoler.' We shall here conclude with observing
that guilt must ever be attended by wretchedness: perpetual fears
and alarms will destroy the hope of future happiness; and we no
longer consider life as valuable than while we are able to cherish
the expectation that permanent felicity will reward the toils of the
present hour.



JOHN BRETT
Executed For Forgery.

This offender was the son of a clergyman in the north of Ireland,
and, having received an excellent education, obtained an ensign's
commission in the 49th regiment of foot, on the Irish establishment,
when he was about twenty years of age. His disposition inclining him
to feats of arms, he distinguished himself so greatly at the siege
of Ticonderago that he was advanced to be a lieutenant, and likewise
made adjutant of a regiment. The regiment being ordered from America
to Jamaica, was stationed there some years; and in this island Brett
married a gentleman's daughter, and received a considerable fortune
with her: and two children were the issue of this mar riage. The
regiment remaining in a state of inactivity, Brett was at a loss how
to dispose of his time, and thereupon took to a habit of gaming,
which incurred the censure of his father-in-law, who blamed him for
a conduct so inconsistent with the interest of his family.
Recriminations becoming mutual, the family became uneasy, and Brett
wished for an opportunity of returning to Europe.

This opportunity soon offered; but, to lead to the occasion, we must
mention the following fact:Deserters from the regiments in Great
Britain, and sometimes persons who have been capitally convicted,
are sent to serve in regiments in the West Indies; and the officers
on duty there go in rotation to England to examine such persons
before they are sent over. Now it happened that, at the period of
which we are writing, the officer appointed to sail to the port of
London wished rather to remain in Jamaica; and Brett making
application to go in his stead, his request was complied with; and
he sailed in a man of war, which landed him at Portsmouth. Going
immediately to London, he associated with a set of gamblers, who
soon stripped him of his own money, and likewise of some cash with
which he was intrusted on behalf of the regiment to which he
belonged Thus distressed by his imprudence, he endeavoured to borrow
money to make up his loss; but, failing in all his applications, he
determined on the commission of forgery; whereupon he wrote the
following letter to Messrs. Frazier, Wharton, and Mullison,
merchants in London:

"Gentlemen, 
This goes by a St. Eustatia vessel, by one Mr. Richard Horton, a
purser of a man of war, whose bills upon you, to the amount of one
thousand guineas sterling, I must request the favour of you to
honour, and you may depend that I shall soon send you proper
remittances on that account. I have no more to add at present, but to
desire you will be kind enough to comply with this, as it will not
only be of service to him, but to myself likewise; and in so doing
you will very much oblige 
Your humble servant,
WALTER PRINGLE."

This letter was dated from the West Indies, but not written in Mr.
Pringle's hand, a circumstance that gave some suspicion to the
gentlemen to whom it was directed; who were surprised that the
person in whose favour it was drawn did not deliver the letter
himself, but sent it by the post. This occasioned suspicion of a
forgery; and the gentlemen resolved not to accept any bills in
consequence of the letter. A few days afterwards they received a
bill, of which the following is a copy:

"March 18, 1761.
Gentlemen,
Twenty days after sight please to pay Mr. William Huggins, or order,
fifty pounds; and charge the same to the account of Walter Pringle,
Esq. of St. Christopher's,  merchant, as per advice you will find by
a letter of credit in my favour by Walter Pringle.
Richaud Houton."

As it was known that no packet had arrived about that time from the
West Indies, little doubt remained but that a forgery had been
committed; wherefore the merchants determined to make the most
cautious inquiry. On the Monday following a gentleman, named
Huggins, called for the bill, on which Mr. Mullison asked him how he
came by it. He acknowledged to have received it, in his shop, of a
person who would call again. Hereupon a peace-officer was employed
to attend at Mr. Huggins's house; and two days afterwards Brett
came, and, being carried before Sir John Fielding, he acknowledged
the forgery not only of the bill, but of the letter of credit, on
which he was committed to Newgate.

Brett, being brought to his trial, pleaded 'Not guilty;' but, when
Mr. Mullison had sworn to the facts, he begged leave to retract his
former plea, and, having remarked that he had been ill advised by
his attorney, said, 'I will not give the Court any trouble to prove
the name Richard Horton not to be his handwriting; I have nothing to
say but to plead guilty;' and in consequence hereof he received
sentence of death. After conviction he behaved in the most contrite
and penitent manner. His father made all possible intercession to
obtain the royal mercy for his unfortunate son; and in the meantime
he wrote to him, to advise him to make proper preparation for that
ignominious death which he had but too much reason to expect.

Great interest was made to save him, but in vain: the crime was of
such a nature, that it would have been a point of false lenity to
pardon it in a commercial kingdom. On the day of execution Brett was
conveyed to Tyburn, with three other malefactors, one of whom was
David Morgan, who had been convicted of robbing Mr. Dobbison on
Finchley Common. When at the place of execution, a respite was
brought for Morgan, just as the executioner was on the point of
tying him up. This being received by the under-sheriff, he went into
the cart, saying 'Which is Morgan?' to which he answered 'My name is
Morgan:' on which the under-sheriff said 'Loose him; take him away.'
Morgan, now turning to Brett, said 'My reprieve is come; fare you
well!' and they took a most affectionate leave of each other, after
which Brett earnestly continued his devotions to the last moment.
Morgan's reprieve arose from the following circumstance. He had
stopped the above-mentioned Mr. Dobbison and Mr. Aukland in a
chaise. Dobbison attempted to fire a blunderbuss at him; but it
flashed in the pan. On this Dobbison begged his life; to which
Morgan replied, 'God forbid I should take, your life: you know what
I want; I am in necessity.' Mr. Aukland said, 'All you can desire of
a gentleman is to ask your pardon;' to which Morgan replied 'I do
not desire even that.' Brett was hanged at Tyburn on the 12th of
June, 1761.

After the repeated remarks we have made on the nature, danger, and
consequence of the crime of forgery, it will be the less necessary
to extend our observations on this particular case of Brett. One
observation, however, is too striking to be omitted. He was a
military man. Military men universally consider themselves as
gentlemen; so, indeed, they ought to be, and as such they ought to
behave; but the misfortune is, that the pay of officers, excepting
those in the higher ranks, is not equal by the day to what a ticket-
porter will get in London. Officers, therefore, of all men, should
learn the great lesson of frugality, if they would wish to live with
credit in that rank to which their interest or merit may have
advanced them.



JOHN SMITH AND ROBERT MAYNE
Executed for a Mutiny on Board the King George, 10th
May, 1762

On the trial of these men, along with five more of the crew, it
appeared that disputes arose on board the King George, a fine
privateer of thirty-two guns and two hundred men, commanded by
Captain Reed, and cruising against the enemies of the country,
concerning some prize wine, which was stowed in the hold, some of
the crew insisting on its being hoisted up to be used for the whole
ship's company. This would have been attended, in their then
situation, with both difficulty and danger, and was consequently
opposed by Captain Reed and his officers.

Thus disappointed, a factious discontented set endeavoured to
corrupt the remainder, who soon gained over so formidable a party,
that they determined to seize the ship, and turn pirates in the
Indian seas. In order to this, off Cape Ortugal, the mutineers
demanded the keys of the arm-chests, on the refusal of which they
drove the captain and officers into the cabin. They then placed a
guard at the door, and brought a nine-pounder carriage-gun, loaded
with round and grape shot, to fire among the officers; but were
prevailed upon to desist by the entreaties of Mr. Gardener, the
sailing master. To him they offered the command of the ship,
acquainting him with their intention of steering for the East
Indies; but on his refusal they put him under a guard, and took the
ship into their own care, until they had, for want of skill, nearly
lost both the ship and themselves. They then released Mr. Gardener,
and gave him the helm; when he steered into Camarinas, in Spain,
where most of the mutineers took to the boats, and made their
escape.

Such as were apprehended were brought to trial; and though two more,
viz. Thomas Baldwin and Laurence Tiernan, were found guilty, yet
Smith and Mayne only were executed, who were the ring leaders of the
mutiny. They suffered at Execution Dock, May the 10th, 1762. They
were both Irishmen, and Roman Catholics, and were attended by a
priest of that religion.

A few years after this affair a mutiny broke out among the crew of
the Namur, of ninety guns. Fifteen were found guilty, and ordered to
be hanged. They were brought for execution on board the Royal Ann,
with halters round their necks, and, while waiting for the fatal gun
being fired, were told that his majesty had pardoned fourteen of
them, but one of them must die; and they were ordered to cast lots.
How exquisite must have been the feelings of these miserable men at
the awful moment of deciding on the fate of one! The fatal lot fell
upon the second man that drew, Matthew M'Can, who was soon run up to
the yard-arm, where the body hung nearly an hour. The pardoned
seamen were turned over to the Grafton and the Sunderland, under
sailing orders for the East Indies.



JOHN KELLO
Executed for Forgery, 13th October 1755

John and Joseph Kello were the sons of a mercer in an extensive way
of business, in Houndsditch, who placed John at a grammar-school at
Ludlow in Shropshire where he attained a great proficiency in
classical learning. His education being completed, he was articled
to a reputable merchant; and, soon after the expiration of his
clerkship, he procured three hundred pounds for the purpose of
establishing himself in business, with which sum he embarked for
Virginia; and, soon after his arrival there, he connected himself in
partnership with a person who had been some time settled in that
colony in an advantageous branch of trade. Joseph Kello had served a
Blackwell Hall factor some years in the capacity of a clerk, and in
that time he contracted an intimate acquaintance with Mr. Cotton, a
packer, of Aldermanbury, who was employed to do a great deal of
business for a gentleman named Partridge; and, from frequenting Mr.
Cotton's house, Joseph had frequent opportunities of seeing Mr.
Partridge's writing, and became acquainted with many of that
gentleman's commercial concerns.

After a residence of about three years in Virginia John Kello
returned to London, and hired lodgings in the neighbourhood of
Bloomsbury Square; but, being addicted to a life of pleasure, he
soon found himself in very embarrassed circumstances. The situation
of Joseph was not more eligible than that of his brother; for he was
equally attached to scenes of dissipation; nor was he more inclined
than John to industry in his profession or economy in his expenses.
With the view of relieving themselves from their embarrassments,
they concerted a plan for obtaining a thousand pounds, by means of a
forged draft, in the name of Mr. Partridge; and learning that, on
the 28th of August, he was gone to Harlow, they determined to seize
the opportunity of his absence for carrying their villainous plan
into execution.

Joseph having taken one of the checks under the firm of Amyand,
Staples, and Mercer, from Mr. Cotton's compting-house, carried it to
his brother, at the Red Lion alehouse, in Moorfields, and there
filled it up in a hand very nearly resembling Mr. Partridge's
writing. The counterfeit instrument was now enclosed in a letter to
Mr. Cetton, purporting to be the writing of Mr. Partridge, desiring
him to receive the thousand pounds expressed in the draft in one
bank-note, and leave it under cover at the bar of Sam's Coffee-
house, directed for Mr. Rous. The letter enclosing the counterfeited
draft was dispatched by a porter, who, upon delivering it, was asked
by Mr. Cotton who was his employer; in reply to which he said he had
received the letter from a gentleman in the street, and that no
answer was required. The hand of Mr. Partridge being imitated with
great nicety, Mr. Cotton had no suspicion of an intended fraud, and
immediately set out for the banker's house in Cornhill, where he
presented the draft to Mr. Mercer, who, after checking him for
coming after the usual hour of paying money, paid the thousand
pounds in one bank-note. Mr. Cotton immediately went to the coffee-
house, and sealed the note in a cover, which he directed to Mr.
Rous; but after waiting about three hours, in expectation of seeing
the gentleman, he returned home, taking the note with him, and
leaving word at the bar for Mr. Rous to call at his house in
Aldermanbury.

When Mr. Cotton got home he found Joseph Kello there, and mentioned
to him that, as the sum Mr. Partridge had authorized him to receive
was considerable, he judged it not prudent to leave the note at the
coffee-house, lest some mistake or accident should happen. Hereupon
Joseph went to his brother, who was waiting at Seymour's Coffee-
house, in Pope's-head Alley, whence they dispatched a chairman to
Mr. Cotton, with a verbal message, as from Mr. Partridge, desiring
him to leave the note for Mr. Rous at the coffee house. Joseph now
returned to Mr. Cotton; and presently after him came the porter, and
delivered his message. Mr. Cotton set out for the coffee-house,
being desirous of giving the note into the possession of Mr. Rous;
and, upon inquiring for a gentleman of that name, the landlady said
he had been gone from the house only a few minutes, but had left
word that he should return in a short time. John, who waited to
receive the note under the name of Mr. Rous, went out of the house
upon observing that the messenger did not return alone. Mr. Cotton,
recollecting that Mr. Partridge had connexions in trade with a
gentleman named Rous, who lived at Hackney, concluded that he must
be the Mr. Rous for whom the thousand pounds were intended; and,
after waiting at the coffee-house till near midnight, he left a note
at the bar, intimating that he would the next morning wait upon Mr.
Rous, at Hackney, with the bank-note.

Upon going home he found Joseph Kello at his house, and gave him an
account of his conduct. Joseph Kello intimated that he was
apprehensive Mr. Partridge would be highly offended upon learning
that the note was not delivered according to his order. Mr. Cotton,
however, still adhered to his resolution of keeping the note till he
could dispose of it without hazard; and he directly went to the
post-office with a letter to Mr. Partridge, assigning reasons for
his conduct in the affair. Joseph slept at Mr. Cotton's that night;
and the next morning (which was Sunday) he informed his brother of
Mr. Cotton's design of going to Mr. Rous, at Hackney. It was now
agreed that another letter, as from Mr. Partridge, should be written
to Mr. Cotton, purporting that he (Partridge) had received notice by
express that Mr. Rous had not received the note, and desiring the
directions contained in his former letter might be immediately
obeyed. This letter they artfully sent, under cover, to Mr.
Partridge's house; and that gentleman's porter carried it to Mr.
Cotton, who had set out for Hackney, but stopped for refreshment at
the Sun alehouse, at London Wall, where the porter found him. In
consequence of the forged letter Mr. Cotton immediately went to
Sam's Coffee-house, and there left the note in a cover, directed for
Mr. Rous. Joseph, learning that Mr. Cotton had acted agreeably to
the pretended order of Mr. Partridge, communicated the circumstance
to his brother, who went to the coffee house, and received the note
under the name of Mr. Rous.

On the day the note was obtained by John, Mr. Cotton and Joseph
dined together; after which the brothers met by appointment, and
went into the fields near Sadler's Wells, where the cover was 
opened, and the enclosed bank-note taken out. They then adjourned to
John's lodgings, in Bloomsbury, where it was resolved that he should
set out in a post-chaise for Bristol, in order to procure cash for
the note; and Joseph borrowed ten guineas for his expenses on the
road. Not being able to obtain the money at Bristol, he proceeded to
Bridgewatcr, in Somersetshire, where the clerk to the receiver-
general of the land-tax changed the note. He had no sooner received
the cash than he travelled post to London, and took up his residence
with a woman of the town in a street near Westminster Abbey. He gave
the woman with whom he cohabited a bag, in which was the cash
received in exchange for the bank-note, desiring her to take care of
it, and saying it contained halfpence to the amount of five pounds.

Joseph Kello being taken into custody, charged on suspicion of the
forgery, he made use of some expressions which seemed to convey an
indirect accusation against his brother; and, after he had been
particularly questioned respecting the affair, it was agreed to
admit him an evidence for the crown, in case of John being
apprehended. The postilion who had driven John to town recollected
the place where he had ordered his trunk to be conveyed; and that
circumstance facilitated the discovery of his lodgings, where he was
taken into custody by Sir John Fielding's men, who recovered more
than nine hundred pounds of the money obtained by means of the
counterfeit draft. John Kello being brought to trial at the Old
Bailey, his brother's evidence was exceedingly strong, and supported
by a great number of corroborative circumstances; and be was
therefore convicted of the crime alleged in the indictment.

Being summoned to attend prayers, he refused, saying he was a
Dissenter. Hereupon Mr. Akerman sent him word that he might be
attended by a minister of his own persuasion, but that his presence
in the chapel was expected; and to the latter part of the message
Mr. Akerman is supposed to have been induced by an unwillingness to
trust him in the cells alone, the servants belonging to the prison
being engaged in attending the other prisoners during divine
service. He obstinately persisted in refusing to be attended by any
dissenting minister; and, nearly to the end of his life, appeared to
be totally indifferent as to the necessary preparations for
eternity.

When the morning on which he was to be executed arrived the Ordinary
put several questions to him respecting his sentiments of the
doctrines of Christianity, in which he declared he entertained a
firm belief, and that pride alone had suggested whatever reasons he
had given for an opinion to the contrary. At the place of execution
he acknowledged his guilt with every appearance of unfeigned
contrition; but his voice was so low, through a very decayed state
of health, that he was to be heard only by those who were in or very
near the cart. Being asked by the Ordinary whether he forgave his
brother, his answer was, that he forgive him as far as he could,
'consistent with humanity.' His devotions being concluded, he was
turned off, October the 13th, 1764; and, after hanging the usual
time, his body was delivered to his friends, by whom it was
privately interred in a decent manner.

From the above narrative we may learn that, however nearly allied by
blood and friendship, no obligations will be found sufficient to
prevent our best friends from becoming our accusers when they are
impelled by the double motive of self-preservation and the desire of
making some reparation for the crimes they have committed. It would
be a difficult point to determine which of the brothers had the
greatest share of guilt. Perhaps the ignominious death of John was
not a more severe punishment than what was sustained by Joseph; for
it is scarcely to be supposed that any favourable change of
circumstances could restore him to happiness after having proved so
material an instrument in producing the destruction of a brother.
Wealth is desirable only as the means of procuring the conveniences
and comforts of life: but let our readers remember that, when it is
obtained by unjustifiable actions, the consciousness of guilt will
perpetually obtrude upon the mind, wholly disappoint or take off the
relish of every promised enjoyment, and leave us miserable slaves to
the tyranny of continual alarms and dreadful apprehensions.



THOMAS USHER
Executed for Robbery, 4th May, 1764

This treacherous thief was clerk to the owner of the Bristol waggon.
A captain of a ship having delivered to him, and entered on his
books, a parcel to be forwarded to London, containing one thousand
eight hundred pounds, the unworthy servant determined appropriating
it to his own use. Before he set off, willing to plunder to the
utmost, he took two hundred pounds belonging to Mr. William James,
his master, and even robbed his fellow-servants of their watches.

Upon the discovery of the flight and robbery, Mr. James pursued him
to London, where he had reason to suppose the thief would take
refuge. He traced him to the Oxford Arms, in Oxford Road, to which
he came in a post-chaise and four, but he soon after set off in a
hackney-coach. Mr. James now despaired of tracing him any farther;
but, being persuaded to lay the case before Sir John Fielding, the
myrmidons of that active magistrate soon found the coachman who had
taken up Usher and his booty. It appeared that he had paid an extra
fare to be driven by the Islington road to the Black Bull, at
Whitechapel, with a view to evade pursuit. From thence he was
followed to Sabridgeworth, in Hertfordshire, and there apprehended.
Most of the money lodged by the Bristol captain, which was in 
Portugal gold, was found upon him. A letter was also discovered,
directed to his wife, appointing her to meet him at an inn on Epping
Forest, and to invite her brother and sister to come along with her,
having joyful news to tell them; no less, continued the letter, than
a thousand pounds gained in the lottery, and which he had about him.
The wife was, however, deprived of the pleasure of the journey, by
the officers apprehending her, on whom they found above one hundred
pounds, and one of the watches stolen by her husband, which left
little doubt of her having been privy to the robbery.

Usher was brought back to Bristol, and indicted for the offence at
the next Court. Upon the trial, the circumstances already related
being proved, and the evidence of his master full and positive, he
was found guilty, and sentenced for death. During his execution,
which took place at Bristol, May the 4th, 1764, while the attention
of the populace was wholly employed upon the malefactor, a single
highwayman, well mounted, committed a robbery, in the sight of
thousands, and, for a time, escaped!



WILLIAM JAQUES
Executed for the Murder of a Black Man, August, 1764

This treacherous murderer was a seaman in the royal navy, and a
disgrace to that brave and generous set of people. He belonged to
the Stag frigate, and the black man was also one of the crew. They
had lately been paid off, and each received twenty-eight pounds.
Jaques soon squandered away his share in dissipation among lewd
women, and determined to replace it by robbing the negro.

For this purpose he decoyed his victim into a wood, and, taking him
unawares, he dashed his brains out with a hedge-stake, rifled his
pockets, and then made his escape. In a few days the corpse was
found; and suspicion falling on Jaques, from their having been seen
in company, he was pursued and taken in a public house at the
Devizes. There were found upon him sixteen thirty-six-shilling
pieces; and about his neck was the handkerchief of the deceased. He
had with him the bloody stake with which he committed the murder,
and immediately confessed the crime, and signed his confession.

He also acknowledged that he had murdered three more men, and had
robbed a gentleman on Hounslow Heath of ten pounds. He was a wretch
who drew little pity for his fate, and was executed at Salisbury, in
August, 1764.



RICHARD SWIFT
Transported for Buying Stolen Goods

Swift was the son of poor people living near St. Luke's Church, Old
Street, who gave him some share of education, and bound him
apprentice to a turner. During the term of his servitude he
associated with a number of abandoned people, who supported
themselves by thieving; and, when the period specified in his
indenture was expired, he wasted the greatest part of his time in
the company of those profligate wretches at an infamous house in
Golden Lane.

Swift by some means ingratiated himself into the favour of a brewer,
and had the address to interest him so warmly in his behalf, that he
put him into a public house in Old Street, which was known by the
sign of the Barley Mow, and had been long a receptacle for thieves
of every denomination. When Swift commenced landlord he afforded all
possible encouragement to his iniquitous customers, who, after
spending the day at his house in blasphemy, drunkenness, and riot,
constantly departed on the approach of night, in order to commit
depredations on the public.

The persons inhabiting the neighbourhood where Swift lived were so
dissatisfied with his conduct, and made such frequent complaints of
the irregularities committed by his customers, that he was under the
necessity of changing his place of abode; and, taking an alehouse
near Shoreditch Church, he persisted in his usual course of
wickedness, instructing thieves in what manner to obtain booties,
frequently assisting in the actual commission of robberies, and
constantly receiving the goods stolen by his associates. It is
supposed that, before Swift was brought to justice, upwards of
twenty men were hanged, and a much greater number transported, whom
he had instructed and encouraged in the various arts of thieving;
and, though it is known that he was many times committed to Newgate,
and the New Gaol, Southwark, for offences of various kinds, he
escaped the sentence of the law till he was upwards of fifty years
of age.

Swift and some of his associates followed a waggon one evening from
Snow Hill to The Cock Inn, Aldersgate Street; where Swift, being
known to some of the ostlers, left his accomplices (Fossett, and a
Jew named Solomons), giving them directions to steal as many goods
from the waggon as they should be able, and bring them to him.
Fosset and Solomons concealed themselves in the yard; and, after
waiting some time, observed the ostler and waggoner go into the
taproom together. They seized this opportunity of robbing the
waggon, whence they stole a box containing seventy-two pounds of
candles. They carried the box to Bishopsgate Street, where they
opened it, but were greatly disappointed upon finding what it
contained; for they imagined that they had acquired a valuable booty
of plate. They carried the candles to Swift's house; and he gave
them a small sum for the stolen goods, in order to encourage them to
commit robberies of more consequence.

Fosset being apprehended on suspicion of the above robbery, he was
examined by Sir John Fielding, to whom he confessed the particulars
of the fact; and Swift having been long known as a daring violator
of the laws, it was judged expedient to admit Fosset an evidence for
the crown. In consequence of Fosset's information Swift was
apprehended, and indicted for purchasing goods knowing them to be
stolen. The evidence against him being indisputable, he was
convicted, and sentenced to transportation for fourteen years. He
had not been in America a month when he embarked as a passenger on
board a vessel bound to Liverpool; and, at the expiration of the
year 1764, he landed at that town. On his way to London he stopped
at Coventry, where he was apprehended, and secured in prison. At the
ensuing assizes he was brought to trial before Sir Henry Gould. The
record of his former conviction being produced, it appeared that the
person who wrote it, in specifying the weight of the candles, had
inserted seventy instead of seventy-two. The prisoner, having heard
the copy of his conviction read, pointed out the error, and
requested the judge to allow him counsel, which was readily granted.
After the case had been argued in a very learned manner, the judge
declared that the error was fatal to the indictment, and that the
prisoner must therefore be acquitted. When Swift was on the point of
being discharged, one of Sir John Fielding's men made oath that an
accusation was lodged against him for stealing a quantity of cotton
in the county of Middlesex. Here upon he was ordered to be conveyed
to London. No indictment was found against him for stealing the
cotton; but, being put to the bar of the sessions-house in the Old
Bailey, the Court ordered him to be transported for the remaining
part of his former sentence.

Richard Swift was a second time put on board of one of the transport
vessels on the 24th of April, 1766. Since the time of Jonathan Wild
the above malefactor was one of the most notorious receivers of
stolen goods by which this country has been infested. If such
delinquents were to be punished by death, it is beyond a question
that great advantages would accrue to the public; for, if thieves
were to find a difficulty in disposing of their booties, they would
be effectually discouraged from pursuing illegal courses; and those
who should be hardy enough to continue them would seldom escape the
justice due to their iniquity. Receivers of stolen goods are to be
classed among the most infamous species of felons. They encourage
robbers, and are therefore accessory to the crimes they commit; they
are guilty even of a species of deliberate murder, since the
practices they countenance seldom fail to bring the more immediate
perpetrators thereof to violent and premature death.



ELIZABETH BURROUGHS
Executed for Murder, April 4th, 1766

On the trial of this woman it appeared that one Henry Steward, a
broker, at Bury St. Edmunds, had taken into his house, in the
capacity of servant, a girl named Mary Booty, whose father was then
recently deceased, and whose goods had been sold by Steward, in the
way of his business. Elizabeth Burroughs had lived as a servant to
Steward, but was not then in his employ. Finding that Booty supplied
the place that she had formerly filled, fried with jealousy (as she
expressed herself), she went, for the purpose of quarrelling with
her late master, to his house. For some time there was a general
fray among the three; but the man, finding that Burroughs had struck
Booty on the head with a hammer, quitted the house, and left the
girls together. In the course of the night Mary Booty was found in
the street, expiring before Steward's door.

Many circumstances concurred for supposing that she had been thrown
out of the window by Burroughs: her skull was fractured, and she was
otherwise much beaten and bruised. Yet, under these proofs and
corroborative evidence, the hardened wretch, to the last moment,
asserted her innocence. Her last words were, 'I know a lie will
avail me nothing; I am innocent of the murder for which I suffer.'
She was executed at Bury St. Edmunds, April the 4th, 1763.

We do not know a more dangerous step towards the ruin of the peace
of mind, in fact, eventually, of every individual of a family, than
that of the master becoming familiar with his female servant. No
person can read this unhappy case without entertaining the idea of
an improper intercourse having taken place between Steward and
Burroughs; and, though it appears she had left her ostensible
employ, yet it is plain she considered the favours of her master
still at her command, and that they were encroached upon by the
admission of the deceased. On this point, unfortunately, we find
that a grey beard does not always bring wisdom.



JOHN M'CLOUD
Executed for the Murder Of Mr. Stoddard, October 24th,
1768

Though the crime for which this unfortunate youth justly suffered
was of the deepest dye, yet his execution excited much
commiseration. He was not twenty years of age when he met his
untimely and ignominious death, and was apprentice to a glazier; but
he gave way to that fatal habit to all apprentices of attending
public houses when his master's business was done for the day; when
evil example soon caused him to throw off almost all restraint, and
he was frequently seen intoxicated when he should have been at work.

This kind of life, everyone knows, is supported at no little cost;
and the lost youth is soon driven to some dishonest practice, in
order, for a short time, to keep up the enticing, but fatal, career
he has begun. Their first plunder is too often upon their masters,
because it is done with less danger, and frequently without
mistrust. M'Cloud chose the highway for this purpose; and,
accompanied by another stripling, who escaped justice, on the 15th
of October, 1758, sallied out, armed with knives and bludgeons, on
the road leading to Islington. The first unhappy passenger whom they
met was Mr. Stoddard, keeper of Clerkenwell Bridewell, returning to
the prison from Islingtona man of resolution, and the keeper of
robbers. He resisted their attack, and would have secured them both,
had they not drawn their knives, and stabbed him many times, when he
fell, and the villains ran off, after rifling his pockets. The
unfortunate man died of his wounds on the 18th.

M'Cloud alone was apprehended, and, untaught in villainy, confessed
his crime; that it was his first attempt to do a dishonest act; and
that the murder was involuntary, for that neither his companion nor
himself had any such intent. He further said, that he could not say
which of them gave the death-wound; but that, finding himself
pressed, he drew his knife in his own defence. When brought to the
bar of the Old Bailey, it was remarked that so open and honest a
countenance, had not often been arraigned there; and his behaviour
coincided with his appearance; but what can all this avail in
purging so foul a deed?

He was condemned to be hanged, and his body to be delivered to the
surgeons for dissection. At the fatal tree he bitterly lamented his
folly, and earnestly exhorted all his fellow-apprentices against
neglecting their master's employ, which he said would, sooner or
later, bring them to an untimely end. He was executed at Tyburn on
October the 24th, 1768.



MICHAEL SAMPSON
Forger, whose Death Sentence Was Commuted to
Transportation because he Had Saved a Nobleman's
Servants from Drowning

We give a place to this case from its presenting a singular
extension of the royal mercy in the crime of forgery. The greatest
interest since this instance has been made in vain for pardon to
forgers, particularly for the two brothers, Robert and Daniel
Perreau, Dr. William Dodd, and William Wynne Ryland, whose cases we
shall hereafter give, and many others.

Michael Sampson was not, in fact, arrived at the estate of man when
he committed a forgery, without, perhaps, being aware of the
enormity of the crime, and for which he was tried at the Old Bailey,
and found guilty. He had received a good education, was brought up
to the sea service, and already commanded a merchant vessel; and,
young as he was, he was distinguished by the appellation of Captain
Sampson. When brought up to the bar, May the 5th, 1764, to receive
judgment, on being asked by the clerk of the arraigns, in the usual
form, 'Why sentence of death should not be passed upon him?' he thus
addressed the Court:

'My Lords,
	'After having voluntarily pleaded guilty, I humbly wait to
receive the sentence of the law. Great as my crime is, his majesty's
mercy is still greater; and if, in my past conduct, any
circumstances have happily appeared, by which I have (under God)
been the means of saving the lives of any of his majesty's subjects
(and with truth I can say that I have saved above two hundred from
perishing), I hope those circumstances will, in some measure,
recommend me, a truly sincere penitent, to his royal mercy; and, if
it should be his gracious pleasure to save that forfeited life,
which before had been the means of saving so many others, the
remainder of it shall be spent in a manner becoming the situation of
one sensible of that inestimable blessing.
	'My lords, I applied to the Court last sessions to put off my
trial, in order that I might be able to lay many favorable
circumstances before this Court that might incline your lordships to
mercy; but, being advised that those circumstances were more proper
to be laid before his royal majesty, I confessed that guilt which in
conscience I could not deny.
	'Your lordships are men; you feel as men; and, perhaps, may
now feel some compassion for an unhappy youth, truly penitent, and
not yet twenty years of age.
	'Permit me, my lords, to add, that, if your lordships, who are
now proceeding according to strict law, shall be pleased to render
me any compassionate services, that obligation to myself and my
worthy relations, now involved in my sufferings, but not in my
guilt, will never be forgotten. But, my lords, if, after all, the
bitter cup of justice is not to be removed from me, I humbly submit
to thy will, O God, in whom I trust.'

A certain nobleman, high in office, several of whose domestics were
among the number whom Sampson had been the principal cause of saving
from drowning, used all his influence in favour of the wretched
youth; and succeeded in first obtaining a respite, and eventually a
pardon. The consideration which moved the royal breast to mercy was,
doubtless, his having saved the lives of so many fellow. creatures
from perishing in the Dublin packet, bound for Ireland; yet still it
opened a door to pardon for an offence which never can be endured in
a commercial country like Britain. When the conditional pardon
reached Newgate it was found to include eight unhappy culprits, then
under sentence of death, on condition of transportation for life to
America; viz. Michael Sampson, William Brown, Richard Bevas, William
Bellet, James Wharton, John Boylan, Richard Gray, and John Faulkner;
and the following pardoned on condition of transportation for seven
years; viz. Richard Jewes, William Manning, William Smith, and
Elizabeth Osborne. Sampson being asked in the usual manner, as well
as all the rest, whether he would accept his majesty's favour on the
above condition, he thus replied:

'My Lord,
	'It is entirely above my comprehension to express the
gratitude and thanks I owe for such extraordinary mercy to an
unfortunate young man, whose life was forfeited to public justice. I
most humbly accept of the proffered terms, and will never cease to
pray for the eternal happiness of my most benevolent king, through
whose most gracious mercy 1 now exist.
	'Words cannot, my lord, yet my future conduct shall
demonstrate, that it may not be amiss sometimes to temper justice
with mercy. And I most humbly return your lord ship, and this
honourable Court, my most grateful thanks for the trouble they have
been at, and for their generous behaviour towards me.'

This unfortunate young man was sent to Virginia, pursuant to his
sentence of transportation.



JAMES MURPHY AND JOHN DOGAN
Executed for Being Concerned in Wilkes's Riots, July
11th, 1768

The first and most daring mob during these riots was occasioned by
the coal-heavers, of which gang were Murphy and Dogan. They demanded
an increase of wages; and, because the sailors in the coal-ships
would not second their unlawful and exorbitant demand, they were
attacked, and various dreadful skirmishes ensued. The rioters then
went on board the coal-ships, and obliged the men who were at work
to leave off; so that the business of delivering ships in the river
was totally at a stand. They complained that their employers, called
undertakers, oppressed them in various shapes; curtailed the wages
paid to them, not in money, but in liquor and goods of a bad
quality; and that those undertakers got fortunes while they and
their families were starving.

One day they proceeded, with colours flying and drums beating,
towards the Palace Yard, as they said, to lay their complaints
before the king; but were met by the justices, with Sir John
Fielding at their head, who, with much entreaty, prevailed on them
to return. On the 12th of June their insolence arrived to such a
height that the military was called in to the assistance of the
civil power. The desperadoes even attacked the soldiers, who fired
upon them, which killed several rioters, and who, in return,
murdered three of their opponents. Twenty of the leaders were
secured, and committed to prison.

A monthly publication at the time, on this subject, says, 'The gaols
are full of these fellows, who would neither work, nor let others
work, so that the business of the river has been greatly
obstructed.' Nothing intimidated the rioters, who for some time
paraded the streets in large bodies, armed with cutlasses,
bludgeons, and other offensive weapons, crying out 'Five pounds for
a sailor's head, and twenty for a master's! We'll cut the
lightermen's throats, and murder all the masters, burn their houses,
and set fire to their ships.' In this daring manner they continued
to terrify those concerned at the water-side. The military
frequently dispersed them; but no sooner were they retired than the
coal-heavers sallied out from their lurking-holes, and continued
their riotous practices.

The sessions, however, were at hand, and Murphy and Dogan, two of
the most active, who had been secured at the affray wherein the
soldiers were killed, were convicted of the murders, sentenced to
death, and their bodies to be delivered to the surgeons for
dissection. On the morning of their execution, which took place at
Tyburn, July the 11th, 1768, a great number of Irish women assembled
at Surgeons' Hall, and set up the funeral howl of their country upon
the bodies being carried into the hall for dissection, pursuant to
the sentence; nor would they disperse until they found no hopes of
rescuing their 'dear countrymen,' whose death they insisted was a
'big burning shame.' [Note: Formerly, in the country parts of
Ireland, where a corpse is sometimes carried several miles for
interment, the women, as the procession passes on the road, set up a
mournful cry, which they call Keeninga custom now nearly extinct.]

This example intimidated the remainder of the discontented rabble,
who were soon glad to be again taken into their former employ. On
the 26th of the same month seven more of the riotous coal-heavers,
having been tried, found guilty, and condemned at the Old Bailey,
were carried from Newgate to the Sun Tavern Fields, the spot of
their riot, and executed pursuant to their sentence. The whole of
the London constables and peace-officers were, by the sheriffs,
ordered to attend the execution. A party of the guards was posted in
readiness, in case of any attempt to rescue the culprits; but though
more than fifty thousand people, on a moderate calculation, were
present at the place of execution, no disturbance happened, and the
guards never appeared in sight of them.



MOSES ALEXANDER
Executed For Forgery although Innocent, 9th August,
1769

The unhappy man, whose memoirs it is our present task to record, was
a native of the city of Glasgow, in North Britain. He was scarcely
arrived to manhood when he travelled to London; and for several
years he carried a pack about the country, retailing different sorts
of goods; but linen was the principal article in which he dealt. He
was naturally of an industrious disposition; and his industry
procured him success. He made overtures of marriage to a young woman
who had two uncles possessed of considerable property; and knowing
that they intended to give her a marriage portion, and to make her
their heir, he gained credit for a large assortment of linen drapery
goods, and opened a warehouse on Fish Street Hill, with a view of
giving himself consequence with his intended bride and her wealthy
relatives. The young woman's relations, believing Alexander to be in
flourishing circumstances, gave their consent to the marriage, which
was in a short time solemnized; and soon afterwards he connected
himself in partnership with a linen-draper in Holborn, named Nicol,
who was a man of unblemished integrity, but encumbered with a
numerous family and some pecuniary embarrassments.

Mr. Nicol being perfectly conversant in the wholesale branch of the
linen trade, it was agreed that he should travel to Manchester,
Glasgow, and other places, for the purpose of purchasing goods.
Alexander kept the circumstance of his partnership a profound secret
from his wife's relations; but, after he had obtained from them
several considerable sums, the matter was divulged in the following
manner:One of his wife's uncles happened to be in Alexander's
counting-house, when a bill was brought for acceptance, payable by
Alexander and Nicol. Hereupon the gentleman upbraided Alexander for
concealing from him so material a circumstance as that of his being
connected in partnership: the other declared that no partnership
subsisted; that Nicol was no more than his servant, and had inserted
his own name in the draft either through mistake or villainy. Mr.
Nicol returned to London in about two months, when Alexander denied
his having a right to part of the business, and said he would submit
the decision of the case to the Court of Chancery. Though articles
of co-partnership had been regularly executed, Mr. Nicol was averse
to involving himself in an expensive suit of law, which he feared
his circumstances would not enable him to support; and therefore he
declined engaging in a tedious contention with a man who had treated
him in so injurious a manner.

The difference between Nicol and Alexander took place in the summer
of 1765; and about eight months afterwards the latter, who had
quitted his house on Fish Street Hill, and opened a warehouse in
Tooley Street, Southwark, failed to the amount of about sixty
thousand pounds; and it was then publicly known that he was the
principal of a great number of retail shops established in different
parts of the town, under a variety of names; and it was considered
as an extraordinary circumstance that, with a capital so very
inadequate to the extensive trade into which he had launched, he
should be able to support his credit for so long a period: but the
public surprise abated when it was discovered that he had chiefly
depended on the circulation of notes of hand and bills of exchange.
Some time having elapsed, he engaged again in business, and a second
failure took place, though for a sum greatly inferior to the claims
of his former creditors. He had now no expectations of assistance
from his wife's relations; but he contrived means for establishing
himself again in business, which he was the better enabled to carry
on by means of notes of hand being frequently lent him by a man
named Brown. Brown was in France towards the end of the year 1768;
and about that time he became connected with one Aked, of Leeds, in
Yorkshire, whose notes he passed for the support of his drooping
credit in the manner that he had formerly negotiated those of Brown.

Alexander had borrowed eighty pounds on a note of Aked's, indorsed
in the name of Brown, for ninety-eight pounds, six shillings; and it
not being paid when due, he gave Mr. Fryar, who had advanced the
money, another note, as collateral security, assuring him that in a
few days the notes should be redeemed. At length Fryar accused
Alexander of forgery; and he was committed to Newgate. He was
acquitted on indictments found against him for two other offences of
a similar nature; but, though several witnesses swore the writing
was not the prisoner's, he was convicted of forging the indorsement
on the bill for ninety-eight pounds, six shillings. Brown would have
proved the most material witness; and, had he been in England, the
prisoner would, perhaps, have derived great advantage from his
evidence. The behaviour of Alexander in Newgate was such as could on
no account be disapproved in a man under his unhappy circumstances;
and he entertained strong hopes of being considered as an object of
the royal mercy. From a variety of circumstances great numbers of
people believed him to be innocent of the fact; and very powerful
interest was made for preserving his life.

On the morning appointed for his execution he was respited for a
week: before the expiration of that time, and it being represented
that messengers were gone to France in search of Brown, he was
respited for a week longer. Brown's affidavit was brought from
France, expressing that he wrote the indorsement that Alexander had
been charged with forging. The affidavit being carried to his
majesty at Richmond, he was pleased to refer the matter to Lord
Weymouth; but his lordship's interference could not be obtained, he
being then at his country seat. The sheriffs attended at Newgate the
next morning, in order to conduct the prisoner to the place of
execution. He informed them that his friends were gone to Richmond,
to make a second application to the king; and they consented to
defer their melancholy office till the issue of the intercession
should be known. No further respite being obtained, the prisoner was
taken from Newgate about half past twelve o'clock, attended by a
dissenting minister, with whom he prayed in an earnest and devout
manner. At the place of execution his behaviour was decent and
composed; and he persisted in the declaration of his innocence till
the last moments of his life. Moses Alexander was executed at Tyburn
about half past two in the afternoon of the 9th of August, 1769.

The imprudence of Alexander in launching into a trade too extensive
for his capital to support produced a train of difficulties that
ended in an ignominious death. His conduct in regard to Mr. Nicol
proved him to be divested of all principles of integrity; and
certain it is that in several instances he was guilty of forgery,
and other unjustifiable practices; but whether he committed the
offence of which he was convicted is a question that we pretend not
to decide. We are aware that, if legal decisions were to be
frequently reversed, the reverence that is due to the law would be
highly endangered; but in cases of a doubtful nature reason and
humanity will justify the suspension of a convict's sentence till
his criminality shall be more clearly proved. We mean not to
insinuate the least reflection against the sheriffs, who acted
perfectly consistent with the duties of their office; but we cannot
avoid observing that it was a most unfortunate circumstance for
Alexander (because, had Brown personally acknowledged the
indorsement on the day of trial, an acquittal must have necessarily
ensued) that, in the absence of the secretary of state, one or more
of the judges had not power to determine whether Brown's affidavit
was of sufficient authority to leave the convict's fate in suspense
till his guilt or innocence could be more satisfactorily
ascertained.



CHARLES DAVID MORGAN, DAVID MORGAN, WILLIAM SPIGGOT,
WILLIAM WALTER EVAN, WILLIAM MORRIS, AND DAVID
LEWELLIN
Executed for the Murder Of Mr. Powell, March 30th,
1770

This was a murder of so unprovoked, premeditated, daring, and cruel
a nature, that every reader must be shocked at the recital. For a
man to have his house beset by a troop of villains, for the sole
purpose of assassinating him, in a country famed for laws and the
protection of persons and property, surprised every individual of
the nation; and each circumstance connected with this dreadful tale
serves to increase its horror. This crime was premeditated by one
William Williams, a mercer, at Llandovery, in Carmarthenshire; and
there is too much reason to fear that the wife consented to the
murder of the husband: at all events, the accounts of the
transaction would warrant such suspicion.

It appeared that William Powell, Esq. a gentleman of good estate,
resided at Glanareath, in the parish of Llangaddock, in
Carmarthenshire, in Wales. For some time he lived on bad terms with
his wife, to whom he allowed a separate maintenance of one hundred
pounds a year, and placed the children at a boarding-school near
London. Mrs. Powell (a fatal step, too often taken by repudiated
wives) incessantly railed against her husband, and, opening her
complaints to Williams, urged him to assist her in taking away the
children from under their father's care. This infatuated man
accordingly accompanied Mrs. Powell to the school; and they had
address enough to prevail upon the master to give them up the
children, which Williams immediately placed into another, pointed
out by the mother. Mr. Powell being soon apprized of these
proceedings, he applied for his children; but their new master
replied that he had received them from Mr. Williams, and that to him
alone could he deliver them.

The Court of King's Bench was now moved for an habeas corpus, and
Williams was served with a rule to show cause 'Why he should not
deliver up the children to the father?' but of this serious
proceeding Williams took no notice, until he was served with an
attachment for a contempt of Court. This writ being sent to the
sheriff for execution, Williams absconded, and formed the diabolical
determination of revenging Mr. Powell's proceedings against him in
the Court by his death. Failing in different attempts to shoot him,
this remorseless villain tampered with a number of poor and ignorant
Welshmen, to assist him in the horrid deed. This gang, according to
the confession of one of them, consisted, altogether, of fourteen,
of the following description:

William Williams, the instigator, of Llandovery, escaped.
	Charles David Morgan, labourer, executed.
	William Charles Morgan, his son, acquitted. 
	William Spiggot, a barber, executed.
	William Morris, a saddler, executed.
	John Spiggot, a servant, brother to William, acquitted.
	William Walter Evans, labourer, executed.
	David Morgan, an itinerant tinker, executed.
	Walter Evan, his apprentice, executed.
	William Thomas, a glover, admitted evidence for the crown.*
	Thomas Drayn, labourer, escaped.
	John Isaac, ditto, escaped.
	Morgan James, a pedlar, escaped;
	and another ruffian, called Captain Bowen, of Kel-y-Cwm,
escaped.

[*Note: William Thomas soon met the fate of his companions, whom he
now appeared against, as evidence for the public; for we find, in a
note of Welsh Criminal Records, that on the 18th of September, 1773,
little more than three years after the murder of Mr. Powell, this
identical William Thomas was hanged at Pensarn, in Carmarthenshire,
for a highway robbery.]

This horrid gang, in the evening, when Mr. Powell was sitting with
his family, broke into his house in disguise, and murdered him with
a ferocious cruelty too shocking to relate. The trial of that part
of this gang who were apprehended came on at the city of Hereford,
where they were removed by writ of habeas corpus, before Sir Joseph
Yates, one of the judges of the Court of King's Bench.

A case so very extraordinary, in fact scarcely paralleled in the
annals of criminal history, drew together the people from all parts
of the county. Charles David Morgan, David Morgan, William Spiggot,
William Walter Evan, William Morris, and David Lewellin, were found
guilty: the evidence did not reach some, and the remainder of this
horrid gang escaped from justice. The following speech of the judge,
on passing sentence, will amply show the nature of their crime:

'You (naming the prisoners) have been tried, and, upon evidence that
leaves not the smallest doubt, have now been found guilty of the
most wicked, the most savage, the most horrid murder that ever
stained the hand of mana cool, deliberate, preconcerted
assassination! without a quarrel to provoke, without a passion to
incite, without a motive to tempt you but the blackest that ever
disgraced human naturea willingness to earn the wages of iniquity,
the execrable wages of a hireling assassin. And how hardened, how
determined, were the preparations you made for that bloody work! Day
after day projecting the design, till, at last, deliberately putting
on the ruffian's frock, and blackened face, you daringly entered the
doors of the deceased; and, in his own house, murdered him, most
inhumanly murdered him, with every circumstance of savage barbarity!
yet he had never done the least injury to you, not the smallest
provocation of offence.

'That unfortunate man is now in his grave, and in two days you will
be as cold and lifeless as he. But how different will be your
departure! By your bloody hand he was wickedly murdered. You for
that murder will justly die. It is now my duty to pronounce that
dreadful sentence; an office which to me is ever painful. I feel for
the melancholy condition you are in, who are so soon to die by the
hands of justice; but how little did you feel for the poor man you
murdered!

'Friday next, the day after to-morrow, will in this world be your
last: but think of the more dreadful day to come, when you will
appear before a far more awful tribunal, before the Great Judge of
all mankind. Think how you will stand before him, covered over with
the blood of your fellow-creature, whom you so wickedly murdered,
most daringly presuming to destroy that life which the Almighty
gave, and which He alone had a right to take away.

'You have now but two days to live, and in that short time have much
work to do. I therefore most earnestly entreat you to employ every
moment that is left you in imploring God's mercy and forgiveness,
that your soul may escape that dreadful punishment which lasts
through all eternity. At this bar you must expect no mercy.

'The sentence of the law will most certainly be executed upon you;
and that sentence is, 'That yon must be taken from hence to the
place from whence you came; and from thence, on Friday next, to the
place of execution; that you be there hanged by the neck till you
are dead; and that your bodies afterwards be delivered to the
surgeons, to be dissected. And the Lord have mercy on your souls!'

They were executed accordingly, amid the execrations of a vast
concourse of spectators, at Hereford, March the 30th, 1770.



JOHN STRETTON
Executed for Robbing the Mail, 1st August, 1770

This unhappy man was descended of respectable parents, who gave him
a liberal education; nor did any circumstance arise to throw blame
on his character till the discovery of the crime which cost him his
life. He was apprenticed to a grocer in London, and served his time
with a degree of fidelity that would have done credit to any
servant; and he appeared to gain the general good opinion of those
who were acquainted with him. At the expiration of his
apprenticeship be went to live as a journeyman to a grocer in
Bishopsgate Street, where he still maintained a fair character, and
continued in this station several years, during which he married,
and had a daughter; but his wife died a considerable time before the
perpetration of the fact which rendered him a fatal victim to the
violated laws of his country.

Mr. Stretton, having by his frugality accumulated a sum of money,
opened a shop in. Bishopsgate Street on his own account, and had
every reasonable prospect of success; for so regular had been his
conduct, and so irreproachable was his character, that not any
person in his own way of business refused to give him credit to any
reasonable amount. Unhappily, however, he had not long embarked in
trade before his ruin ensued, from a cause which one would have
thought very unlikely to produce it. Having conceived a design of
advancing himself in life by a second marriage, and a butcher in the
neighbourhood being reputed worth a considerable sum of money, he
paid his addresses to his daughter, who was so well pleased with
him, that she did not hesitate to make a declaration in his favour;
but the father, unwilling to part with any money, as a portion for
his daughter, resolved not to give his consent, because Mr. Stretton
was not in circumstances of independence. In the meantime the lovers
contrived frequent opportunities of seeing each other, and the young
woman repeatedly informed Mr. Stretton with the determination of her
father. Chagrined by this circumstance, and resolved to remove the
objection which seemed to arise from his presumed poverty, he made
the dreadful resolution of robbing the mail.

He had not, however, for some time an opportunity of carrying his
intention into execution; for he was seized with a severe fit of
illness, which confined him to his bed for some weeks, during which
time he was frequently visited by the girl whom he had courted, and
also by her mother, who was a warm friend to the proposed marriage.
At length he recovered his health in a very considerable degree; on
which he resolved to complete, if possible, the plan which had so
long agitated his mind. In pursuance hereof he took an opportunity,
when his shopman was in bed, one Saturday night, to quit the house,
and go as far as the City Road, between Islington and London, where
he awaited the arrival of the northern mail, which came opposite
Peerless Pool about two o'clock in the morning. Stretton, observing
the postboy coming up, stopped the mail, and took out such bags as
he thought proper; after which he went into Moorfields, where he
examined the contents of the bags, and, selecting such bills and
notes as he considered most valuable, left the bags behind him, and
retired to his own house.

As soon as the robbery was made known at the post-office, the Post
master-General offered by advertisement, as is usual on such
occasions, a reward of two hundred pounds for the apprehension of
the robber: but nothing transpired in the course of several weeks;
and it is probable that the offender might have remained much longer
undetected but for the following circumstance. Stretton still
continued to pay his addresses to the butcher's daughter; but her
father, unwilling that she should marry a man in low or doubtful
circumstances, was continually talking to Stretton on the subject of
money matters; till at length the latter was so imprudent as to show
him the drafts in his possession, and even to send a porter to Mr.
Boldero's, the banker, for the acceptance of one of them, that no
doubt might remain of their being good notes: but the porter had no
sooner presented the bill than he was detained, and a peace-officer,
and other persons, were sent in search of Mr. Stretton, whom they
found at his own house. They inquired how he came to be possessed of
the note in question; to which he replied that he had taken it in
the course of business from a person in Bond Street, who was in his
debt. This story did not seem to be credited: however, a coach was
called, and the parties went together to Bond Street, in search of
the person who was said to have paid the bill: but no such man could
be found; on which the suspicions against Stretton being greatly
strengthened, he was conveyed to the house of Sir John Fielding, who
committed him to Newgate, to abide the event of a trial.

Objections being made by counsel to the putting him on his trial at
the first and second sessions after his commitment, it was
accordingly brought on at the third. [Note: It ought to be
mentioned, to the credit of our courts of justice, that the
slightest argument, which has but the appearance of reason, is
sufficient to influence the Bench in favour of the prisoner.]

When Mr. Stretton was put on his trial, full proof arose that the
drafts and notes which had been taken out of the mail were found in
his house; and, as he could give no probable account how they came
into his possession, there was a strong presumptive, amounting
almost to positive, proof that he had himself committed the robbery;
for it appeared evident to the jury that a tradesman, who had taken
these bills and notes in the common course of business, could have
accounted for the manner in which he became possessed of them, or at
least the greater part of them. After a full deliberation on the
case, the jury did not hesitate to pronounce him guilty, the
consequence of which was that he received sentence of death.

After conviction he was regular in his attendance on the offices of
divine worship; but no arguments that were made use of could prevail
on him to acknowledge his guilt, and he steadily persisted in a
denial of the justice of his sentence. Notwithstanding this, he
appeared exceedingly penitent for all the faults which he had ever
committed; and declared that he expected salvation only through the
merits of the Redeemer of mankind: but, with regard to robbing the
mail, he insisted that he had never been guilty of it; and that he
detested the thought of such an execrable baseness, and was totally
innocent of the crime alleged against him. These declarations he
repeatedly made; and on the morning of execution, when he was called
down to the Press-yard, to have his irons knocked off, he was urged
by the Ordinary of Newgate to make an explicit confession of the
crime; but, far from doing so, he still avowed his perfect
innocence. He was attended to the place of execution by immense
crowds of people, who wished to hear the dying words of a man to be
executed for so capital a crime, for which he would never
acknowledge the justice of that verdict by which he had been
condemned. This unhappy man suffered at Tyburn on the 1st of August,
1770.

Many people have thought it impossible, and indeed humanity would
suppose it so, for any man to die with a lie in his month; but in
the case of Stretton it will be very hard to form an opinion in his
favour; for, if he did not obtain the notes and drafts by robbing
the mail, how did he procure them?If he could have given an honest
account how he became possessed of themif he could, as Shakspeare
emphatically phrases it, have delivered 'a round unvarnished tale'
it would have been almost impossible that he should have been
convicted; for the jurymen of this country (to their honour be it
recorded) are exceedingly tender of the lives of their fellow-
citizens. The presumption then, in this particular case, is very
strong that the malefactor must have denied his crime from a species
of pride altogether unwarrantable. We would not wish to be thought
severe or uncharitable in our conjectures; but it is improbable that
any man could have been possessed of the contents of a mail, which
had been robbed, without knowing how they came into his possession.
His sending the draft to the banker's for acceptance is a proof of
the most egregious folly; for he must have been morally certain that
his messenger would be stopped, and that his own detection would
inevitably ensue. If we suppose that his love induced him to take
this dangerous step, we should recollect that he had been married
before, and was therefore the less likely to have been involved in a
passion so violent as to tempt him to so dangerous an experiment.
Upon the whole, notwithstanding all appearances to the contrary, the
presumption is very strong that this man was in distressed
circumstances, which he sought to repair by marriage; but, finding
his hopes at least postponed, he took the most dangerous method
imaginable to repair his shattered fortunes. It is astonishing that,
during his sickness, he should not have had recollection enough to
induce him to desist from carrying into execution the dangerous plan
he had formed. In general sickness is productive of thoughts more
serious than those which attend us in perfect health; but the whole
of this unhappy man's conduct should teach us to pray continually
for the assisting grace of God, that we may not be led into
temptation, but delivered from all the evils that surround us; so
that, after a short passage through this troublesome world, we may
be received into the arms of eternal mercy!



RICHARD MORGAN
Executed for Privately Stealing, 27th May, 1772

Illustration: Morgan at the club


This malefactor was a native of Ellesmere, in Shropshire, descended
of poor parents, whose virtuous characters were the greatest part of
their possession. They bestowed on him as good an education as their
circumstances would admit, and were careful to instruct him in the
duties of religion. When he grew towards years of maturity he
entered into the service of a farmer in the neighbourhood, with whom
he lived near three years with an unblemished reputation. After this
he engaged to serve other farmers in different parts of England,
continuing to labour as a husbandman till he became almost two-and-
twenty years of age, and then repaired to London, in order to obtain
subsistence by his honest endeavours. He had not been long in town
before he entered into the service of Mr. Hotchkin, a capital linen-
draper near Smithfield Bars. His principal business was to carry out
parcels, and his behaviour was such, for a considerable time, as
entitled him to the approbation of his master.

At length he was unfortunate enough to become acquainted with the
servant of a distiller in the neighbourhood, who introduced him into
a set of company which led to his ruin. Morgan had been hitherto
remarkable for his sobriety; but a fatal change soon took place. The
distiller's servant was one of a low alehouse club, of which Morgan
became a member: and each of the company paid fourpence halfpenny
for his evening's expenses in beer and tobacco. It was in this club
that the first taint appears to have been given to Morgan's morals.
Some of the company, who were chiefly porters, used to boast how
considerably they defrauded their masters, and even mentioned the
names of the parties to whom they sold the stolen effects. For some
time Morgan appeared shocked at the idea of obtaining money by such
a violation of the laws of duty and integrity, and actually absented
himself from the club; but at length the servant of the distiller
prevailed on him to rejoin the company, which he did, but with a
reserve in his own mind that he would not be concerned in any of
their iniquitous transactions. These good resolutions, however, did
not last any considerable time; for his companions, wishing him to
enter into their practices, artfully took him to the house of the
man who received the stolen goods, where he saw such various
articles which porters had stolen from their masters, and remained
undetected, that he was but too easily induced to commence the
illicit practice.

His mind being thus prepared for acts of dishonesty, he soon began
to purloin his master's effects, which he stole in considerable
quantities; and as Mr. Hotchkin had a very large stock, and dealt in
the wholesale trade, the articles could not be easily missed, so
that he had an opportunity of continuing his de predations for a
considerable space of time; and, indeed, when the articles were at
length missed, no one suspected Morgan to be the thief, as his
character had been hitherto irreproachable, and his behaviour such
as to entitle him to general respect. His custom was to convey the
stolen goods to a stable in Durham Yard, Chick Lane, where they were
deposited till the usual purchaser came, and bought them, and
carried them off. Morgan's practices in this way were so
considerable, that his companions of the club began to look on him
as a proper agent for disposing of such goods as should be stolen by
others; but this plan was defeated almost as soon as it was formed.

Mr. Hotchkin at length discovering that he had been robbed, and that
the depredations had been frequently renewed, and observing that not
any person had broken into his house, he concluded that the robber
must be one who lived in the family. In consequence hereof a person
was appointed to watch the motions of Morgan; and on his going out
he was followed to a house, whence he took several parcels to an
inn, to be carried by the Birmingham waggon. Inquiry being made into
the affair, it was discovered that Morgan had a considerable
quantity of goods destined for the same place; and these, being
examined, were found to be the property of Mr. Hotchkin, whose marks
were on the several pieces; on which the offender was taken into
custody, and carried before a magistrate. On his examination he
denied having been guilty of the crime alleged against him; but, as
the presumptive evidence of the fact was too strong to allow of his
being dismissed, he was committed to Newgate, till the ensuing
sessions at the Old Bailey, that his guilt or innocence might abide
the award of a jury.

On his trial the evidence against him was so conclusive that no
hesitation could be made to find him guilty, and judgment of death
passed of course. After conviction he acknowledged to the Ordinary 
of Newgate the justice of his sentence, and owned that he had
defrauded his master of goods to a considerable amount. He was
constant and regular in his devotions, both in the chapel and in his
cell; nor did he seem to entertain a hope of that mercy which he had
no right to expect. When he was told that his name was included in
the warrant for execution, he received the dreadful news with great
composure; and confessed that he had merited the shocking fate that
awaited him. He behaved even with pious resignation, and
acknowledged that faith in the merits of Christ by which poor
sinners arc to expect salvation. He was visited after conviction by
a number of people who had known him in the former part of life, and
who kindly assisted him in his solemn preparations for eternity. He
received the sacrament on the morning of his death, and repeated the
declarations he had formerly made of his guilt. At the fatal tree he
addressed himself to the surrounding multitude, earnestly desiring
servants not to defraud their employers. He prayed in the most
earnest manner, and so audibly as to be heard by great numbers who
attended his fatal exit. After the body had hung the customary time
it was delivered to his friends, in order to its being buried as
they might think proper. Richard Morgan suffered at Tyburn on the
27th of May, 1772.

From the case of this unfortunate man persons in a dependent
situation should principally learn two things; viz. never to injure
their masters; and by all means to avoid any connexion with low
company at alehouses, as the keeping such company may insensibly
involve them in expenses which may lead to the commitment of acts of
dishonesty. Honest countrymen are generally too fond of repairing to
London, in the vain hope of making that fortune which very few of
them ever acquire; and perhaps those who do might be more happy in
their native fields, undisturbed with the cares of the busy world.
It is not every man that grows rich that becomes happy of course;
and perhaps the contrary is more generally the case. Upon the whole,
we should learn resignation to the will of Providence, and be taught
the great doctrine of being content in any station in which we may
be placed:

'Life's but a short chase; our game's consent
Which most pursued is most compelled to fly
And he that mounts him on the swiftest hope
Shall often run his courser to a stand;
While the poor peasant, on some distant hill,
Undangered, and at ease, views all the sport,
And sees content take shelter in his cottage.'
SHAKESPEARE
(sicactually these lines are by Colley Cibber)



EDWARD BIRCH AND MATTHEW MARTIN
Executed for Forgery, 2nd January, 1772

The first-mentioned of these malefactors, Birch, was the son of very
respectable parents, and born at Hereford; and, after having
received a very liberal education, he served as a lieutenant in the
militia during the war. Being concerned in a matter respecting a
family estate, the right of which was litigating in the Court of
Chancery, he came to London in the year 1766; and as his business
obliged him to stay in town for a considerable time, and being of a
scheming turn of mind, and possessed of ready money, he determined
to employ it in some manner that he thought would prove
advantageous. While he was deliberating on the best method of
disposing of his cash, he became acquainted with a person named
Cobb, a mechanic of singular ingenuity, who had contrived a machine
for the catching of fish in much greater numbers than by the usual
methods. Mr. Cobb was not in circumstances to carry his plan into
execution, yet was exceedingly anxious to reap the fruits of his
ingenuity. It is not, therefore, to be wondered at that he readily
embraced an offer of partnership with Birch, who was able to lay
down the sum that might be wanted for the completion of the scheme.
This being the situation of both parties, the partnership of course
ensued, the terms of which were very advantageous to Birch. Mr. Cobb
having procured a patent to secure to him the sole emoluments to
arise from his scheme, Birch advanced the money to pay for it, and a
farther sum to fit out a vessel, which was sent to sea under the
immediate direction of Cobb. This step was intended merely to
ascertain the success that was likely to attend the scheme; but, as
the first trial exceeded the most sanguine expectations of either
party, Birch formed the ungenerous design of becoming sole
proprietor of the patent. With this view he found a pretence to
quarrel with Cobb. The scheme did not take complete effect; but the
partnership was dissolved on the following terms, viz. 'That Birch
should be allowed the use of Cobb's machine to fish with till such
time as the money owing to him was paid; while Cobb was to carry on
the fishery in what manner he thought proper.'

This agreement took place in the year 1768; and Cobb, being now
reduced to very low circumstances, embarked for Denmark, where he
continued many months. Birch, in the meantime, flattered himself
with the hope of obtaining a very considerable fortune by the new
project; and at this period he married a girl, with whom he received
a fortune of five hundred pounds. During Mr. Cobb's absence from
England Birch went to South Wales, where he engaged in the business
of the fishery, which, for some months, was attended with as great
success as could have been expected. In order to dispose to
advantage of the fish thus taken, an agent was employed to sell them
in London; and they were regularly sent up in machines constructed
for bringing them with expedition, and without injury. It happened
that a quarrel arose between Birch and the person who was his agent,
respecting the punctuality of payments; on which the latter was
arrested by Birch; but he instantly gave bail to the action, and
then prevailed on a rope-maker to arrest Mr. Birch. These matters
were litigated with the utmost warmth and imprudence on both sides;
till at length Birch found himself so embarrassed by the expenses of
law that he was obliged to take refuge in a prison. [Note: Surely no
man in his senses would deliberately embark in law. How many in
stances do we see of the lawyers swallowing up the whole property!
It is better for a man to submit to an injury than to be stripped of
all he has in the world, as is but too frequently the case.]

The business of his fishery was now wholly neglected, and at length
he determined to take the benefit of an insolvent act; and it is
said that he was perjured in this matter, swearing that he was in
Ireland at the time prescribed by law, though he had not been out of
this kingdom; but this we do not aver as a fact, unwilling to load
the unfortunate, and the deceased, with the imputation of crimes
which possibly they may never have committed: and we are the more
diffident of admitting the alleged crime in this particular case,
because it is probable that, if Birch had been perjured, he would
have been prosecuted with the utmost severity of the law. Be this as
it may, he was now in circumstances of great distress,having no
other support for himself and his wife than what arose from the
casual bounty of his friends. We are told that, for a year after he
was cleared by the act for the relief of insolvent debtors, he was
perpetually devising schemes to raise money, some of which were not
the most laudable: and that at length he engaged in a forgery, not
less extraordinary in the design than fatal in its consequences.

It happened that Sir Andrew Chadwick, who was one of the band of
gentlemen pensioners, was in possession of estates to a very
considerable amount. Sir Andrew, having attained a very great age,
had repeatedly drawn his will, at distant periods, but had not
signed his name to any will that he had made, though there were many
copies of what he intended to have done for his relations and
immediate heirs at law. Birch becoming acquainted with a woman who
had found one of the wills in an old trunk that had been the
property of Sir Andrew, the former seemed to think, on the perusal
of it, that some emolument might arise from the possession of this
paper.

In a short time afterwards Sir Andrew died; and, no will regularly
executed being found, a gentleman of Lancashire, who had married a
niece of the deceased, took possession of his fortune, in defect of
claim being made by any nearer relation. In the meantime Birch made
diligent inquiry after the relations of Sir Andrew, and at length
found that one of them, who lived in Ireland, had a better title to
the estate than the person who was then in possession of it. With a
view to make a private advantage, Birch made known his discovery to
Matthew Martin, the other subject of this melancholy narrative.
Martin was a watch maker by profession, and in easy circumstances.
He advanced a sum of money to enable Birch to go to Ireland, and
find out the right heir to the estate. Birch set out on this
expedition; and, having found more than one claimant, he returned to
London, and made a new will in the name of the deceased, conveying
the fortune to the Irish relations. This being done, Birch and
Martin submitted the forged will to the inspection of an attorney;
and it was agreed to commence an action for recovery against the
gentleman who was in possession of the estate.

It appeared that the presumptive will had been dated in the year
1764; but some drafts of wills made since that time by Sir Andrew
Chadwick being found among the papers of the deceased, a suspicion
arose that a forgery had been committed in the business; on which
Birch and Martin were taken into custody, and carried to Sir John
Fielding's office, where Birch's behaviour was plausible in a very
high degree; and he gave such an account of his becoming possessed
of the will as would have satisfied persons not aware of the knavery
of mankind. Several persons attended at the office, ready to bail
Birch and Martin; but the magistrate refused to accept of any bail,
and committed the prisoners to Newgate. In the interim between the
commitment and the trial, one of the most extraordinary
circumstances happened that was ever recorded in a work of this
nature. A paper-maker, who lived at Maidstone, being in town on his
private business, fell into company with the attorney who was
employed to carry on the prosecution; and, the conversation
happening to turn on the circumstances of the presumed forgery, he
begged to have a sight of the will, which at this time being in the
hands of Sir John Fielding, the attorney took him to the office of
that magistrate, where the will was presented to him; and no sooner
had he taken a view of it than he declared that, in the year 1768,
he had made the paper on which that very will was written.

The trial of the prisoners was brought on at the ensuing session of
gaol delivery at the Old Bailey. The paper-maker above mentioned was
an evidence, and the most material one, on the trial; for he proved
that the paper had a mark upon it, which he himself invented in the
year 1768, and he positively swore that the paper was of his own
manufacture. Though there were several collateral proofs of the
fact, yet they would not have been of sufficient weight to convict
the prisoners but for this positive evidence of the paper-maker.
Birch cross-examined the witnesses in such a manner as proved that
he was a man of subtlety and address; but, notwithstanding all his
artifices, both the prisoners were found guilty, after a trial which
continued thirteen hours. The counsel for the convicts moved an
arrest of judgment on the last day of the sessions, founded on a
point of law presumed to have arisen in their favour. No objection
being made to this motion, the sentence was postponed till the final
opinion of the learned judges had been taken on the case. This case
was learnedly argued before the judges (nine of whom were present)
at Sergeants' Inn Hall, in Michaelmas term, 1771; when the reverend
bench were unanimous in opinion that the convicts were guilty of the
crime alleged against them; in consequence of which they were
condemned to die.

After sentence of death was passed on them they behaved with a
decent and devout resignation to their fate; for, not entertaining
the least hope of that pardon which could not reasonably be
expected, they made every preparation for the awful change that was
to await them. On the day of execution they were fervent in their
devotions at the fatal tree; and, after the customary ceremonies on
such solemn occasions, they were turned off. After hanging the usual
time, their bodies were delivered to their friends in order to be
buried. These unhappy men suffered at Tyburn on the 2d of January,
1772.

The intervention of Providence in the detection of guilt is most
strongly exhibited in the case of these malefactors. Who could have
conceived that the discovery of forgery should have arisen from a
circumstance so apparently trifling as the writing a presumptive
will on one sheet of paper rather than on another? Yet so it
happened. Little did the forger think, when he purchased the sheet
of paper, that it was to be the immediate instrument of his own
destruction! We have had many opportunities, in the course of this
work, of remarking on the horrid nature and dangerous consequences
of forgery; but nothing has equalled the particularity of the cases
of Birch and Martin, and perhaps such an instance may not occur
again for an age: yet surely this ought to afford a lesson of the
highest caution, never to be guilty of a crime which leads to such
certain and absolute destruction. In the affair of the malefactors
in question their counsel started an objection, which left their
case to the consideration of the judges. Very few cases have we
known where the opinions of the judges differed from those of the
juries of this country. In fact, the juries, according to the
construction of our laws, and in the eye of reason, are the true
judges of the fact, the essential declarers of the guilt or
innocence of the party accused. Notwithstanding this, we ought to
think ourselves happy in the tender exertion of our legislative 
power. When one jury has found a man guilty, the slightest error,
real or accidental, will entitle his case to the retrospection of a
secondthat of the venerable bench of judges, who cannot be supposed
to be biassed by any interest, to be influenced by any
consideration, to give their opinions in favour of either party,
contrary to the established rules of right, and the known laws of
the land. Upon the whole, we have a claim to triumph in the
protection afforded us by the laws; and those who wilfully
transgress them ought to be punished in the most exemplary manner.



WILLIAM EDWARDS WHITE
Executed for Murder, 25th October, 1772

The cruelty and depravity of this villain alone deserve notice in
our Criminal Catalogue. He first broke his oath to God, that he
would faithfully serve his king, as a good soldier; then deserted
the service of his country; and, thus let loose upon the public, he
fell to plundering and murdering the innocent traveller. How many
were his victims, or to what amount he had plundered, does not
appear; for he was a hardened villain, denying at the very gallows
the murder which we shall now proceed to relate. On the 10th of
September, preceding his execution, the body of a man was found near
the public house called the Hampshire Hog, on the Hammersmith road,
near London. The skull was fractured in a shocking manner, and the
pockets of the deceased were found rifled of all their contents.
Suspicion soon fell upon the soldier who had been, seen lurking
about the neighbourhood, and White was therefore apprehended, and
committed to Newgate.

On Friday, the 20th of October, 1773, he was brought to his trial at
the Old Bailey; and, without a doubt remaining in the mind of the
jury, they found him guilty. Being convicted of murder, execution
must follow within forty-eight hours; and, in order to give the
unhappy culprits as much time as possible to make their peace with
the Almighty, they are generally tried on a Friday, and, Sunday
being by the law deemed dies non, execution cannot take place until
the day after; and the Monday subsequent to the conviction of White
was the anniversary of the accession to the throne of King George
III. A writer of the time says, 'It is remarkable, that, since the
25th of October, 1760 (the accession), no man had been hanged on
that day, in London, except a murderer, who then suffered death at
the end of Bow Street, Covent Garden.

White was executed at Tyburn, October the 25th, 1773, and died an
obdurate and unrepenting sinner, acknowledging the robbery, but
denying the murder.

Two days after his execution the same gallows suspended five well-
looking and penitent men, whose fate caused very different
sensations in the breasts of the spectators. These men were

Thomas Ashby and Edward Lundy M'Donald, for a burglary in the house
of Mr. Edmund Bailey, in Oxford Street, and stealing therefrom a
quantity of plate and other effects.

William Cox, for stealing bank notes and cash to the amount of four
hundred and forty pounds, the property of Mr. Kendrick, in Oxford
Street.

Emanuel Peel, for breaking into the house of William Bakewell, Esq.
in Jermyn Street, and stealing thereout a quantity of plate, and
other valuable articles;

and John Sterling, for forging a will, purporting to be the last
testament of Elizabeth Shooter, with an intent to defraud the South
Sea Company of three hundred and fifty pounds.

Their behaviour was very devout, and Sterling was remarkably
penitent. Just before Cox was turned off he whispered something to
Mr. Toll, who acted as Ordinary, and who, with a loud and distinct
voice, acquainted the spectators 'that William Cox begged their
prayers; that he acknowledged he committed the crime for which he
was about to suffer, and hoped that God would receive his soul.' On
this the dying man expressed much consolation, and the people cried
'Amen.' A proof that these unfortunate men were respected and pitied
on their journey to eternity appears from a circumstance somewhat
unusual, of both the sheriffs, with their under-sheriffs, attending
on horseback, and two men in black scarfs and hatbands, and with
black staves in their hands, walking before the carts which conveyed
the prisoners to the place of execution, where they were allowed an
hour and a half in their devotionsa circumstance not then
remembered. Mourning-hearses attended, to take away the bodies of
Cox and Sterling; and the others were delivered to their friends.
The concourse of people on this occasion, and the awfulness of the
scene, were unparalleled.



ROBERT POWEL
Executed for Forgery, 2nd January, 1772

This unhappy victim to the violated laws of his country was a native
of Merioneth, in North Wales. His parents were poor people, but were
distinguished by the honesty and regularity of their conduct. They
educated him as well as their circumstances would permit them; and
then sent him to London, in the hope that he might be able to
advance himself in life. Powel had not been long in town before he
obtained the place of a shopman, in the service of a tradesman of
reputation. In this station his behaviour was so unexceptionable,
and there was so much of gracefulness in his person and manner, that
his master soon raised his wages, and sought every opportunity of
promoting his interest: indeed every person in the family was
pleased with the decorum that appeared in all his behaviour; which
was laid down as a rule of conduct that ought to be observed and
copied by the other servants. By an even and steady course of
frugality Powel saved money enough to embark in business for
himself; and, on the death of his master, he courted the sister of
Mr. Taylor Barrow, who held a place of some importance in the
Custom-house. Mr. Barrow, exclusive of his place, carried on a
considerable business; and Mr. Powel, having engaged in trade, was
as successful as the most sanguine of his friends could have wished
him to be; and, in general, was looked upon to be a young man in a
thriving way of business. In fact, he was soon in very flourishing
circumstances, and his success induced him, contrary to the advice
of his friends, to take a large farm a few miles from the
metropolis; which took up more of his time and attention than it can
be presumed a tradesman could spare from his business; so that the
wonder will be less that ruin should ensue.

Having involved himself by undertaking too many concerns, he was
reduced in circumstances, and determined on the commission of that
forgery which cost him his life. His brother-in-law, Mr. Taylor
Barrow, was possessed of very considerable property in the East-
India stock. Powel being apprized of this, and knowing that stock
bore a very high price at that time, forged his name to an order for
the selling out four hundred pounds. This being done, he went to a
coffee-house, and inquired for a broker. The master of the house
recommended him to a Mr. Portis, who was largely concerned in the
brokery business. Mr. Portis, being sent for, attended Powel to the
East-India House in Leadenhall Street, where the latter declared
that he was Taylor Barrow, the proprietor of the stock, which he
transferred by imitating the hand of his brother-in-law with so much
art, that no suspicion arose of the forgery. On the day the stock
was transferred Portis sold it to a third person, and, gave the
produce to Powel, who immediately quitted his family, and went into
Wales, on a visit to his relations. It was not long before a
discovery was made of the forgery, and a large reward was offered
for the apprehension of Powel; but Portis being totally unacquainted
with his name, and none of his friends or relations conceiving that
he could have been concerned in such a transaction, no suspicion of
his guilt arose for a considerable time.

In the meantime Portis exerted his utmost diligence to discover the
offender: but all his endeavours proved fruitless, till a 
circumstance, merely accidental, occasioned his apprehension. Powel
continued in Wales till he presumed the affair was forgotten in
London, where he was received in the most affectionate manner by his
relations, who had no idea of what had passed; for, if they had,
they would undoubtedly have advised him to consult his safety in
flight. Powel now lived on Dowgate Hill; and, about a month after
his return to London, he went to Cheapside on business, and after
that to Lombard Street, when Mr. Portis met him near the Post-
office. Powel happened at this time to be dressed in the same
clothes that he wore when the forgery was committed; and Mr. Portis
immediately recollected his person, but was unwilling to take him
into custody till he was fully convinced that he was not mistaken in
the man. Powel, observing that Portis regarded him with some
attention, turned his face aside, from a consciousness of guilt, and
to prevent the other from having a full knowledge of him. Mr. Portis
passed him, but immediately turned back, and took a second, and
afterwards a third view of him; when, no doubt remaining in his mind
that he was the real offender, he took him by the arm, and begged
him to accompany him to the coffee-house where they had first met.
Powel pretended not to have any knowledge of the other party; but
Portis resolutely insisting that he should go with him, the latter
complied with as much grace as he could, to prevent any disturbance
happening in the street. They no sooner got to the coffee house than
the master and one of the waiters, at the desire of Portis, paid an
attentive regard to Powel, and averred that he was the man who had
asked for the broker to sell the stock. On this the prisoner was
taken before the sitting alderman at Guild hall, and, his person
being positively sworn to, the magistrate committed him to Newgate,
in order to his being tried at the next sessions at the Old Bailey.

When the trial came on the culprit produced a number of people to
prove that he was in the country at the time the forgery was
committed; but the jury, not being satisfied with their testimony,
brought in their verdict that he was guilty. When he was taken to
the bar to receive sentence of death, his counsel moved that the
judgment might be postponed, 'on account of some informalities in
the record;' and the Court, ever attentive to the laws of humanity,
acceded to the motion. The consequence was, that in Michaelmas term,
1771, the case was learnedly argued before the judges, who were
unanimously of opinion that Powel had been guilty of the forgery;
whereupon sentence was passed that he should undergo the judgment
awarded by law.

After condemnation his behaviour was highly proper for a man in his
unhappy situation. He was earnest and regular in his devotions, made
every proper preparation for death, and resigned himself to his fate
with the composure that became a Christian, who placed his hopes on
a better world than that, to a longer residence in which he had
forfeited his title. He was indulged with a mourning-coach to the
place of execution, where his conduct was such as proved him
properly affected by his situation. He appeared sincere and ardent
in his devotions; and after he was turned off, and his body had hung
the usual time, it was delivered to his friends for interment.
Robert Powel suffered at Tyburn on the 2nd of January, 1772.

In the case of this offender we see the almost absolute
impossibility of concealing a guilty transaction. His name was
unknown to Portis; his crime was a secret even from his relations;
and he remained in Wales till he thought the affair was forgotten:
yet he had been but a short time in London before he found himself
in Newgate for the commission of that very crime which he flattered
himself had been effectually concealed; and an ignominious death
followed. Mysterious are the ways of Providence, and past finding
out. Who that reads this story will scruple to admire that divine
wisdom and jus tice which cannot be comprehended? If Powel could
have been contented with his situation he might have lived in credit
and reputation. The keeping of farms near London has been the ruin
of many a tradesman. A regular attention to one branch of business
is generally productive of more profit than the embarking in a
variety of schemes; and as such we would recommend it to all our
readers who are engaged in the mercantile line.



JOSEPH GUYANT AND JOSEPH ALLPRESS
Executed for Robbing the Mail, 8th July, 1772

The first-mentioned of these offenders was a native of Essex,
descended from honest but poor parents, who gave him as good an
education as consisted with their circumstances, and then bound him
apprentice to a smith, with whom he served his time with fidelity,
after which he laboured as a journeyman in his own profession.
Quitting the county of Essex, he repaired to Edmonton, near London,
where he married, and commenced business on his own account.

For a considerable time be was as successful in trade as could be
reasonably expected, but at length sustained a loss to which he
attributed all his future misfortunes. Guyant, having been out
receiving money from several people who employed him, was stopped on
his return to his own house by two footpads, who robbed him of above
sixty pounds, and then bound him to a tree. This loss was a matter
of great importance to him; but it was much aggravated by the
consequences that followed it: for, as the robbery happened, in the
day time, he was advised to sue the county, to indemnify him for the
loss; but, failing to adduce the necessary proofs, he lost his suit,
and was involved in still farther difficulties by the consequence.
The expense of the suit being considerable, Guyant was arrested, and
sought refuge in a prison. In consequence of a subscription among
his friends, he removed himself to the Fleet, where he continued
till an act for the relief of insolvent debtors enabled him to
obtain his liberty. He had at this time a family which was in want
of the necessaries of life; but, during his imprisonment, he had
acquired such a habit of idleness that he was still less disposed to
provide for them than before.

It will be now proper that we say something of Joseph Allpress, the
person concerned with Guyant in robbing the mail. Allpress was a
native of St. Ives, in Huntingdonshire, and, like his accomplice,
had served his apprenticeship to a smith. After his time was expired
he laboured a considerable time in draining the fens in the Isle of
Ely; and then his ill fortune led him to Edmonton, where he
contracted an acquaintance with Guyant, which ended in the most
fatal consequences; for Guyant, having now lost all relish for a
life of industry, persuaded the other to be concerned with him in
deer-stealing. This proposal was but too well relished by Allpress,
who, without reflecting on the dangerous tendency of such a
practice, embarked in the scheme with Guyant, and they robbed the
parks of several gentlemen in the neighbourhood.

Encouraged by what they deemed success, because they remained
undetected, they broke into the church at Edmonton, and carried off
some of the communion plate; but it was not known who were the
offenders till after they were convicted of robbing the mail. A very
little time had passed after the sacrilege, when Guyant proposed to
Allpress the fatal scheme which ended in the destruction of them
both; intimating, at the same time, that their fortunes might be
made by the putting off the bank-notes. Allpress declared that he
had never seen a bank-note in his life, and confessed that he was
very illiterate; but, overborne by the persuasions of the other, he
at length agreed to be concerned in robbing the mail. This shocking
resolution being made, they lost no time in the attempt to carry it
into execution, the first step to which was the preparing an axe,
hardened to such a degree as to cut iron. Having thus resolved on
their plan, they waited in the road, at a place called Houndsfield,
for the arrival of the northern mail. At length the post-boy
arrived, and had with him a person named John Thomas, to whom he had
given a lift on the road. Guyant stopped the horses of the mail-
cart, and threatened instant destruction to Thomas and the driver,
unless they immediately got down. This threat was too terrible not
to be complied with; on which the post-boy was ordered to drive his
carriage into an adjacent field, and Thomas was compelled to attend
him. The robbers now bound the other parties to a tree, and then
demanded the key of the mail-cart; but, finding that it was not in
possession of the driver, they took the cart across the field, broke
it open with their axe, and then took out some of the bags, and
buried a number of the notes in the earth.[Note: This circumstance
first appeared on the examination of the prisoners at Sir John
Fielding's, when the writer of this account was present, and saw the
notes, discoloured by lying in the ground.]

The driver of the mail-cart, and his companion, remained bound to
the tree till morning, when the latter happily freed himself, and
then gave liberty to the other. On searching for the horses, they
found them grazing in the field, and discovered that the cart had
been broken as above mentioned. The post-boy instantly drove to
London, and gave proper notice of the injury that had been done. The
secretary of the General Post-office immediately advertised a reward
of two hundred pounds for the discovery of the offenders; but
nothing transpired for some months, till at length Allpress ventured
to London, to procure the acceptance of some of the stolen drafts;
the worst scheme that could possibly have been devised: for, the
payment of these drafts being previously stopped, Allpress was taken
into custody; and, being carried before Sir John Fielding, he
immediately confessed the fact, on which he was committed to prison,
and some officers of justice sent in search of Guyant, who soon
found him, and discovered several bags in a yard behind his house,
in which were a number of letters which had been stolen from the
mail. Both offenders were lodged in Tothill Fields' Bridewell, and
at the proper time removed to Newgate, in preparation for their
trials at the Old Bailey; where they were convicted on the fullest
evidence, and received sentence of death.

After conviction, and indeed long before it, they exhibited the
truest penitence that perhaps was ever observed by illiterate men in
their unhappy situation. They were exceedingly attentive to the
instructions of the Ordinary of Newgate, and made the devoutest
preparations for their fatal exit. On the morning of execution they
received the sacrament with every mark of the sincerest contrition,
and made a solemn declaration of their hope of eternal bliss through
the merits of the Redeemer of mankind. On their way to the place of
execution they behaved with the utmost decency, and, when arrived at
the fatal spot, Guyant was so weak that it was necessary for two men
to support him while the executioner fixed the halter round his
neck; yet he was fervent in his devotions, notwithstanding his
weakness. Both the malefactors begged the spectators to take warning
by their fatal exit, and, having finished their devotions, suffered
the sentence of the law; after which their bodies were cut down, and
carried to Finchley Common, where they were hung in chains. Joseph
Guyant and Joseph Allpress were hanged at Tyburn on the 8th of July,
1772.

In the case of the malefactors before us we see a remarkable in
stance of the progressive nature of vice. Guyant and Allpress were
first deer-stealers, then guilty of sacrilege, and at length
ventured on the horrid plan of robbing the mail. Those who do not
see, in this instance, the absurdity of encouraging the first
emotions to vice, will not be convinced by any arguments that we can
offer. We shall, therefore, drop the subject, to make a remark which
is new in a work of this kind. When these unhappy men were examined
at the public office in Bow Street, there appeared a degree of
contrition in their countenances and behaviour, that no language can 
describe. They solicited it as a favour of Sir John Fielding that
they might be re-committed to Tothill Fields' Bridewell; alleging as
a reason, that the devotions at that place were more regularly
performed than at other prisons; and this we have good reason to
believe to be the fact. The governor of that prison is a religious
man, and laudably exerts himself in the instruction and edification
of the unhappy people who fall under his care. This is a rare
instance, which cannot be sufficiently applauded, and we trust that
Mr. Smith (the governor) will pardon the liberty we have now [Note:
in February, 1779] taken in mentioning his name on an occasion which
is intended, and ought, to do him honour. Happy would it be if every
keeper of a prison was equally zealous to promote the eternal
welfare of the unhappy persons committed to his care. But, while we
say this, we must in common justice remark, that the prisons
throughout England were never managed with a stricter regard to the
laws of decency and regularity than at present.



JOSEPH COOPER
Executed for Robbing his Master, 30th June, 1772

This man's crime and ingratitude, as far as respects the robbery, is
precisely the case of George Barnwell. Cooper, like him, unhappily
became the dupe of a second Milwood, and through her instigation he
was worked up to rob his benefactor. Surely no servant who has even
seen the representation of Lillo's fine tragedy, founded on a fact,
would ever dare to venture upon the commission of so foul a crime.

Joseph Cooper was the son of very poor, but honest, parents: his
father died when he was but seven years of age, and his mother, thus
deprived of a protector, was reduced to take in washing for the
maintenance of herself and three helpless children, of whom Joseph
was the eldest. Through some friends, who pitied her distress, this
boy was admitted into a charity school, where he continued till he
was fourteen years of age, when Mr. Beaumont, a cutler in Redcross
Street, took him as an apprentice, in mere compassion to his
destitute situation of life. Mr. Beaumont was a man in a very
extensive way of business; so that the youth had an opportunity of
becoming a complete master of his profession; and such was his
diligence and good behaviour for a considerable time, that perhaps
no lad in such a situation as he was ever acquired a better
character, or was more esteemed by the neighbours and others who had
connections with his master. Mr. Beaumont, observing this excellent
disposition, treated him with the utmost kindness, with a view to
inspire him with a resolution of continuing in the practice of that
duty which was so likely to be productive of his present and future
happiness. Unhappily, however, for Cooper, this gentle treatment had
not its desired effect; yet he served out his apprenticeship with
fidelity, and afterwards lived some time with his master as a
journeyman. Mr. Beaumont still continued to treat him with his usual
kindness; and so generous was his behaviour towards him, that the
least attention to his own interest would most probably have
preserved him from ruin, and enabled him to have made a very
creditable figure in life.

Unfortunately for himself, Cooper got acquainted with a number of
young fellows of dissolute character, who frequented a public house
in Golden Lane, where they spent their time in scenes of riot and
dissipation, equally calculated to destroy their health of body and
peace of mind. Cooper's former principles of virtue were all
unhinged by an association with such obnoxious companions, and his
mind was soon contaminated with ideas that led with rapid and
certain progress to his destruction. At length, through the
instigation of his companions, he frequented houses of ill-fame,
which introduced him to the company of women of abandoned character;
one of whom he became intimately acquainted with, and cohabited with
her at a house of an infamous description in Denmark Court, in the
Strand

In the conversation between Cooper and his girl, the latter advised
him to rob his late master, as the readiest way to raise a supply to
support their present extravagance; and this scheme was thought the
more practicable as Cooper, having lived several years in the house,
knew all the avenues to it, and every part of which he was well
acquainted with. Cooper at first appeared to be shocked at the
simple idea of so basely injuring a man who had protected him in the
early part of life, and had, on all occasions, proved himself a
disinterested friend; and he actually, for some time, refused to
have any concern in such an ungenerous transaction: at length the
arguments of the girl prevailed, and he resolved on the commission
of the crime which terminated in his destruction. It was Mr.
Beaumont's custom to spend his evening at a public house in Old
Street; and on his return home he carefully locked his doors, and
observed that every other place of possible entrance was made fast,
in order to prevent the admission of robbers: yet his vigilance
proved fruitless, for Cooper, whom of all men he would have least
suspected, became the ungenerous infringer on the property of his
benefactor. Mr. Beaumont, having seen his house secure at night,
retired to rest; but about two o'clock the next morning he was
awakened by a noise that seemed to be in his room. Terrified in a
high degree by this unexpected visit, he was for some time afraid of
venturing out of his bed; but at length, hearing that some person
had gone out of his chamber, and shut the door, he got up, and
discovered that his bureau had been broken open, and a hundred
guineas stolen from it. He likewise observed that the lock of the
chamber door, and the chain which confined it, had been forced open
by means of a chisel.

As it was presumed that the person who had committed the robbery
could not be at any great distance, Mr. Beaumont alarmed the
watchmen, who made an immediate pursuit; and, though they did not
overtake the robber, they presumed that they were near him, from
hearing the trampling of feet hastily moving in the street, as those
of a person flying from a pursuer. The circumstances attending this
robbery made it almost evident that the person who committed it must
have been intimately acquainted with the avenues of the house; and
Mr. Beaumont was induced to suspect that Cooper was the thief, from
what he had then lately heard of his abandoned course of life. Mr.
Beaumont therefore sent for a constable, and at seven o'clock the
following morning Cooper was taken into custody at the house where
he resided in, Denmark Court in the Strand. He at first denied
having had any concern in the robbery; but, being conveyed to his
master's house, the precise money lost, except one guinea, was found
on him. Mr. Beaumont sent for a neighbour, named Dyson, to advise
him how to act, and expressed, with tears, his aversion to the
thought of prosecuting him. Mr. Dyson told him it would be unsafe to
discharge him; on which he was conveyed to the Compter, and, on his
examination before the sitting alderman, such strong evidence of his
guilt appeared, that he was committed to Newgate, to take his trial
at the next Old Bailey sessions.

After a fair and candid trial the jury brought in a verdict of
guilty, but joined in recommending him as an object of the royal
clemency; and Mr. Beaumont, his master, signed a petition in behalf
of the wretched convict; but, after the report was made to the king,
he was included among those who were ordered for execution. He
behaved in the most contrite manner at the fatal tree, where he
confessed that he had merited that public and ignominious death
which the law had justly awarded for his crimes. He suffered at
Tyburn on June the 30th, 1772.



LIEUTENANT-GENERAL WILLIAM GANSEL
Tried for Firing a Pistol at John Hyde, 8th September,
1773

General Gansel, having greatly impaired his fortune by a life of
gaiety, had been several years under great pecuniary embarrassments,
from which he was using his utmost endeavours to extricate himself
at the time when the transaction happened which gave rise to the
trial, of which it is our present business to relate the 
particulars.

In the forenoon of the 26th of August, 1773, Mr. Lee, an eminent
surgeon, applied to John Hyde to arrest General Gansel for a debt of
a hundred and thirty-four pounds. They went to the proper office,
and obtained a special capias; after which the officer applied to
his brother, Thomas Hyde, Henry Feltus, William Sleigh, and Richard
Reeves, to assist in the intended capture. Between two and three in
the afternoon Mr. Lee met the bailiff and his assistants, and,
accompanied by John Hyde, went to the house of Mr. Mayo, in Craven
Street, Strand; the other men being appointed to wait at some
distance. The street door being open, they went into the parlour,
and Mr. Lee asked Mrs. Mayo whether General Gansel lodged in her
house. Being answered in the affirmative, Hyde went into the street,
and, having beckoned for his companions to come up, attempted to go
towards the general's apartments; but on the stairs he was opposed
by two boys, who were brothers, and servants to the general. At this
time the other bailiffs entered the passage, and John Hyde having
struck a knife from the hand of one of the boys with a walking-
stick, and thrown it out of the window, he and his brother were soon
overpowered, and bolted in the yard. John Hyde deposed that, when
the boys were in the yard, he proceeded towards the second floor,
and observing the general, with whose person he was well acquainted,
upon the landing-place, hastened towards him, and placed his knee
between the chamber door and the wainscot, and endeavoured to force
into the room, when the general discharged a pistol, the ball from
which passed through the upper panel of the door, towards the hinge,
and struck the wainscot on the staircase; that he then got into the
room, and, clapping the general on the shoulder, said 'Sir, you are
my prisoner;' when the general, with his left arm over his right
shoulder, pointed another pistol at his face; but that, by suddenly
stooping his head, he fortunately escaped the ball, which passed
through the hat of Henry Feltus; that the general was then with much
difficulty forced downstairs, and put into a hackney-coach, which
conveyed him to a lock-up house kept by a sheriff's officer, named
Armstrong, whence he was soon afterwards removed to Newgate. Feltus
produced the hat through which the ball of the second pistol had
passed; but neither his evidence, nor that of Thomas Hyde, Sleigh,
or Reeves, materially differed from that of the first witness.

The general said that, though he was not wholly unused to speak in
public, his ill state of health, and other circumstances, had given
rise to an apprehension that he might be incapable on the present
occasion to do justice to his cause in an ex tempore address, and he
had therefore reduced his defence to writing. He then read the
defence, which, among other matters, set forth, that being informed
by his servants, Henry and James, that the house was surrounded by
armed ruffians, and, presently after, hearing a violent, uproar at
the head of the stairs, he locked himself into his chamber, against
the door of which he placed an elbow chair; and, the uproar
increasing, he fired off a pistol, pointed to the upper part of the
door, with a view of deterring the assailants, who soon broke into
the room, the forcing the door throwing him down, and the second
pistol going off without design, while he was falling. He said that,
from a perusal of 'Blackstone's Commentaries,' he was taught to
believe that an Englishman's house is his castle, and that a room
hired for a certain time was to be considered as his castle; that he
paid for his apartments by the year; and that he had occupied them
eight-and-thirty years, sixteen of which Mr. Mayo had been his
landlord; and that he conceived he had an undoubted right of
defending himself in his own habitation. In the course of his
address the prisoner mentioned several persons whom he desired might
be examined on his behalf. Several witnesses swore that the bolt of
the lock belonging to the general's chamber door had been strained,
and the screws of the receiver of the bolt forced out of the wood;
and they likewise deposed that, from a very particular examination,
they were confident the ball must have took a different direction,
had the pistol been fired when the door was open; adding that, when
the door was open only three inches, they perceived that the
impression made by the ball on the wainscot of the staircase was not
nearly in a right line with the hole in the panel in the door, but
that, when the door was perfectly closed, there was an exact
correspondence between the hole through which the ball passed and
the mark where it afterwards struck the wainscot. Mrs. Mayo swore
that from the time the transaction happened the premises had not
been seen by any person but in her presence, and that no alterations
whatever had been made.

The above is a faithful abstract of the evidence adduced for and
against the prisoner, on an indictment for feloniously shooting at
John Hyde: the first count charging him with firing off a pistol
held in his right, and the second with firing at the same man
another pistol held in his left hand. After the jury had remained
out of Court some time, they brought in their verdict, 'Not guilty.'
The general was arraigned on two other indictments: one for
feloniously shooting at Thomas Hyde; and the other for feloniously
shooting at Henry Feltus: but the counsel for the prosecution
informed the Court that, 'as the general was acquitted on the
merits, he should waive proceeding on the two last indictments.'
General Gansel was tried at the Sessions House in the Old Bailey on
Wednesday, the 8th of September, 1773.

It was imagined that the principal matter for the decision of the
Court would have been 'Whether the law would justify a man in
opposing a forcible entry into his place of habitation, and how far
the character, office, and authority of the assailants were to be
considered in mitigation of a violent attack?' but the question took
a turn very different from what was expected.

The evidence of John Hyde and his associates set forth that the door
was partly open when the general fired; but the contrary appeared
from the depositions of other witnesses. It does not seem that the
first pistol was pointed immediately at any person; for the hole in
the door was considerably higher than the head of the tallest man;
and it is very probable that the second pistol went off while the
general was falling. Thus the matter seems to have been understood
by jury. Nothing but the last extremity of danger can justify the
use of fire-arms, or other desperate weapons. There is something
extremely shocking in the idea of taking away the life of a fellow-
creature when he is unprepared for eternity, Let our readers
remember that, if it should prove their misfortune to labour under
injury and oppression, the most eligible means of obtaining redress
will be by an application to the legislative power.



ISAAC DARKING, Alias DUMAS
Executed for Highway Robbery, 16th April, 1761

Tins malefactor was born in Eastcheap, where his father carried on
the business of a cork-cutter. While very young he gave pregnant
proofs of his attachment to what is called pleasure: a life of
gaiety and dissipation had too many charms for him; and he was
hailed among the young rakes, and even the ladies of the town, as a
youth of very superior qualifications. His attachment to women was
remarkable; and this leading him into great expense, he had recourse
to the highway to support his extravagance; the consequence of which
was that he was apprehended, and, being tried at Chelmsford, was
capitally convicted, and received sentence of death; but, being then
very young, the judge respited him till the following assizes, when
he obtained a pardon, on the condition of transportation for
fourteen years. Previous, however, to his being transported, the
prisoners had formed a design of murdering the keeper, turnkey, &c.
in order to effect their escape; and Darking having obtained some
knowledge of the secret, he made a discovery of it; the consequence
of which was that his sentence of transportation was remitted, on
the terms of his serving as a soldier in the plantations. Hereupon
he was conducted to the Savoy prison in London, whence he made
several efforts to escape; but, not succeeding, he at length sailed
with many others, and was put on shore at Antigua; but the life of a
soldier being highly disagreeable to him, he determined to quit the
service without permission us soon as possible. He had not been long
on the island before he ingratiated himself with the captain of a
ship, to whom he promised a large reward if he would land him in
England. Hereupon the captain took him on board, and concealed him
in the hold of the ship; so that, though diligent search was made
after him, he escaped undiscovered.

On his arrival in his native country he renewed his depredations on
the highway, and committed a variety of robberies in the western
counties, and in the middle of the kingdom; but, apprehensive of the
consequences that might ensue, he entered on board the Royal George
man of war, in which he was rated as a midshipman. In the summer of
the year 1760 the ship lay at Portsmouth; and Darking, getting leave
of absence for some weeks, employed this interval in committing a
variety of robberies, of which the most remarkable was the
following:

Lord Percival being travelling the Bath road on the 22nd of June,
Darking met him near the Devizes, and presented a pistol, demanding
his money on pain of instant death. The highwayman had a crape over
his face. Lord Percival gave him thirteen guineas; but, dissatisfied
with that sum, he insisted on having more; on which his lordship was
so provoked that he forced the pistol from his hand, and, pulling
him to the ground, leapt from the chaise to take him into custody.
Darking now ran away, and Lord Percival pursued him. The highwayman
turned about, presented a pistol, and demanded his purse: but his
lordship declaring he had no more money, Darking mounted his horse,
and rode off, having first desired that Lord Percival would not
appear against him if he should be tried.

Being apprehended on the following day, he was committed to prison,
and brought to trial at the next assizes held at Salisbury, when he
was acquitted, because Lord Percival would not swear positively to
his person: yet the circumstances against him were remarkably
strong; for the money found on him agreed with what Lord Percival
had been robbed of, a pistol was in his possession which appeared to
match with that his lordship had lost, and a piece of crape was
found in his pocket. In consequence of questions asked on this
trial, Darking said that he was born in the West Indies, and was
quite a stranger to this country; that, on his way from Bath to
Portsmouth, he had lost his road; that, on the approach of night, he
went to a village to refresh himself; and that, when he was
apprehended, it could be no wonder that a benighted traveller should
appear confused. He owned that he had friends in England; but they
did not live near enough to do him any service on that occasion. He
declared that he had purchased a pair of pistols, one of which he
had lost on the road, and was probably picked up by the person who
committed the robbery with which he was charged. He said that the
confusion he appeared in when taken arose from his being accused of
a crime of which he was innocent; and accounted for the crape found
in his possession by saying it was what he had worn as a neckcloth,
having been in the king's service at the taking of Guadaloupe.
Darking was no sooner acquitted than he asked for some money which
had been taken from him on his apprehension, which the Court
directed to be delivered to him; and then the judge dismissed him,
having remarked on the generosity of his prosecutor, and advised him
to leave off such dangerous practices as those in which he had been
concerned. Being told he was now at his own disposal, he seemed full
of anxiety till his fetters were knocked off, and then he
immediately set out for London in a post-chaise.

During his confinement at Salisbury his genteel accomplishments were
much the subject of tea-table conversation; and he was visited by
the ladies, who seemed delighted with his discourse. These
circumstances gave rise to the following lines, which were published
in the newspapers on his acquittal

'Joy to thee, lovely thief! that thou
Hast 'scaped the fatal string;
Let gallows groan with ugly rogues
Dumas must never swing.

Dost thou seek money? to thy wants
Our purses we'll resign;
Could we our hearts to guineas coin,
Those guineas all were thine.

To Bath in safety let my lord
His loaded pockets carry
Thou ne'er again shall tempt the road,
Sweet youth! if thou wilt marry.

No more shall niggard travellers
Avoid thee;we'll insure 'em:
To us thou shalt consign thy balls
And pistols;we'll secure 'em.

Yet think not when the chains are off,
Which now thy legs bedeck,
To fly; in fetters softer far
We'll chain thee by the neck.'

Darking was so distinguished by the gracefulness of his person that
he was the favourite of unthinking women wherever he came; and it is
probable that, after this escape at Salisbury, he might have married
some woman of fortune if he could have divested himself of his
unhappy turn to extravagance, which led him to the highway whenever
he wanted a supply. Soon after his return to London he commenced his
former practices, infesting the roads round the metropolis for more
than six months, spending at bagnios, gaming-houses, and taverns,
what he acquired by his lawless practices. His robberies near town
had been so numerous that he became apprehensive of detection, and
therefore retired farther into the country, where he continued to 
rob some time; but at length returned to London. Having hired a
horse in Piccadilly, he travelled to Oxford, where he slept; and the
next day, returning towards London, he stopped a gentleman, named
Gammon, near Nettlebed, and robbed him of his watch and money.
Darking now turned back; but the gentleman proceeded towards town,
having first stopped at an inn, and left a description of the
highwayman. Mr. Gammon had not been gone more than two hours when
Darking called at the same inn, and gave the landlord two letters
directed to women in London; saying that he should not go to town
for two or three days, and begging that the letters might be
forwarded. From the description that Mr. Gammon had given, the
landlord concluded that Darking was the robber: yet, as he carried
pistols, he did not choose to secure him; but no sooner was he
departed than the landlord enclosed the letters in a cover, and sent
them to London by the post, directed to Mr. Gammon. These letters
giving a knowledge of Darking's lodgings, Mr. Gammon applied to Sir
John Fielding; in consequence of which proper measures were taken
for the apprehension of Darking, who was found in bed, some days
afterwards, with a woman of the town. He made an attempt to escape
out of the window, but was soon secured and lodged in Newgate.

On the approach of the assizes he was removed to Oxford by a writ of
habeas corpus; and, being tried before Baron Adams, was convicted on
the clearest evidence. When he was brought to the bar to receive
sentence of death he besought the clemency of the judge, petitioning
to be transported for life: in answer to this petition his lordship
addressed him as follows:

'Young man, you have been arraigned upon an indictment for a robbery
on the king's highway, and have been found guilty after a fair and
candid trial. From your youth, you might have expected to have lived
many years; and, from your education, might have been a comfort to
your friends and relations, as well as a service to your country;
but your engaging in vicious and immoral courses hath at last
brought you to this untimely end. A day of this sort you could not
but have expected, and it hath now overtaken you. Happy would it
have been for you that your former deliverance, in a situation such
as this, had been a memento to you to have altered your conduct. I
hope your present circumstances will have a better effect upon you,
and induce you to repentance. Make proper use of the time you have
to live, in endeavouring to make your peace with God, for you will
soon be in another world: your application to me for mercy is quite
in vain; it is not in my power to grant it; from the king alone it
is to be expected, of which, however, I can give you but little,
very little, hope.'

During the time this malefactor was in prison he frequently diverted
himself with reading The Beggars' Opera. He likewise drank freely;
nor did he seem to entertain a proper sense of the horrid situation
to which his vices had reduced him. On the day of execution his
behaviour was remarkably intrepid; and, at the place of his death,
he fitted the halter to his neck, and threw himself off with great
appearance of determined resolution. This criminal was hanged at
Oxford on the 16th of April, 1761. After the pathetic address
delivered by the judge to this convict it will be the less necessary
to make any particular remarks on his case. Those whose vices may
have tempted them to the commission of crimes within the cognizance
of the law, and who have not enough of virtue remaining to take
proper warning, and reform after conviction and conditional pardon,
deserve the fate they meet; and ought to die unpitied, as they have
lived enemies to the repose of their fellow-creatures!



SAMUEL MALE
Executed for Robbery, 25th March, 1773

The short life of this culprit was remarkable for producing two
surprising instances of the uncertainty of identity.

On the 4th of September, 1772,he was arraigned at the bar of the Old
Bailey, for robbing Mrs. Ryan, at which time, in a note taken of the
circumstance, he was called 'the unfortunate barber's boy,' being
then very young. The prosecutrix, and other evidence, swore
positively that the prisoner committed the robbery on the 17th of
June then last past. The Court consequently supposed conviction
would follow; but, being called on for his defence, he said he was
innocent, and that the books of the Court would prove where he was
on the day of the robbery. Reference was immediately made to the
records; and strange, yet true to relate, that, on the very day and
hour sworn to, Male was actually on his trial, at the bar where he
then stood, for another robbery, when he was unfortunate enough to
have been mistaken for the robber. He was consequently acquitted,
and his case greatly commiserated.

We might reasonably conclude that these escapes, when innocent,
would have deterred him from guilt; but the inside of Newgate will
very soon contaminate the youthful mind, and, though discharged with
honour, he came out a determined thief. His career of villainy was
short indeed; for in six months afterwards we find him expiating his
crimes at the gallows. He was at length charged with a real robbery,
committed by him on the person of Mrs. Grignion, and, being unable
longer to prove an alibi, as he had hitherto done, he was found
guilty. The circumstances of his acquittals, which might have proved
advantageous, now militated against him. Mercy could not be extended
to one who, in defiance of all warning, would turn robber. He
suffered at Tyburn March the 25th, 1773, along with Matthew Doyle,
for robbing Mr. Lewis Herne; Joseph Richardson and Jonathan Brannon,
for burglary. The ages of these four malefactors did but just
outnumber the scriptural number of the years of one man; yet it was
said, 'though young in years, they were old in iniquity.'

A very remarkable instance of personal similitude happened at New
York, in North America, in the year 1804. A man was indicted for
bigamy, under the name of James Hoag. He was met, as was supposed,
in a distant part of the country by some friends of his first wife
(for there, as well as in our own country, there can be but one real
wife), and apprehended. The prisoner denied the charge, and said his
name was Thomas Parker. On the trial, Mrs. Hoag, her relations, and
many other creditable witnesses, swore that he was James Hoag, and
she swore positively that he was her husband. On the other side, an
equal number of witnesses, and equally respectable, swore that the
prisoner was Thomas Parker; and Mrs. Parker appeared, and claimed
him as her husband.

The first party were again called by the Court, and they not only
again deposed to him, but that by stature, shape, gesture,
complexion, looks, voice, and speech, he was James Hoag. They even
described a particular scar on his forehead, by which he could be
known. On turning back the hair, the scar appeared. The others, in
return, swore that he had lived among them, worked with them, and
was in their company, on the very day of his alleged marriage with
Mrs. Hoag; Here the scales of testimony were balanced, for the jury
knew not which party to give credit to. Mrs. Hoag, anxious to gain
back her husband, declared be had a certain more particular mark on
the sole of his foot. Mrs. Parker avowed that her husband had no
such mark; and the man was ordered to pull off his shoes and
stockings. His feet were examined, and no mark appeared.

The ladies now contended for the man, and Mrs. Hoag vowed that she
had lost her husband, and she would have him. During this strife a
justice of the peace from the place where the prisoner was
apprehended entered the Court, and turned the scale in his favour.
His worship swore him to be Thomas Parker; that he had known, and
occasionally employed him, from his infancy: whereupon Mrs. Parker
embraced and carried off her husband in triumph, by the verdict of
the jury.



JOHN CHALLENOR
Executed for Parricide 23rd  August, 1773

Of all murders, the shedding the blood of a parentstopping the very
fountain from whence flowed our lifeis the most shocking. It is a
matter of horror to reflect how dreadfully human nature can be
debased; yet already, far too often, has duty tortured our feelings
in recording such abominable cases. To endeavour to amend the heart,
and to deter others from crime, is the intent of this Calendarthe
very end of punishments.

This parricidal monster was a labourer, brought up to his father's
employ, and had, during life, toiled by his side. They were at work
together in a wood near Stone, in Staffordshire, and, some hasty
words having passed between them, the ingrate seized an iron pot, in
which he had just cooked their dinner, and threw it with such
vengeance at his devoted sire, that one of its feet entered the old
man's skull; and of the wound he languished, in extreme agony, three
days, and then expired. The murderer was immediately committed to
gaol, where he showed little remorse at his fell deed; and seemed
alone anxious for his father's recovery, from the dread of being
hanged for the murder.

This John Challenor was of a ferocious revengeful disposition: he
treated his wife and children with great cruelty. Once, upon a
trifling occasion, he aimed a blow at his wife, which killed his
child, an infant in her arms; but, the brutal deed being attributed
to accident, he, for a while, escaped his deserved punishment. Being
now brought to trial at Stafford assizes, the deposition of his
deceased parent, with other corroborating circumstances of his
guilt, being adduced, the jury found no hesitation in pronouncing
him guilty; on which he was executed, August the 23d, 1773, amid the
execrations of an incensed multitude, and his body was ordered to be
hung in chains near the spot where he committed this most foul deed,
which was accordingly done.

On the same day on which he suffered, another murderer, of the name
of Ambrose Cannon, was executed at Horsham, in Sussex, for a murder
in which he had joined one Thomas Green, to whom he had been
apprentice above sixteen years before. These two villains
barbarously killed one Thomas Cole, and they both immediately fled
from justice, and escaped to parts beyond the sea. During thirteen
years had Cannon struggled with his conscience; which at length (as
sooner or later it ever will) became so tortured with remorse, that
he could no longer remain in satisfaction out of his own country: in
short, his mind could afford him no rest, and he yearned to throw
himself upon his fate. He returned even into the same county where
he had joined in the murder, and settled at Hastings, under a
feigned name, married, and had three children. At length he betrayed
himself, was seized, and, sufficient proof being adduced, though
more than sixteen years had intervened, found guilty, and hanged.

Another most detested parricide, of the name of Thomas Hitchcock,
was tried, convicted, and executed at Oxford, on the 2nd of March,
1778, for the cruel murder of his venerable father. It is a
melancholy reflection that such unnatural and horrid ideas should
enter the mind of man.



CHARLES MILLS AND JOHN PUGH
Executed for Highway Robbery, 7th November, 1774

These offenders were born of poor parents, and received little or no
education. In the winter they acted as porters on the wharfs of the
Thames, and in the summer employed themselves as haymakers; but at
length associating with abandoned company of both sexes, who lived
in Chick Lane, and such places, they lost those fair characters they
had hitherto supported. Distressed in circumstances by their own
vices, they determined to supply their wants by robbery; but, their
appearance being too mean to permit them to think of hiring horses,
they determined to commence footpads, and committed a number of
robberies in the fields north of London, frequently ill-treating
those whom they robbed. Their success for some time was trifling,
but, being sufficient to furnish them with several offensive
weapons, their depredations became more frequent, and their booties
were spent, as those of thieves generally are, in the company of
abandoned women. They commonly met at an alehouse in Tottenham Court
Road, and, having flushed themselves with liquor, sallied forth to
assault the unoffending passenger.

We now proceed to mention the fact, the commission of which cost
them their lives. On the 10th of August, 1774, they met, according
to custom, at the alehouse, and, having drank themselves into
spirits to undertake daring exploits, they went into the fields near
Primrose Hill, between London and Hampstead, when a violent shower
of rain falling, they took shelter under a hedge. In the interim a
gentleman named Gilson, who had been reading in a book as he
strolled over the fields, came to the same spot, to avoid the
violence of the shower. When the rain abated Mr. Gilson was going
away; but the villains threatened his instant death if he hesitated
to deliver his money. In the meantime Mills rifled his pockets,
where finding only a few shillings, the robbers blasphemed in a
horrid manner; and Mr. Gilson, apprehensive of fatal consequences,
then delivered his watch, with a guinea and some silver, which he
had till then concealed. Ten days afterwards Mr. Gilson was again
near the same spot, and, sitting down to read, observed the
identical robbers approaching him. Knowing them well, he applied to
a manservant belonging to farmer Welllngs to assist him in taking
them into custody. The man hesitated, as doubting if the gentleman
had been really robbed; but Mr. Wellings, being informed of the
affair, directed two men to go in search of the footpads, who were
soon taken, conveyed before a magistrate, and lodged in Newgate.

At the next Old Bailey sessions they were convicted, and sentenced
to die. After conviction they sent to some of their former
companions in iniquity; but not one would attend them. For a short
time they entertained hopes of being respited; but these hopes soon
vanished. Pugh behaved penitently; but Mills much more so, answering
explicitly all the questions that were asked him, confessing his
guilt, and wishing for life only in the hope of making reparation to
those who had been sufferers by his crimes. They were admitted to
the sacrament on the morning of their execution; and, when their
irons were knocked off, Pugh seemed almost abandoned to despondency,
and at the place of execution he acknowledged the justice of his
sentence. Mills, also, confessed that he had committed many other
robberies, the result of his attachment to women of abandoned
character. Charles Mills and John Pugh were hanged at Tyburn on the
7th of November, 1774.

The most remarkable circumstance in the case of these malefactors
is, that, after conviction, their former abandoned acquaintances
would not visit them. Thus were they left in the utmost distress in
the hour of the greatest extremity Hence young people should learn
the extreme ill consequence of keeping bad company; and that the
true way to be happy is to associate with those who have more wisdom
and virtue than themselves.



WILLIAM HAWKE
Executed for Highway Robbery, 1st July, 1774

This was another depredator of considerable notoriety, and of so
desperate a mind as to appear dauntless of death. He was born at
Uxbridge, in Middlesex, in the neighbourhood of which town he
committed many highway robberies. His father dying when he was but a
boy, he came to London, without any friend to direct his steps, and
hired himself as a pot-boythat is, a drawer of porter to a low
public housewhere were constantly before him examples which might
lead any unprotected youth from the paths of virtue. He soon
connected an acquaintance with abandoned people who frequented an
alehouse in St. Giles's, and was persuaded to join them in
committing depredations upon the public. Hawke at length commenced
highwayman, and became an accomplice of William Field, the
particulars of whose life we have already mentioned. Field and Hawke
were transported to America; and, returning to England nearly at the
same period, they again became associates in committing robberies
upon the highway. Hawke and Field being apprehended together, the
former escaped from Tothill Fields' Bridewell, and got over to
France; but the other suffered the sentence of the law.

Upon his return to England he committed a surprising number of most
daring robberies; and several months elapsed before the thief-takers
knew him to be the man by whom the roads about London were so
dangerously infested. Information being given to Mr. Smith, the
keeper of Tothill Fields' Bridewell, that Hawke's wife had been to
Uxbridge on a party of pleasure, he sought the driver of the coach
in which she was conveyed, and learnt from him that Hawke lodged in
Shoe Lane. The following morning Mr. Smith, Mr. Bond, Mr. Leigh, and
some other persons in the service of Sir John Fielding, went to Shoe
Lane. Bond, going up two pair of stairs, entered the front room, and
there discovering Hawke slumbering in bed, threw himself across the
highwayman, who, twisting the sheet round Bond's head, reached at a
pistol that was under the pillow, at which instant Smith entered,
and caught hold of his hand. With much difficulty Hawke was secured;
and, being put into a coach, he said that his misfortunes were in
some measure alleviated by the consideration that no life was lost,
for he was provided with several loaded pistols, and had formed the
resolution of firing upon every man who should attempt to take him
into custody. Being conveyed to the public office in Bow Street, a
great number of persons were bound to prosecute, and he was
committed to Newgate.

At the next sessions at the Old Bailey he was arraigned on an
indictment for robbing Mr. Hart of a small sum of money; and the
following are the most remarkable circumstances adduced in
evidence:

Mr. Hart and Captain Cunningham were stopped in the Fulham stage, a
little beyond Knightsbridge, by the prisoner, who demanded their
money. The captain refused to resign his property; and Hawke
threatened to fire, and, pointing his pistol at the captain, he said
'Fire away, and be damned!' on which the robber discharged his
pistol, and the ball passed between the captain's shoulder and his
coat. Mr. Hart then delivered a few shillings; and Captain
Cunningham, getting out of the coach in the interim, seized the
bridle of the highwayman's horse, when he discharged a second
pistol. He then remounted, but did not ride away for some minutes,
during which interval the captain employed himself in picking up
stones, and throwing them at him. At the time of Hawke's trial
Captain Cunningham was abroad; but Mr. Hart's evidence was so
positive, clear, and circumstantial, that no doubt remained as to
the guilt of the prisoner, who was therefore sentenced to be
executed. While Hawke was under sentence of death, in Newgate, his
behaviour was such as may be called decent, rather than penitential.
While his irons were knocking off, on the morning of execution, one
of his acquaintance addressed him thus: 'How do you do, Billy? will
you have some flowers?'Hawke replied, 'I am pretty well, I thank
you. How is Harry Wright? he has been ill of late, I hear,' meaning
one of the turnkeys of Tothill Fields' Bridewell. And then, while
the man held the nose gay, he picked out a flower, and, with great
composure, placed it in a button-hole of his coat. When the cart was
preparing to be driven from under the gallows he threw off both his
shoes; and, when he found it move, he collected his utmost strength,
and leaped up, so that his neck was instantly dislocated. He
suffered at Tyburn, July the 1st, 1774.



WILLIAM FARMERY
Executed for the Murder of his Mother, 5th August,
1775

We have reluctantly shown, in more instances than one, the unnatural
brutality of men murdering their fathers; but, while we sketch the
more shocking crime of this monster, we have some consolation in
observing that, in our long researches into the wickedness of
mankind, he is the first we have met with who, with long lurking
malice, shed the blood of his mother. A subject so strangely horrid
and unnatural we shall dismiss by a bare recital of the shocking
circumstance. It appears that, among other undutiful acts, he had
one morning given offence to his parent, for which he was justly
reproached, on which he went out of her house, took his knife from
his pocket, and deliberately whetted it till quite sharp. Then
returning with the murderous instrument in his hand, he found his
unfortunate mother in the act of making his own bed. Without
uttering a word, he threw her down, and, as a butcher kills a sheep,
he stuck her in the throat, and there left her weltering in her
blood, of which wound she died.

On his examination he confessed the fact, and said that he had
determined upon his mother's death three years ago; for that he had
treasured up malice against her since she had corrected him for some
trifling fault when a little boy. In the prison of Lincoln, called
the Round-house, he declared that, when asleep there, he felt
something move within him (the tyrant Conscience), and that when he
awoke he saw his mother's ghost upbraiding him for his foul deed. He
suffered at Lincoln, August the 5th, 1775, amidst the execrations of
a multitude of indignant spectators.

'Even you yourself to your own breast shall tell
Your crimes, and your own conscience be your hell.'



MESSRS. RUMBOLD AND SYKES
Members of Parliament for Hindon, in Wiltshire,
Imprisoned for Bribery, in the Year 1776

"Where honour ought to have the fairest play, you'll find
"Corruption, envy, discontent, and faction,
"Almost in every band."
OTWAY.

This offence is a main link in the chain of corruption which has
long been a grievance to the people, and loudly calls for reform.
When Mr. Pitt, early in his political career, was out of place, he
was a strenuous advocate for such reform; but from the moment of his
appointment to the chancellorship of the exchequer, he lost sight of
every abuse. Thus, we find it, as Sir Robert Walpole used to say,
"Every man has his price." Since those times corruption has made
rapid strides, and bribery at elections a common practice.

The present state of the representation of the British Empire, may
be seen from the following sketch of a recent meeting in London, on
the subject, taken from the newspapers of the day.

"On the first of May, a numerous meeting, convened by advertisement
in the London newspapers, was held at the Crown and Anchor, in the
Strand, for the avowed purpose of entering into resolutions, in order
to effect a reform in parliament. It was attended by the two members
for Westminster, and many other independent representatives of the
people in the present parliament.

"Sir Francis Burdett was called to the chair, from which, in a speech
most elaborate and elegant, he opened the business upon which they
were convened. The resolutions were presented by Major Cartwright.
The most prominent of them were,

- "That in a petition presented to the House of Commons, on the 6th
of May, 1793, it was offered to be proved at the bar, that 154
individuals did, by their own authority, appoint or procure the
return of 307 members of that House, exclusive of those from
Scotland, who were thus enabled to decide all questions in the name
of the whole people of Great Britain.

- "That in 1782, it was declared by Mr. Pitt in the House of Commons,
that seven or eight members of that House were sent there by the
nabob of Arcot, and that a foreign state, in enmity to this country,
might procure a party to act for it under the mask and character of
members of that House.

"Mr. Maddox, member for Boston, made the following statement of the
representation of the people in the House of Commons: -


26 Burgage tenures, private property, returning members:	 52 
	51 Boroughs at about 50 Voters each 	100 
	23 Boroughs at about 100 voters each	 45 
	28 Boroughs at about 200 voters each	 56 
	2 Boroughs at about 30 voters each	  4 
	Making 1175 voters, who return a majority to the House of
Commons of 	257

"In 1793, Seventy-five peers returned 167 members to the House of
Commons. Since 1793, Eighteen new peers have been created, who had
influence of 39 commoners, and six baronets, who had influence over
eleven. Thus, in all, there are 206 members in the House of Commons,
under the influence of peers, created during the present reign. In
Ireland they had the disposal of upwards of 200 borough votes in the
House of Commons, besides the influence they had in counties, of
which he could name at least thirty, represented by the sons and
brothers of peers. The treasury returned 167, and the borough faction
91. Of all these the number was 306, to which adding 21 returned by
17 boroughs, of 150 voters in each, made 327 English members under
this influence, which deducting from the total number of 513, left
only 186 uninfluenced members of the House of Commons. The result is,
a majority of 141 in favour of this borough faction. "Can you
conceive," continued Mr. Maddocks, "that any good effects could be
derived from a parliament so constituted, even leaving out of your
view all the influence of the crown, from places, pensions, and the
178,000l. a year paid for sinecures,"to people for doing nothing at
all.

Messrs. Rumbold and Sykes had obtained seats for the borough of
Hendon, and it appearing to the commons that they had been guilty of
bribery, the attorney-general was directed to prosecute them.

On the 14th of March, 1776, their trial came on in the court of
King's Bench, and after a very long hearing, they were both found
guilty. On the 8th of June following, Messrs. Rumbold and Sykes were
brought before the court of King's Bench, in order to receive
sentence on their conviction of bribery, at the late general
election; when Sir Richard Aston, one of the judges, observed, that
the crime of which they had been guilty, was aggravated by the
tendency it had to lead the ignorant and unwary, to the commission
of that horrid and foul sin, PERJURY, the only barrier between God
and man. From these and other reasons, equally forcible, he inferred
the necessity of an exemplary punishment; and therefore he ordered
each of them to pay a fine of 1000 marks (666l. 13s. 4d.) to the
king, and to suffer six months imprisonment; and at the expiration
thereof, should enter into a recognizance of 1000l. each, and two
sureties, in 500l. each, for their good behaviour for three years,
One of the electors thus bribed, was pilloried for perjury, two days
after the late members had been sentenced, and again, the next week,
at Hindon; where he was brought for that purpose, from the King's
Bench prison.

During the confinement of Sir Francis Burdett, for what was
conceived a contempt of this supposed virtuous House of Commons, the
Electors of Westminster met to celebrate the anniversary of their
free election of their present patriotic Representatives. Lord
Cockrane and Sir Francis Burdett. On this occasion Mr. Jones
Burdett, the brother of the imprisoned Baronet, in contrasting the
impunity allowed to such men as Lord Castlereagh and Percival, the
Chancellor of the Exchequer, bartering a seat in Parliament for a
Cadetship, with the severity shown to poor offenders, who were often
punished, with death for stealing a few shillingswith Hunt,
Williars, Jones, and others, public defaulters, to the amount of
hundred of thousands of pounds, quotes the following lines from
Shakespeare's tragedy of King Lear:-

"Through tatter'd clothes small vices do appear,
"Robes and furr'd gowns hide all, plate sin with gold,
"And the strong lance of justice hurtless breaks;
"Arm it with rags, a pigmy straw doth pierce it."

About this time a Member of the same House, a creature of
Government, named Hunt, representative of an insignificant borough,
controlled by the Minister of the day, called Queenborough, in Kent,
ran off to America, with 93,817l. 14s. 5d. of the nation's money,
wrung from the industry of the patient yeomen; while dire distress-
nay, the calls of hunger, which, by holy writ we are taught, "Will
break through stone walls," have impelled the wretched to use force
in order to compel the rich and the monopolisers to lower the price
of provisions, are adjudged guilty of rioting. Hence a prison dirge,
with too much truth, thus concludes:

"And yet in vogue
"Lives the great rogue;
"While small rogues are by dozens hang'd."



JOHN MADDY, or MANNING
Another Case of Adultery

In the twenty-third year of the reign of Charles II. John Maddy, or
Manning, was indicted at the assizes for the county of Surrey, for
the murder of one Mavers, to which he pleaded not guilty. Judge
Twisden directed the jury to find the following special verdict, in
order to have the opinion of the twelve judges, viz. "That John
Maddy, coming into his own house, found Mavers in the act of
adultery with his wife, and with a joint stool he struck and killed
Mavers; and that there was no precedent malice in Maddy towards
Mavers."

The record was moved by writ of certiorari into the court of King's
Bench, and by the opinion of the Judges, this was but manslaughter,
and he was gently, that is, with an iron hardly warm, burnt in the
hand.

This precedent has since been, in such cases, adopted, and Venables
was found guilty of manslaughter, and in like manner punished. This
is a mere pretence of conformity to the law; and we hold it
abundantly sufficient for the punishment of a villain who defiles
the marriage bed.

About this time a silk mercer on Ludgate-hill, suspicious of his
wife's fidelity, gave out to his family, that his business called
him to a distant part of the kingdom. His wife, while she put a
change of linen into his saddle bags, feigned infinite sorrow for
his departure. He had been apprised of her misconduct by a faithful
servant, and to him he communicated his real intent; which was, to
proceed on his horse (in those times tradesmen rode on horseback,
now they sport a phaeton or curricle) a few miles, and return at
night. Accordingly his door was secretly opened to him, while his
guilty wife and her paramour were regaling in the parlour. He
cautiously, in the dark, went to his chamber, and taking his sword,
secreted himself in a closet. The guilty pair soon followed, and in
the very act of defiling his bed, he plunged his sword through them
both. No jury would take cognizance of the cause of their deaths.
Let all adulterers thus perish.



FRANCIS DAVID STIRN
Convicted of Murder, but Poisoned Himself in Newgate,
12th Sept, 1760

Public conversation on the fate of Lord Ferrers, was not at an end,
when the remarkable case of another malefactor interposed. This was
the unhappy fate of Francis David Stirn, by birth a German; a man of
erudition, and unfortunately possessed of passions great as that
unhappy lord. The circumstances which gave rise to this melancholy
tale, are as singular as the last, and will be contemplated with
nearly equal interest, by the reader.

Francis David Stirn was born in the principality of Hesse Cassel,
about the year 1735. His father was a minister, and his brother is
now a metropolitan minister at Hersfeldt, having the superintendance
over the Calvinist clergy of a certain district. At a proper age he
was sent to a public grammar-school in Hesse Cassel, where he made a
considerable progress, and was then removed to a college at Bremen,
which is endowed with professorships, as a university. While he was
here, he preached some probationary discourses, according to the
custom of the place, and though he was scarce twenty years of age,
became tutor to the son of one Haller, a doctor of laws, and
burgomaster of the city. But he soon forfeited the favour both of
Mr. Haller and his wife, by a suspicious and supercilious
disposition, which broke out into so many acts of indecorum, that he
was dismissed from his employment. He was then taken home by his
brother, who soon after placed him at the university of Hintelin,
belonging to Hesse, where he pursued his studies from the year 1756
till the middle of the year 1758. During this time he improved his
knowledge in the Latin and Greek classics to an uncommon degree; he
also acquired a very considerable skill in the Hebrew, and became a
great proficient both in vocal and instrumental music, dancing,
fencing, and other polite accomplishments.

About this time, the French having made an irruption into Hesse, and
impoverished the inhabitants by raising exorbitant contributions,
his brother was no longer able to support him, and therefore sent
him to England with very strong recommendations to a friend, who is
in a station of great honour and interest. This person received him
kindly, and promised to procure him an appointment that should be
agreeable to his friends: but as no opportunity immediately
presented he offered himself as an assistant to Mr. Crawford, who
keeps a school in Cross-street, Hatton Garden, and was received,
upon the recommendation of the Reverend Mr. Planta, who had himself
lived with Mr. Crawford in that station, and left him upon his
having obtained a place in the Museum. It was also proposed that he
should assist the German minister at the chapel in the Savoy, where
he preached several probationary discourses; but as he made use of
notes, he was not approved by his auditory; Stirn, however, with the
suspicion natural to his temper, imputed his disappointment to some
unfriendly offices of Mr. Planta, and some unaccountable combination
between him and the people.

He then turned his thoughts towards a military life, in which some
offer of advantage seems to have been made him; but his friends here
were so well apprized of his infirmity, that, knowing it would be
impossible for him to submit to the subordination established in any
army, they earnestly dissuaded him from it, that he might not incur
the censure of a court-martial, or bring himself into other
inextricable difficulties. He then formed a design of entering into
one of our universities; and having communicated it to his friends,
he obtained the interest of several clergymen of considerable
influence: but some new sally of his jealous and ungovernable
temper, disgusted his friends and disappointed his expectations. But
instead of imputing his disappointment to himself, he threw out many
threats against those whom he had already offended by his petulance
and ill behaviour.

In the meantime, he continued in Mr. Crawford's family, where he
gave frequent and mortifying instances of his pride and
indiscretion; one of which is too remarkable to be omitted. He set
out one day with Mr. Crawford, and a Prussian gentleman, to dine
with Mr. V, a Dutch merchant at Muswell-hill; in his way thither he
quitted their company, and, by crossing the fields, got to the house 
before them. When he came there, he took such offence at something
Mr. V said, in some trifling dispute which happened between them,
that he called him Fool, and proceeded from one outrage to another,
till Mr. V ordered his servants to turn him out of doors, which was
done before his companions, Crawford and the Prussian, got there.
Yet Stirn, when they came back in the evening, fell into another fit
of rage against them, and charged them with having got to Mr. V's
before him, and concealed themselves in another room, to enjoy the
injurious treatment which Mr. V was prepared to offer him;
insisting that he had heard them rejoicing and laughing at his
disgrace.

While he lived with Mr. Crawford, he became acquainted with Mr.
Matthews, a surgeon in the neighbourhood, who advertised the cure of
fistulas, and disorders of the like kind. Matthews is said to have
insinuated to Stirn, that, though Crawford professed great
friendship to him, yet his intention was only to keep him in a state
of poverty and dependence, and to render his abilities subservient
to his own advantage, without giving him a valuable consideration,
telling him, that it was in his power to provide much better for
himself. From this time, Stirn's behaviour to Mr. Crawford was very
different from what it had been before, and Mr. Crawford was
proportionably less satisfied; so that, though he still continued
with him, yet Crawford says, that he now kept him merely from the
regard he had to him and his family. Soon after this, Matthews made
him a proposal to come and live with him, offering him an apartment
ready furnished, and his board, upon condition that he should teach
Mrs. Matthews and her daughter music, and Matthews himself the
classics. This proposal Stirn inclined to accept; but Mr. Crawford,
hearing of it, endeavoured to persuade Matthews to retract it,
telling him, that Stirn had failings which would render him a very
troublesome inmate. Matthews, who seems to have had neither a good
opinion of Crawford, nor good-will to him, immediately told Stirn
that he had been attempting to persuade him to go back from his
proposals, and mentioned also the reasons he gave for so doing. This
threw Stirn into a rage, and he expressed his resentment to Crawford
in strong terms, and a boisterous behaviour. Stirn soon after
accepted Matthews's proposal, and Matthews offered to secure him a
continuance of what he had offered for twelve months, by writing;
but Stirn refused the obligation, saying, that his honour was
sufficient. Crawford having failed in persuading Matthews not to
receive Stirn, now endeavoured to prevail upon Stirn not to go to
Matthews; and, therefore, though he says he would not have kept him
so long, but in regard to Stirn himself and his friends, he now
offered to raise his salary, that he might keep him longer, at
greater expense. But this offer was refused, and Stirn took
possession of his apartment at Matthews's house; a very little time,
however, was sufficient to show that they could not long continue
together.

Stirn's pride, and his situation in life, concurred to render him so
jealous of indignity, and so ingenious in discovering oblique
reproach and insult in the behaviour of those about him, that,
finding one evening, after he came home, some pieces of bread in the
dining room, which had been left there by a child of the family, he
immediately took it into his head, that they were left there as
reproachful emblems of his poverty, which obliged him to subsist on
the fragments of charity. This thought set him on fire in a moment;
he ran furiously upstairs, and knocking loudly and suddenly at Mr.
Matthew's chamber-door, called out, Mr. Matthews! He was answered by
Mrs. Matthews, who was in bed, that Mr. Matthews was not there; but
he still clamorously insisted on the door's being opened, so that
Mrs. Matthews was obliged to rise, and having put on her clothes,
came out, and asked him what he wanted, and what he meant by such
behaviour; he answered that he wanted Mr. Matthews, and that he knew
he was in the room. It happened that at this instant Mr. Matthews
knocked at the street door, and put an end to the dispute with his
wife. The moment Mr. Matthews entered the house Stirn in a furious
manner charged him with an intention to affront him by the crusts;
Mr. Matthews assured him that he meant no such thing, and that the
bread was carried thither by the child: Mrs. Matthews also confirmed
it, and Stirn was at length pacified. He seems to have been
conscious of the strange impropriety of his conduct, as soon as he
had time for reflection; for the next morning he went to Mr.
Crawford, and expressed a most grateful sense of Mr. and Mrs.
Matthews's patience and kindness in suffering, and passing over, his
fantastic behaviour.

It is however probable, that, from this time, they began to live
together upon very ill terms; Matthews soon after gave him warning
to quit his house, and Stirn refused to go. What particular offences
had been given on each side does not appear; but they had been
carried to such lengths, that Crawford consulted Mr. Welch, a
Middlesex justice, about them, on Stirn's behalf. What directions he
received are not known; but, on Wednesday the 13th of August, Stirn
having been then in Mr. Matthews's family about two months, Matthews
went to a friend upon Dowgate hill, whose name is Lowther, and
telling him that Stirn had behaved so ill he could no longer keep
him in his house, and that he had refused to quit it, requested his
advice and assistance to get rid of him. Mr. Lowther then went with
Mr. Matthews to Mr. Welch, who finding there was no legal contract
between them, told Matthews he might turn Stirn out when he pleased,
without notice. Matthews then determining to turn him out that
night, Mr. Welch desired he would be cautious, and advised him to
get a couple of friends to be with him; and when Stirn came in,
first to desire him to go away peaceably, and, if he refused, to
lead him out by the arm. Matthews then said, he was a desperate man,
and if he should offer any rudeness to him, would make no scruple of
stabbing him. He was then advised to take a peace officer with him.

And having now received sufficient instructions, he went away with
his friend, determined to put them into execution. While Matthews
and his friend were at Mr. Welch's, Stirn was making his complaint
to Mr. Crawford, whom he met at Bartlets-Buildings Coffee-house,
near Holborn. He told him, with great emotion, that Mr. Matthews had
villainously and unjustly charged him with having alienated the
affection of his wife, and, by her means, having had access to his
purse. Mr. Crawford, who appears to have known that Matthews had
warned Stirn to be gone, and that Stirn had refused to go, advised
him, as the best way of removing Matthews's suspicions, immediately
to quit his house. Upon this he started up in a violent rage, and
told him, if he spoke another word, he would  and muttered
something else to himself, which Mr. Crawford could not hear. But
the next moment he told him, that he and Mr. Chapman (a surgeon in
the neighbourhood) had conspired with Mr. Matthews to ruin his
character, and oblige him to quit England with infamy. After some
farther altercation, he sat down, and appeared somewhat more
composed; but on a sudden, started up again, with new fury in his
look, and said, his honour was wounded, his character ruined, and
his bread lost; that, under such circumstances, he could not live;
and that, if Matthews scandalously turned him out of his house,
which he seems to have threatened, he would be revenged. Mr.
Crawford attempted some farther expostulation, but finding it in 
vain, and it being now near 11 o'clock, he accompanied him to Mr.
Matthews's door, and there left him. But though he was in a temper
that made expostulation hopeless, yet, he says, he left him, as he
thought, in a disposition to do as he advised him.

Matthews, in the meantime, had got two friends, of which Mr. Lowther
was one, and a constable; and having removed all that belonged to
Mr. Stirn out of his room, into the passage, they were waiting for
his coming in; Matthews having determined to turn him into the
street at that time of the night, and leave him to get a lodging
were he could. When Stirn knocked at the door, it was opened to him
by Lowther; and upon entering the passage, and seeing his clothes
and other things lying in it, he cried out, with great passion, "Who
has done this!" Matthews replied, "I have done itYou told me, you
would not leave my house but by force, and now I am determined you
shall go." Stirn then reproached Matthews with being a bad man, and
told him that he was a coward, and would not have dared thus to
insult him if he had not procured persons to abet him and assist
him. Some farther words passed on both sides; after which, Matthews
desired Stirn to take a glass of wine, there being then wine and
glasses upon the table; and said, "let us part friendly." Stirn then
said, he would not go till he had played his last tune; and there
being a spinnet in the room, he went and struck it five or six
times: then he said, "I want but half a guinea; you may do what you
will with my clothes and books." Matthews replied. "if you will tell
me what you want with a half a guinea, and have not so much, I will
lend you the money." Stirn then put his hand in his pocket, and
taking out some money, looked at it, and said, "No, I have as much
money as I want, I have spoke to a man today who will write my life
and yours." "Have a care," said Matthews, "what you say; you have
before said enough for me to lay you by the heels;" "Why, what have
I said before," said Stirn. "Why, you have said," replied Matthews,
"that Crawford might thank his God he had got rid of you in the
manner he had; but that you would have your revenge of me." Stirn
then desired Matthews to give him his hand, and Matthews stretching
it out, Stirn grasped it in both his, and said, "I have said so, and
here is my hand, I will have revenge of you." After this, a good
deal of opprobrious language passed between them, and then Stirn
went out of the house with the constable, though not in his custody.

Where this forlorn and infatuated creature passed the night, does
not appear; nor is anything related of the transactions of the next
day, Thursday the 14th, except that Mr. Chapman endeavoured to
procure a meeting of the parties with himself and Mr. Crawford that
evening, to bring about a reconciliation, but without success, Mr.
Matthews being unfortunately from home, when he called to make the
appointment. It appears, however, from divers circumstances which
happened afterwards that, on that day, Stirn bought a pair of
pistols, and that, having loaded them, he sent Mr. Matthews a
challenge, which Matthews refused to accept; and it is probable,
that from this time, he resolved upon the murder, no other means of
revenge being left him.

On Friday morning, the fifteenth, Mr. Crawford, hearing that Stirn
was in great anxiety and distress of mind, gave him an invitation to
dinner. This invitation he accepted, and behaved with great
propriety and politeness till after the cloth was taken away; but
just then he started up, as if stung by some sudden thought, and
uttered several invectives against Matthews; saying, that none but
an execrable villain could impute to him the horrid character of a
thief and adulterer. He said this, without any mention having been
made of his own situation, or of Mr. Matthews's name, and soon after
went away. About half an hour after five, the same evening, as Mr.
Crawford was going down Cross-street, Stirn overtook him. Crawford
at this time discovered such an expression of despair in his
countenance, that he suspected he had formed a design to destroy
himself, especially as it was said he had made an attempt of that
kind six months before. Stirn turned the conversation principally
upon the point of honour, and the proper means of maintaining it.
Crawford, who saw him greatly moved, so as frequently to start, and
change colour, turned the discourse to religion; but observing he
gained no attention he hoped to soothe his mind by mentioning the
prospect he still had of doing well, but Stirn then hastily
interrupted him: Who, says he, will entertain a person under the
horrid character of an adulterer and a thief! No, Sir, I am lost
both to God and to the world. Mr. Crawford then told him, that if he
should fail of success here, he would assist him with money to
return to his brother. "To my brother!" says Stirn, in an agony;
"neither my brother nor my country can receive me under the disgrace
of such crimes as are imputed to me." As he pronounced these words,
he burst into tears; and Mr. Crawford, not being able longer to
support the effect of such a conversation upon his mind, was obliged
to take his leave.

Mr. Crawford, in order to recollect himself, went out into the
fields, where he could not help musing on what had passed; and
finding his suspicions, that Stirn intended to destroy himself, grow
stronger and stronger, he determined to return, and endeavour to
find him out a second time.

It happened that about half an hour after eight o'clock he met with
him at Owen's coffee-house, where the conversation upon his quarrel
with Matthews was renewed though with much more temper than before;
yet Stirn often started, saying, he expected that everyone who
opened the door was Matthews. While he was at Owen's Coffee-house,
he called for a pint of porter and some potatoes, which he devoured
ravenously, though he had supped before, and drank a pint of porter,
and three gills of wine.  About ten o'clock he got up, and said, he
would go to Mr. Pugh's; Pugh keeps an alehouse, the sign of the
Pewter-platter, in Cross-street, Hatton Garden, next door to
Crawford's school, where Crawford, Matthews, Chapman, and other
persons in the neighbourhood, frequently met to spend the evening.

Mr. Crawford endeavoured to persuade him to go home to his lodgings,
upon which Stirn, without making any reply, catched him by the hand,
and pressed it with such violence as almost to force the blood out
at his fingers' ends. They went together to Mr. Pugh's door, where
Mr. Crawford left him, and went home. Stirn went into the
neighbour's room, at the Pewter-platter, where he found Matthews,
who had been to see Foot's farce, called the Minor, in the Hay-
market, and with him, Mr. Chapman and Mr. Lowther; several other
persons were in the room, but not of the same company. Stirn sat
down at the same table with Matthews and his friends; but Chapman
perceiving by his gestures and countenance, that he was in great
agitation, called him out, and admonished him, not to do anything
that might have disagreeable consequences either to himself or
others. After this Stirn returned alone into the room, and Chapman
went home. Stirn walked about the room by himself, and in the
meantime Mr. Crawford came in, having heard who were in company, and
fearing some fatal effect of Stirn's passion, which he hoped he
might contribute to prevent.

Stirn, after some time, applying himself to Mr. Matthews, said,
"Sir, you have accused me of theft and adultery." Matthews denied
the charge; but said, if his wife's virtue had not been more to be
depended upon than his honour, he did not know what might have been
the consequence. After some mutual reproaches, Matthews called him a
dirty fellow, and said he ought to be sent into his own lousy
country: Stirn, after this, took two or three turns about the room,
without reply, and then took a small piece of paper out of his
pocket, and held it some time in his hand, with a design that
Matthews should take notice of it; but Matthews not regarding it, he
held it in the candle till it was burnt; he then walked about the
room for a few minutes more, and Crawford observing uncommon fury
and desperation in his looks, desired the company to drink his
health; Mr. Lowther immediately did so, and, as he thinks, so did
Mr. Matthews too; after which Stirn still walked about the room, but
in a few minutes came and stood at Mr. Crawford's elbow, Mr. Lowther
sat next to Mr. Crawford, and Mr. Matthews next to Mr. Lowther. He
then went and stood between Mr. Lowther and Mr. Crawford and having
continued there about a minute, or a minute and a half, he drew out
the two pistols he had procured for the duel, wrapped up in a piece
of paper, and stretching his arm across the table before Mr.
Lowther, he discharged one of them at Matthews's breast, who gave a
sudden start, and then falling forward, died instantly, without a
groan. Stirn, almost at the same moment, discharged the other at
himself; but, by some accident, the ball missed him, without doing
any other damage. As soon as the smoke was dissipated, and the
company recovered from their first astonishment and confusion, Stirn
was seen standing as it were torpid with amazement and horror. As
soon as he saw the attention of all that were in the room turned
upon him, he seemed to recollect himself, and made towards the door;
but a person in the room, whose name is Warford, seized him, and
after some struggle pulled him to the ground. Lowther immediately
went up to him, and Stirn cried out, "Shoot me, shoot me, shoot me,
for I shall be hanged." Somebody then saying, Matthews is dead,
Stirn replied, "I am not sorry, but I am sorry that I did not shoot
myself."

After his commitment he obstinately refused all kinds of food, with
a view to starve himself, that he might avoid, the infamy of a
public death by the hands of the executioner: he persisted in this
abstinence till the Friday following, the 22d of August, being just
a week, drinking only a dish or two of coffee, and a little wine;
this conduct he endeavoured to justify, by saying, that his life was
forfeited both by the law of God and man, and that it was not lawful
even for the government to pardon him; and what does it signify,
says he, by whose hands this forfeit is paid. The ordinary indeed
told him, in answer to this argument, that his life was not in his
own power, and that as he did not, and could not, give it to
himself, so neither had he a right to take it away; it is indeed
pity that upon this occasion the ordinary was master of no better
argument, for the argument which he used against Stirn's right to
take away his own life, would prove, that his life could not be
lawfully taken away by any other; for if Stirn had not a right to
take away his own life, because, he did not, and could not give it
to himself, the hangman, as he could no more give life than Stirn,
had no more right to take it away. He was, however, urged to eat, by
arguments addressed to his passions; for he was told, that he would
incur more infamy by suicide than by hanging, as his body would be
dragged like that of a brute, to a hole dug to receive it in a
cross-road, and a stake would be afterwards driven through it, which
would remain as a monument of disgrace. These arguments, however,
were without effect, for he never eat any solid food, till he had,
by the assistance of some who visited him, procured a quantity of
opium sufficient to answer his purpose by a nearer way.

On Wednesday the 10th of September having then in some degree
recovered his strength, he was brought to the bar and arraigned; he
was then decently dressed in a suit of black cloth, but, contrary to
the general expectation, he pleaded not guilty, and requested that
his trial might be put off till Friday the 12th, which was granted.
On the 12th he was brought to the bar again, but, instead of his
suit of black, he appeared in a green night gown; he had been
advised to feign himself mad, but this advice he rejected with
disdain. During his trial, which lasted about four hours, he was
often ready to faint; he was therefore indulged with a seat, and
several refreshments; when sentence was passed upon him he quite
fainted away, but being recovered by the application of spirits, he
requested the court that he might be permitted to go to the place of
execution in the coach with the clergyman; upon which the court told
him, that was in the sheriff's breast, but that such a favour, if
granted, would be contrary to the intention of the law, which had
been lately made to distinguish murders by exemplary punishment;
upon this he made a profound reverence to the court, and was taken
back to prison.

About six o'clock, the same evening, he was visited by the ordinary,
who found in the press-yard a German, who said he was a minister,
whom Stirn had desired might attend him: The ordinary therefore took
him up with him to Stirn's chamber, he having been removed from the
cells by the assistance of some friends. They found him lying on his
bed, and as he expressed great uneasiness at the presence of the
ordinary and a prisoner that had been set over him as a guard, they
withdrew and left him alone with his countryman; soon after this, an
alarm was given that Stirn was extremely ill, and supposed to have
taken poison; he was immediately visited by the sheriff, and Mr.
Akerman the keeper of the prison, who found him in a state of
stupefaction, but not yet convulsed; a surgeon was procured, and
several methods tried to discharge his stomach of the poison, but
without effect; he was then let blood, which apparently rendered him
worse.

About nine o'clock he was pale and speechless, his jaw was fallen,
and his eyes were fixed, and about five minutes before eleven he
expired. It does not appear what reason Matthews had for charging
Stirn with an attempt upon his wife, but Stirn solemnly declared in
his last moments that there was none. He expressed many obligations
to Mr. Crawford, who often visited him in prison with great kindness
and humanity; and perhaps if he had been in a situation more
suitable not only to his hopes, but to his merit and his birth, he
would have been less jealous of affronts, and, conscious of
undisputed dignity, would have treated rudeness and slander with
contempt, instead of pursuing them with revenge.

He spent his life in perpetual transitions from outrage and fury, to
remorse and regret; one hour drawing his sword upon his dearest
friends, to revenge some imaginary affront, and the next lamenting
his folly, and entreating their pardon with contrition and tears.
How many are they whose keen sensibility, and violence of temper,
keep them nearly in the same situation, though they have not yet
been pushed to the same excess; let such remember, that no human
being can say to the passions of the mind, any more than to the
waves of the sea, "hitherto shall ye go, but here shall ye be
stayed."

If, by this mournful example, some of these shall be warned
gradually to weaken their vehemence of temper, by restraint, instead
of giving it new force by habit, neither Stirn nor Matthews will
have died in vain; they will have reason to say, upon this occasion,
"that God, in the midst of judgment has remembered mercy; and, that
by the stripes of others they have been healed."

"O shame to all that God design'd below!
"Shame to the wretch who flies from human woe!
"Shame to the wretch who aims th' empoison'd dart
"At the proud feeling of a gen'rous heart!
"Yet slaves there be, who in misfortune's bowl
"Mix bitter draughts, to agonize the soul;
"Whose bosoms gladden at another's woe;
"And joy to see the grief-swoln eyes o'er flow."
PRATT.



WILLIAM ODELL, A SOLDIER, AND JOHN DEMPSEY, A SAILOR
Executed at Tyburn, September 15, 1760, for Murder

WE find no particulars of the lives of these men; yet, the
singularity of a soldier and a sailor, each dressed as when they
served their country, being carried in the same cart, through the
most public streets of London, to suffer an ignominious death, for
the commission of the foulest of crimes, induces us to give a
distinct head to their case. Their offence is certainly attended
with every circumstance that can rouse our indignation at such
inhuman, cowardly, deeds, as those for which they so justly
suffered.

A soldier, whose profession teaches him courage, and inculcates the
principle of protection to the weaker sex, to barbarously turn the
weapon entrusted to him to defend his country, upon his wife, is a
dreadful reflection. Nor are we less mortified, in finding a British
sailor, whose courage and generosity is proverbial, like a dastard
assassin, and with a deadly weapon of the most diabolical
construction, attack an unarmed man, and murder him.

The name of this disgraceful soldier, was William Odell. It was
proved upon his trial, and with much reluctance do we promulgate the
heads of the evidence against him, that he first strangled his wife,
then with his sword, cut her almost piecemeal; and then threw her
mangled body in a clay-pit. John Dempsey, the sailor, was condemned
for murdering John Perry, near Ratcliffe-highway, by striking him on
the head with a large stick, through the end whereof was driven long
nails, which penetrating the skull, proved instant death.

The body of the soldier was delivered to the surgeons, for
dissection; but that of the sailor was hung in chains, near Ealing.



THE MAYOR OF BODMIN, IN CORNWALL
Barbarously Executed in the Reign of Edward VI

THE tyranny by which our hardy ancestors suffered themselves to be
governed by the alternate victorious houses of York and Lancaster,
was, by the revolutionists who chose William of Orange for their
king, regarded with a mixed emotion of pity and contempt. Their
descendants, in the beginning of the nineteenth century, though
aided by the strong light of reason, seem, if not actually, to have
bared their backs to the rod of tyranny, and have surely fitted
their necks to the yoke of oppression. Well may it be observed: that
like the Romans, who had passed their zenith, Britons are
degenerating into the subjection of "a junto of little lawyers," as
the patriot Whitbread calls them, who, while they accumulate
burthens upon us, make us dance and sing in jubilee rejoicing for
the long reign that has wrought so wonderful a change in the very
nature of Englishmen.

The case now introduced, we by no means consider as a deviation from
the original design of this Work; on the other hand, we anticipate
the increased approbation of our readers, on their being presented
with whatever may convey information on any branch of the extensive
and perilous subject on which we are pledged, not only to show
examples of its pains and punishments, but to add and explain the
authority and power by which they are inflicted.

In the reign of King Edward VI. a rebellion happened on account of
the alteration of religion, and the rebels being defeated, Sir
William Kingston, Provost Marshal, was cruel enough to make a jest
of men in misery, by virtue of his office. One Bowyer, Mayor of
Bodmin, having been among the rebels, not willingly, but by
constraint, Sir William sent him word, he would dine with him on a
certain day, for whom the mayor provided an hospitable
entertainment. A little before dinner the provost took the mayor
aside, and whispered in his ear, that there was to be an execution
that afternoon, and ordered him to have a gallows set up over
against his own door. The mayor obeyed his command; and after dinner
the provost took the mayor by the hand, and desired him to lead him
to the place of execution, which, when he saw, he asked him, "If he
thought the gallows was strong enough?" "Yes," says the mayor. "Well
then," replied Sir William, "get up and try, for it is provided for
you!" "I hope, Sir," answered the mayor, "you are not in earnest?"
"By my troth," says the provost, "there is no remedy, for you have
been a busy rebel." And accordingly, without delay, or liberty to
make a defence, the mayor was executed.

A miller, near Bodmin, at the same time, who had been very active in
the rebellion, hearing the provost was at Bodmin, and fearing lest
he should visit his house, told a stout young fellow, his servant,
that he had occasion to go from home, and if any gentleman should
enquire for him, he should tell him, that HE was the miller. The
provost, not long after, came and asked for the miller; the servant
came out and said as he was ordered; upon which the provost
commanded his myrmidons to seize him, and hang him up. The poor
fellow hearing this, cried out, "I am not the miller, but the
miller's man." "Nay friend," says the provost, "I will take thee at
thy word. If thou art the miller, thou art a busy knave, and a
rebel, and deservest to be hanged; if thou art not the miller, thou
art a false, lying knave, and cans't never do thy master better
service than to hang for him." And he ordered him instantly to be
hanged on the next tree.

Many reigns after this period, we find in the page of history, that
France was governed by a monarch of a far different disposition to
those of the sanguinary houses of York and Lancaster. The
circumstance we allude to is as follows: Chabot, admiral in the
reign of Francis I. of France, was nobly descended, had done his
country great service, and was highly in favour with his prince; but
decaying in time, and the king having charged him with misdemeanors
of a long service he had done in Piedmont, and in the defence of
Marseilles against the emperor, gave his royal master some indecent
language, and dared him to try him by law, for all the offences he
alleged against him. Hereupon the king issued out a commission to
the chancellor Poyet, as president, and to others, judges, to bring 
the admiral to a trial for his life, upon an information, and
indictment preferred against him by the royal advocate. The
chancellor was a man of unlimited ambition; and hoping to please the
king in these proceedings against the admiral, inveigled some of the
judges, by artifice and cunning, others by threatenings, and the
rest by fair promises; and though nothing could be proved against
the admiral, that merited the king's displeasure, yet the chancellor
subscribed, and by his arts procured others to subscribe, to the
confiscation of his estate, the forfeiture of his offices, and his
liberty, though he could not prevail on them to the taking away his
life. The king, abhorring falsehood in so great a magistrate, and
though to any that should complain of hardships put upon the
admiral, he might be answered, that he was tried as he desired, by
the law and customs of his country, and by the judges of parliament;
yet the king made all his passions give way to justice, and restored
the admiral to his honour, his estate, his offices, and his liberty;
and caused the wicked chancellor Poyet, to be indicted, arraigned,
and degraded.



JAMES NICKOLSON
Murderer, convicted fifteen years after the murder

Another remarkable discovery of murder, after the crime had been
committed more than fifteen years, was in the case of James
Nickolson. This man murdered one Edward Jones, a blacksmith at
Lewisham, in Kent, then fled from justice, and enlisted as a
soldier. He went abroad, and served in that capacity, until the year
1766, when, being discharged, he returned direct to the very place
where he had committed the murder; but the circumstance appeared to
have died away in the public mind.

Nickolson left a wife, and on his return found her married to
another man, after having received a legacy of one hundred and fifty
pounds, bequeathed him by his brother, as his supposed widow.
Nickolson did not claim his wife, but insisted upon having part of
the legacy, as it was left soley on his account which she refusing,
a quarrel arose, and in revenge, this woman disclosed the
circumstances of the murder, on which her husband was hanged.



COUNTRY RIOTS, OWING TO THE HIGH PRICE OF PROVISIONS
IN THE YEAR 1766
With an Account of The Execution of Some of the
Rioters

"Ill fares the land, to fated ills a prey,
"Where wealth accumulates, and men decay.
"Princes or lords may flourish or may fade,
"A breath can make them, as a breath has made;
"But a bold peasantry, their country's pride,
"When once destroyed, can never be supplied."
Goldsmith's Deserted Village.

THE above prophetic and immortal lines ought to be written in
letters of gold, and prefixed over the door of the house of Commons,
constantly to remind that very important branch of the constitution,
how much it is their duty to attend to the interest of the lower
orders of society for, from want of paying due attention to those
most useful classes of men, the small farmer and peasant, great part
of the distressing evils we now experience has originated.

It is almost the unanimous opinion of the nation, that the monopoly
of farms is the first great leading cause of the immoderate advance
in the price of all the articles of life; for, by throwing the bulk
of the land into comparatively few hands, opportunity is given to
speculation: an evil, especially on objects of the first necessity,
exceeds all calculation. By permitting farmers to hold large tracts,
it is impossible the land can be so well attended to; and for want
of abundance of manure on the tillage land, a very great quantity
has been taken from under the plough, and thrown into pasture,
consequently this had been the means of a vast decrease in the
growth of all kinds of grain. The reduction in the number of farms
in England would hardly be credited, was it not, unfortunately, too
well provednot one county in the kingdom has more than half the
number of farms it formerly had; most counties are reduced one
third; and one county in particular has not the fourth part of the
number it had a few years ago.

It is this cursed monopoly, more than war itself, which impoverishes
the mass of the people, and which will, we greatly fear, in a very
few years more, reduce them to the dependence of the Russian
peasantryslaves to their lords.

In the year 1766, a short time previous to the dreadful commotions
in London, denominated Wilkes's Riots, and which we shall
particularly name, the country people rose in a tumultuous manner,
in various parts of England. The cause of the dreadful outrages, was
the high price of corn, and the following extract from the King's
speech to both houses of parliament thereon, will show some reason
for discontent.

"My Lords and Gentlemen,
	"The high price of wheat, and the defective produce of that
grain last harvest, together with the extraordinary demands for the
same from foreign parts, have principally determined me to call you
thus early together, that I might have the sense of parliament, as
soon as conveniently might. be, on a matter so important, and
particularly affecting the poorer part of my subjects.
	"The urgency of the necessity called upon me, in the meantime,
to exert my royal authority for the preservation of the public
safety, against a public calamity which could admit of no delay.

"I have therefore, by and with the advice of my Privy Council, laid
an embargo on wheat and wheat flour going out of the kingdom, until
the advice of my Parliament could be taken thereon.
	"If further provision of law be requisite or expedient, with
regard to the dearness of corn, so necessary for the sustenance of
the poorer sorts, they cannot escape the wisdom of parliament, to 
which I recommend the due consideration thereof.

"At the same time, I must with concern take notice, that
notwithstanding my cares for the people, a spirit of the most daring
insurrection has, in divers parts, broke forth in violence, of the
most criminal nature.

"Necessary orders have been given for bringing such dangerous
offenders to condign punishment and speedy justice; nor shall
vigilance and vigour on my part be wanting to restore obedience and
reverence to the law and the government."

A special commission was issued for the trial of the offenders, in
the different counties, where these riots had mostly prevailed,
which, it was observed, would cost the country ten thousand pounds!
Before we proceed to the particular offences then committed, let us
take a view of the price of bread, that threw the country into
commotions, compared with the present price, which the people pay
without a murmur; and thus we may judge of the calamitous state of
the British empire

On the 28th of October, 1766, when the insurrections on account of
its enormous price was at their height, the assize for the peck loaf
of 17lb. 2oz. was two shillings and eight-pence for wheaten, and two
shillings for household bread; which is eight-pence the quartern
loaf. In the present year, 1810, the quartern loaf of wheaten bread
is one shilling and five-pence, more than double at the time of the
general outcry; and eight or nine years ago, when the people endured
with patience their distress, it was at the enormous price of three
shillings.

"Bread for my children, give me bread: she cries,
"E'en now, by hunger struck, my husband dies;
"His wife must follow fast; yet save, O save,
"These little ones, for whom that bread I crave;
"And this poor babe now starving on my breast.
"Her pray'r is scorn'd, her sorrows made a jest,
"The jest of that proud plunderer who braves
"The poor man's curse, nor heeds when famine crave."
PRATT's Cottage Pictures.

In viewing the bad consequences resulting from this national clamour
for bread, our feelings are roused at the reflection of thousands
and tens of thousands in this great empire, still wanting the common
necessaries of life, while a few hundred privileged men of fortune,
and dignified clergy, are rolling in luxury. But, saith the law,
bread must not be obtained by force of arms; and the mischiefs which
we shall adduce, shows the wisdom of the law; yet ought the poor to
have food to support nature, as well as the lord, whose luxuries,
having never indulged, they covet not.

The principal flagitious acts, committed in this scarcity of corn,
we have carefully selected from the different periodical
publications of the day; and which, for the convenience of our
readers, and consonant with our plan, we have arranged in
chronological (sic) order.

At Aylesbury the people rose, and seized a quantity of bread and
butter in the market. The magistrate caused the ringleaders to be
seized. They were tried, convicted and imprisoned. 
	Austle, St. The tinners rose, and compelled the butchers to
lower their prices.
	Bath. The mob rose, and did much mischief in the different
markets before they dispersed.
	Barnstaple, (Devonshire.) The poor joined in a body, and
compelled the farmers to sell wheat at five shillings per bushel.
	Bewdley. The mob lowered the price of wheat, meat, and butter.
	Beckingham, near Bath. A miller and his son procured firearms,
and fired upon the people, killing a man and a boy, and desperately
wounded others, which so exasperated the rest, that they set fire to
the mills, and burnt them to the ground. 
	Berwick-upon-Tweed. The people were in commotion on account of
the vast quantities of corn bought for exportation. 
	Bradley, near Trowbridge. A mill was destroyed by the
populace, who divided the corn found therein among themselves. 
	Birmingham. A vast mob rose on the fair-day, and sold the
bread and cheese at their own prices. An affray happened between
them and the peace officers, and some of the ring-leaders were sent
to gaol. The bakers, in order to appease the people, agreed to make
a quantity of household bread at one penny per pound.
	Bradford, in Wiltshire. The provision warehouses and shops
were plundered; one man concerned in this riot was hanged.
	Bromsgrove, in Worcestershire. They obliged the farmers to
sell their wheat at five shillings per bushel, and the butchers
their meat at twopence-halfpenny per pound.
	Colton, Great, in Warwickshire. They rose, traversed the
country, and did considerable damage, till, being met by the
military, they were attacked and dispersed, and eight of them were
killed.
	Coventry. The mass of the people rose, and were joined by the
colliers from the neighbouring coal-pits. They began their outrages
by plundering the warehouses of cheese, and selling the same to the
poor at low prices: They then took whatever provisions they met with
by main force.
	Crediton, in Devonshire. The poor being in great distress, and
on the point of rising, means were taken to supply their wants.
	Dennington. The mob rose, and first plundered awarehouse of
cheese, which was defended by eighteen men in arms; they were
afterwards pursued by the owner, and a large party of his friends,
but to no purpose; the mob defended themselves by throwing stones,
and drove back their pursuers
	Derby. They rose in great numbers, attacked a party of light-
horse, severely pelted them with stones, and wounded the commanding
officer. Then they plundered a warehouse of cheese; in doing which
thirty-four of them were apprehended, pinioned, and carried to gaol.
The remainder, soon afterwards assembled, and attacked an armed
boat, on the river Derwent, which they plundered of cheese to the
value of three hundred pounds, and distributed it among the poor.
They paid no regard to the magistrates, and were restrained alone by
the military, from doing greater mischief.
	Evisham, in Worcestershire. A mob suddenly rose and seized a
quantity of butter, which they sold at sixpence a pound. They
intended to pull down the corn mills, but were persuaded to desist.
	Exeter. The people broke open a cheese warehouse, and sold it
at a low price. They were intimidated from proceeding to further
extremities by the military.
	Gloucester. In order to appease the clamours of the poor, the
most considerable farmers from the hills, agreed to supply the
market with wheat at five shillings a bushel, and actually sold
large quantities at that price.
	Hampton, in Gloucestershire. They rose in considerable
numbers, but were timely opposed by the military; yet not before
they had pulled down some houses containing provisions, and some
lives lost.
	Henley-upon Thames. The people rose, and in a tumultuous
manner called for bread at a reasonable price; but upon the
magistrates reading the riot act, they dispersed.
	Honiton, in Devonshire. They rose and seized sacks of wheat,
lodged by the farmers in public-houses, brought them into the
market, and sold it at five shillings and six pence per bushel. They
returned the sacks to the owners.
	Kidderminster. The populace obliged the farmers to lower the
price of wheat to five shillings per bushel.
	Leicester. The people seized three waggon loads of cheese, and
divided it among themselves.
	Ludlow, in Shropshire. The colliers from the Cleehill, near
this town, assembled in a body, and pulled down the still-house in
that town. They went in a very orderly manner, and returned without
doing any further mischief. The magistrates promised that the still
should not be worked; but nothing could divert them from their
determined purpose.
	Maidenhead, in Berkshire. A number of bargemen entered this
town, on account of the high price of provisions, and, committed
several outrages, in seizing provisions, &c. but were opposed by the
civil power, and the ring-leaders seized and sent to Reading gaol
three of them were hanged.
	Malmsbury. The people rose in great numbers, seized on all the
corn they could find, and sold it at five shillings per bushel, but
were honest enough to give the farmers the money.
	Marlow, Great, in Buckinghamshire. A mob of bargemen rose, and
extorted money from the gentlemen and farmers in that neighbourhood,
with which they purchased spirituous liquors, and intoxicated
themselves, and in that state were very mischievous.
	Nottingham. A mob entered this town on the fair-day, seized
upon all the cheese the factors had purchased, and distributed the
same among the poor; leaving the farmers' cheese unmolested. Here
the military were called into the aid of the magistrates, and a
skirmish took place, in which a farmer was killed.
	Newbury, in Berkshire. A great mass of people assembled on the
market-day, ripped open the sacks of wheat exposed for sale, and
scattered the corn on the ground, seized the butter, meat, cheese,
and bacon, in the shops, and threw it into the streets. They so
intimidated the bakers, that they sold their bread at two-pence the
peck loaf. From Newbury the mob proceeded to Skaw-Mill, where they
threw the flour into the river, broke the windows of the house, and
did other considerable damage there, to the amount of near a
thousand pounds. A poor man named Parker, one of the mob, was
killed, leaving a wife and five small children; and another man had
his arm broke.
	Ottery St. Mary, in Devonshire. The flour mills were destroyed
by the mob.
	Pagenwell, near Stroud, in Gloucestershire. The mob committed
outrages, in order to lower the price of bread. Mr. Chandler, a
shopkeeper, shot one of them dead, who was breaking into his house
in the night; whereupon they set fire to his house, and burnt it to
the ground. Mr. Chandler surrendered himself, was tried, and
honourably acquitted, of killing the rioterthree hanged.
	Paulton, in Devonshire. The colliers joined the poor, and did
great mischief.
	Redruth, in Cornwall. The tinners rose, and intimidated the
butchers to reduce the price of their meat, and the farmers their
wheat.
	Salisbury, in Wiltshire. The risings of the people here were
very numerous, and great mischief was apprehended; but the prudent
measures taken by the magistrates, and the farmers lowering the
price of wheat, danger was happily averted. Some of the ring leaders
were, however, apprehended and committed to prisonone hanged.
	Setbury. The warehouses containing cheese and bacon, were
forcibly entered. The former the mob sold at three-pence, and the
latter at four-pence per pound.
	Sidbury in Devonshire. The mills of this place were destroyed
by the mob.
	Stourbridge, in Worcestershire. The people rose in great
numbers, and compelled farmers, butchers, and dealers, to lower the
price of meat, wheat, butter, &c.
	Tipton, in Devonshire. A number of poor people assembled,
pulled down the flour mills, and did much other damage.
	Thame. The bulk of the people assembled together, and insisted
on the prices of the articles of life being lowered.
	Wallingford. The people rose in one body, and regulated the
prices of bread, cheese, butter, and bacon.
	Welton, in Devonshire. The poor were joined by the colliers,
in order to lower the price of provisions.
	Wincanton, in Devonshire. The poor rose and did considerable
damage, seizing the wheat and meat.
	Wolverhampton, in Staffordshire. The people rose and compelled
the farmers to sell wheat at five shillings per bushel, and butchers
their meat at twopence-halfpenny per pound.
	In various other parts of the kingdom did the poor thus
riotously cry for bread; and seized provisions wherever they could
be found. We have merely given the sketches of the most desperate
cases. Parliament at length sought to remedy the evil, and granted
some temporary relief to the distress of the people.

The Special Commission issued by government, for the purpose of
bringing the riotous poor to punishment, for offending the laws, in
their cry for bread, were opened by the judges of the different
superior courts of record, in the early part of the month of
December, when numbers of misguided, half-starved wretches were
condemned to death, and some of them actually executed.

At Reading several were tried, and sentenced to death, three of whom
were hanged, viz. Daniel Ecland, William Simpson, and John Skelton. 
	At Salisbury four received sentence of death, one of whom was
executed.
	At Gloucester nine were condemned, and three executed; and at
several other towns where the Special Commission was opened, numbers
were condemned, some executed, and others pardoned, whose names do
not appear; nor, indeed, can they be of any import to the reader;
their offences being against the same statute, and attended with
nearly the same circumstances.

During these very serious commotions of the people, numbers of
threatening letters were received by wealthy farmers and
contractors, who had long played into each other's hands, and by
that means the grain was exported. Several advertisements appeared
in the London Gazette, offering rewards for the discovery and
conviction of the writers. To give them all, would far exceed the
limits of our plan; we shall therefore deem it sufficient to extract
the following, which was described to have been received by Mr.
Rabley, of Birmingham:

"This is to acquaint the public, that there is a very large body of
us at Kidderminster and Stourbridge, and by Gd will go through the
work now, or die. We have sworn one another in, and if any poor man
will come to Stourbridge, and be sworn in, we will maintain him and
his family too. We have a large body, already upwards of two
thousand, sworn and already armed. There shall be no hanging in the
case now, we will have all the gaols and prisons down before us, as
we have sworn, and be damned if we won't. Mr. Rabley, we desire you
to put in the Birmingham Gazette, or you have a friend about your
house if you do not gazette it, upon our word we will have it down.
"So no more, your's,
"Already armed at Stourbridge,
"U. B."

Having now, by unwearied pains, presented the reader with the
dreadful effects produced by the high price of provisions, which the
rich never feel: we have only to add, that in the present year,
1813, the articles of life are double, and in many things treble,
the price of the year 1766, with taxes, increased more than four-
fold; yet the people now show no other resentment than a little
grumbling, while they empty their pockets to tax-gatherers!



EDWARD AND JANE M'GINNIS
Brother and Sister Executed at Tyburn, July 18, 1766,
for Burglary

These two miserable children of most unhappy parents, broke into the
dwelling-house of James Adair, Esq. in Soho-Square, and stole
thereout a quantity of plate, jewels, and wearing apparel, to a
large amount.

We find nothing further worthy of note in their case, except the
conduct of the lower order of the country people of the malefactors
(the Irish) in consequence of their execution. It is a singular
national character of these people, in whatever part of the world
they are thrown upon together, they associate, riot, and fight for
each other, which they deem the only mode in which their supposed 
grievances can be redressed. They are ever the very worst subjects
out of their own country. The seaport towns in the United States of
America, contain a vast quantity of Irish emigrants; and this is not
to be wondered at, when, upon a moderate calculation, half a million
of the lower class of that distressed country, within the last
twenty years, have emigrated to that unhealthy climate, where at
least one fourth fall a victim to the burning heat of summer, which,
since that rage for emigration began, and not before, the yellow-
fever, like a plague, sweeps off the inhabitants, particularly new
comers, in great numbers. These imported citizens are the most
impudent and troublesome of the new world. The jailer of the
extensive prison of Philadelphia, declared, that his crew consisted
generally of nearly one half Irish, while a quarter were negroes,
and the remainder disorderly Americans, and the others Europeans.

In the evening, after the execution of M'Ginnis and his sister, a
great number of low Irishmen assembled before the house of one Hart,
a Jew, broke all his windows, and did him other damage, on pretence
of his being an accessory by receiving the goods of which the
malefactors had robbed Mr. Adair; but, in point of fact, the attack
was made upon the Jew, in revenge for his being the principal means
of their conviction. The villains merited being hanged upon the spot
of their riot and spoilation.



ISAAC LONG
And Other Sham Doctors

Quacks and mountebanks are impostors extremely dangerous to society;
for they not only cheat under the most plausible pretences, but very
often poison credulous people with their nostrums. This species of
fraud has, however, we are happy to observe, greatly decreased
within the last thirty years. In that time the progress of
literature has been rapid, and impositions become thereby more
readily detected.

The deceptions used by these artful villains were various. When they
had stuffed down the pill, the powder, and the tincture, which were
to cure all disorders, they had recourse to sham-lotteries, where
articles made with base metal, and of inferior work, which they
pretended was standard gold and silver, were the vaunted prizes; but
even those comparatively worthless articles seldom came to the
gaping crowd; for the quacks generally took care that their wheel
should contain no numbers affixed to them, so that the deluded
people, under this additional imposition, for their money, often
purchased their destruction.

A cheat of this description, who called himself Isaac Long, a Jew,
in the year 1771, was upon his circuit through Wiltshire, at each
town practising his frauds, and disseminating his poison, when the
justices, much to their credit, ordered him to be taken from his
stage, and committed to gaol, as a vagabond.  To punish him
effectually, they caused informations to be exhibited against him
for offences against the lottery act. When the Doctor was brought to
trial, he attempted to evade conviction, by pretending, that he sold
his medicines and gave away his plate. This brings to mind the old
method of propagating treason, libels, or obscene prints, and still
practised in Ireland. A few years ago the editor's affairs called
him to Londonderry, and having never before been in Ireland, the
manners of the lower class of the wretched inhabitants aroused the
emotions of pity and amazement; in fact, they sometimes beg in
crowds; and almost at every corner is posted a beggar. He was
particularly struck with an old woman, who in one hand held some
straw, while ballads were in the other. With the voice of a
boatswain, and in a most vernacular brogue, she perpetually roared
out,

"Who'll buy my straw?
"Who'll buy my straw?
"I dare not sell my book,
"But I'll sell my straw.
"I don't offer rye or oat,
"But my real barley-straw.
"For the Budget's broke open,
"And the butter's come out,
"Of our Stir-a-bout."

Her ballad was a jargon of nonsense and obscenity. This sort of
evasion, would not, however, suit the purpose of Doctor Isaac Long;
for it was too evident that the poor duped people threw up to him
their money, under the sole hope of obtaining the tinselled prize.
The jury convicted him on two penalties of 200l. each; which the
cunning Israelite, such had been the monstrous credulity of the
people, found means to pay, rather than lie longer in prison.

These murderous wretches, Quack Doctors, who pretend to cure every
disease, by one specific, by which the credulous, who swallow their
poison, soon linger into the grave, were formerly severely punished.
Stow records an exemplary punishment that was inflicted on an
empiric who pretended to medical skill, in the reign of Richard I.
When his presumptuous lyings could no longer be faced out, says this
old historian, he was led on horseback through the city of London,
with his face turned to the tail of the animal, and with a collar of
Jordans, to which was affixed a Whetstone, tied round his neck,
while the populace greeted him with shouts, and rung him with
basins. In the reign of Edward VI. also, one Greig, a poulterer, who
had acquired the reputation of being skilful in curing the most
inveterate maladies, was, on examination, proved to be a crafty
deceiver, and was ordered to be set in the pillory, in Southwark,
where he publicly asked pardon of the lord mayor and aldermen, who
were present, as well as of all the citizens, for the impositions he
had practised.

This most dangerous of all descriptions of impostors, in the present
day, we are of opinion, should, for the first offence, that is to
say, for the first they killed, be pilloried; for the second, fined
and imprisoned; and for the third, sentenced to the gallows.



JAMES FRITH
Convicted of Robbing His Master's House, in the Dead
of the Night, and Transported in the Year 1772

James Frith was a servant to an aged wealthy farmer, of the name of
Marsh, residing at Beckingham, near Gainsborough, in Lincolnshire.
Frith had an excellent place; for his master, almost past the time
of labour, confided in him, and gave him extraordinary indulgencies.
There certainly are people in this world so truly restless for
worldly pelf, who will not endure kinder treatment than is commonly
given to those in a similar situation of life. So did it prove with
the ungrateful J. Frith. In the dead hour of night this treacherous
domestic, unseen, stole to the bed-chamber of his master's daughter,
a widow, of about forty years of age, where the father deposited his
ready cash and his plate. He had provided himself with a rope, on
which he made a noose, and before the victim could make resistance,
or give the alarm he put it round her neck, drew it tight, until he
thought she was strangled. Conceiving her dead, he took up the
trunk, and carried it off, but in a quarter of an hour, recovering
her senses, she alarmed her aged father, and the remainder of the
family, but the thief was fled. Pursuit was, however, immediately
made, and he was overtaken at Matlersey, five miles from Beckingham,
with the trunk and its contents, amounting to one hundred and fifty
pounds, besides plate, &c. He was carried before John Dawson, Esq. a
Justice of the peace, who committed him to Nottingham gaol. Evidence
to this effect being given on his trial, he could only be found
guilty of privately stealing, and his sentence was transportation to
America for seven years.

The expense to the nation of transporting each felon, on the most
moderate calculation, is two hundred pounds. The plan recently
adopted in employing them in public works, for our national defence
against a deadly foe, whose ambition knows no bounds, and whose
means of gratifying that accursed passion are bounded alone by our
fleets and our insular situation, is a measure of some wisdom: the
other, to the nation's sorrow, has been proved misplaced security.
By persisting in transportation of felons, within a century, a far
distant country, like the American colonies, would be peopled; and
like them, ungratefully renounce all allegiance and connection.

Men who violate the well-known laws of their country, and who,
instead of following an honest avocation to earn their bread,
plunder the industrious, ought to atone for the injuries they have
done; and the public, upon whom they had long preyed, has a right to
insist, for that end, upon the services of the convicted. If,
instead of planting a colony, twice the distance of America, from
which we found ourselves already too distant to keep the offspring
of our transported felons in subjection, we turn their forfeited
term of years to services at home, the nation may receive
considerable benefit. It will make a difference at least of 350l.,
per man, allowing his seven year's servitude worth no more, clear,
to the state, than 150l. [Note: This estimate will not admit of
Contractors, Agents, or any other description of Governmental Birds
of Prey, who hovered round even the convicts on the Thames, after
the revolt of America.] The first eight years of the Botany Bay
mania, 5765 men and women were transported thither, and 93 children.
The females, at first, were few in proportion to the males; but of
later years, cargoes of them have been shipped for the purpose of
propagation. Supposing, therefore, that in eight years our sapient
rulers, by neglecting their services at home, the country lost, in
expenses and wages, 155,000l. There can be neither calculation nor
allowance made of the smallest benefit to this country ever accruing
from New South Wales. America was ever an expense to the mother
country; she did not, in many instances, pay her own governors and
public officers; and when matured by the fostering arm of the mother
country, the moment her energies would have become serviceable, she
rebelled, and ever since has remained, in her heart's core, the
bitter enemy of the British empire. But this, it will be remembered,
is the calculation of eight years only, ending with 1789; and from
the increase of felons transported at that rate, millions of money
may be lost in this second experimental colonization.

In resorting to the old plan of employing the convicts at home, I am
willing to allow, that we had better send them away, at double the
sacrifice of money to that already submitted to. An ingenious
commentator on the penal laws, [Colquhoun] has given the expenses
and the earnings of the convicts, at Langston Harbour, Portsmouth,
and Woolwich Warren; and extracting therefrom only three years
balance, will stand thus:

CONVICTS, DR.
     £.
 s.
d.
Cash paid out of the Exchequer for their
expenses for the 1789 year
 62,656
15
 5
Ditto for the year 1790,
 46,865
 4
 6
Ditto for the year 1791,
 43,480
 9
 0

153,002
 8
11
CONVICTS. CR.



By 653,432 days' work performed at
Langston harbour, Portsmouth, and
Woolwich, estimated at 9d. per day is
 24,503
14
 0
By 260,440 days' work at Woolwich Dock
Yard, chiefly by artificers, at 1s. per
day, is
 13,022
 0
 0

 37,025
14
 0
Balance being the Money paid by the
Country for maintaining Convicts for two
Years
115,477
14
11
	The effect produced by this plan of employing convicts, it
must be allowed widely differs from mine; but I will show the reader
that my observations are not altogether visionary or speculative,
for I know a nation (once colonies) which makes convicts useful to
society, as they had before been a pest. This may be found in
"Janson's America," a work of much information, and which we offer
as our authority. Mr. Janson, (who it will be remembered resided
fourteen years in the United States, practising as a Counsellor at
Law) on the subject of convicts there, says," [Note: See "The
Stranger in America," page 182]

"The punishments annexed to criminal convictions, in all the American
States, are worthy of imitation. The many public executions which
take place in England, after every jail delivery, are a subject which
strike Americans with horror.

"Though both the penal and common laws of England are generally
adopted in the United States, the punishments differ materially; but
it will be admitted that they are sufficiently proportioned to the
crimes. In very, few cases, indeed, in any State, is the punishment
of death inflicted. Legislative bodies consider, that the laws of man
should seldom extend to the extermination of that life which was
given by the Almighty.
	"In Pensylvania, capital punishments are remitted in all cases
except treason, or murder in the first degree; and in the latter case
death is seldom inflicted; but the culprit is sentenced to solitary
confinement in a dark cell for several years, or perhaps for life. In
the second degree, light is admitted into the cell of the prisoner,
and his confinement is limited to seven or fourteen years. For
burglary, which rarely occurs, the punishment is also solitary
confinement.

"Such as are under conviction of theft and petty-larceny, are made to
work in their cells, at the trade to which they were bred. Prisoners
for inferior misdemeanours, midnight disturbers, vagabonds, and such
as are detected fighting or begging, are kept at labour together.

"It is curious and pleasing to reflect upon the various useful
occupations, these people, hitherto dangerous to society, are obliged
to follow, in the prisons of America, Manufactures of most kinds are
there carried on. Tailors, Shoemakers, and persons of other trades,
have separate rooms; and such of the prisoners as have not followed
any useful branch in particular, are instructed in making nails, by
machines, of which quantities are constantly manufacturing. The
produce not only maintains the prisoners, but leaves considerable
profit to the state. Thus, prisoners who are a great expense to the
English nation, living in idleness, and plotting and teaching each
other mischief, and new methods and devices for plundering the
public, are there rendered valuable members to society.

"The punishment, so far from hardening them in turpitude, reforms
them, and they generally, on their liberation, return to those habits
of industry, which, from compulsion, have become second nature. The
task assigned to them is so moderate, that each individual can, with
ease, earn a daily surplus; and in this case, an account is taken of
it, and it is delivered in cash to the respective claimants, on
liberation. Thus, the most industrious, often accumulate a
sufficiency to enable them once more to begin an honest business."

This mode of reclaiming criminals has stood the test, with
increasing advantage, both to the nation and the individual, for
more than twenty years. Though we have the same resource, yet it may
be said we cannot avail ourselves of the advantage, like the
Americans. It is true, she is not annoyed by ambitious placemen, or
hungry pensioners. There we find no saucy contractors, or craving
agents. A gaoler, and half a dozen turnkeys, inspect the whole
business of a thronged but working prison. Occasionally, a parish-
officer, nay, an unofficial householder, will pay a visit through
the wards, and report what he may see amiss; but in fact this is
seldom wanted. There, prisoners are dismissed, generally reclaimed;
here, the man who enters the walls with but a litle roguery about
him, comes out a finished villain, ready to commit depredations,
which, till then, he had never contemplated.

Instead of ballast heaving, cannot the tailor be made to work on
army-clothing, since wars we are doomed perpetually to groan under?
In like manner the shoemaker, weaver, hatter, button-maker, and, in
fine, every mechanic; cannot they, we say, be confined for the same?
The women could make up linen, and knit soldier's stockings, while
those brought up to no mechanism, the lazy, and the incorrigible,
might be kept to ballast-heaving, or repairing forts and harbours.
Instead, therefore, of the enormous expense to the public in
maintaining the convicts, they might, by honest means, be made a
public benefit. Some Englishmen will not trouble themselves to think
of these things; and those whose eyes are open, will only shrug
their shoulders, and pay the next year's increased taxes.

The many millions expended in Spanish knight-errantry, or for a peep
into Antwerp, honest John Bull clearly sees, and yet seems to freely
pay; and, let our sage men plan expedition after expedition, still 
will John pay, and hope the next piece of Quixotism will, in fame,
out-do the last.

Wherever we have found an opportunity of gleaning from detached
observations on the cases and lives of notorious criminals, which
have never been moulded into a regular report, we lay hold of them
with avidity; in this we hope for credit, in according to us a pre-
eminence over all other reporters.



WILLIAM KELLY
Executed near Gloucester, and His Body Hung in
Chains, September the 28th, 1772, for Murder

IN the case of this man, we find little more said than that he was,
on the clearest evidence, convicted of the murder of Richard Dyer,
except that he long persisted, with the most wicked imprecations, in
his innocence of the charge against him. In this manner he
continued, until the moment the cart which carried him to execution
passed the spot where the murder was committed, when the Almighty
smote his conscience. He turned pale, and trembled, and while
calling God to witness his innocence, his voice suddenly faltered,
and he began to confess his guilt, in an agony of mind.

The cart was stopped, when viewing the place with distorted
features, he said, "Just there I killed poor Dyer; I overtook him,
and walked with him in friendly conversation, until in getting over
that stile," pointing to it, "I struck him on the back of the head
with a hedge-stake, and repeated the blow, he fell dead at my feet."
He farther confessed, that on coming up with the deceased, he had no
intention to hurt him, but that the devil whispered him to commit
murder and robbery; but when he saw his bloody work, he was deprived
of the, power of robbing, and ran away, like Cain, the first
murderer, struck with horror.

The unfortunate wretch left a wife and children to lament his sad
fate, and was but just twenty-two years of age.

"Think, timely think, on the last dreadful day,
"How you will tremble there, to stand expos'd,
"The foremost in the rank of guilty ghosts,
"That must be doom'd for murder! Think on murder!
"That troop is plac'd apart from common crimes;
"The damn'd themselves start wide, and shun that band,
"As far more black, and more forlorn than they."
DRYDEN.



WILLIAM WELCH AND PETER CONWAY
Two Boys, the first fourteen, and the latter nine
years of Age, Tried at the Old Bailey, for a Highway
Robbery on the Person of a Female Infant, still
Younger

WE hardly think that the combined turpitude of mankind, pictured in
almost every page of our voluminous work, exhibits such a scene of
the debasement of human nature, as came out on the trial of these
most miserable children. This abomination could hardly have
proceeded from the parties already described: from whom then,
inquires the astonished reader, or how could greater baseness arise?
From a bawd we answerit generated in a female breast!

"I charge you, in the name of chastity,
Tell me no more; how ugly you seem to me!
There is no wonder men defame our sex,
And lay the vices of all ages on us,
When such as you shall bear the name of woman:
If you had eyes to see yourselves, or sense
Above the base rewards you earn with shame!
If ever in your lives you heard of goodness,
Tho' many regions off, as men hear thunder;
If ever ye had fathers, and they souls,
Or ever mothers, and not such as ye are,
If anything was ever constant in you,
Beside your sins!
If any of your ancestors
Dy'd worth a noble deedthat wou'd be cherished!
Soul-frighted with this black infection,
You would run from one another's repentance,
And from your guilty eyes drop out those sins
That make you blind and beasts."
LORD ROCHESTER'S VALENTINIAN.

Thus we have quoted a noble author upon sin; but we question whether
he, well acquainted as he was with human nature, ever heard of such
baseness in a matron's breast, as that which we now, reluctantly,
discover in the annals of crimes.

The wretched children, Welch and Conway, were indicted at the Old
Bailey, the second of March, 1787, through the procurement of one of
those most dangerous pests to societythe early corrupter of the
morals of both sexesa bawd: who kept an infamous brothel, or stew,
as called in old times, in Coventry-court, St. Giles's, London. The
accused, as well as Mary Davis, the child said to have been robbed
by them, had all been seduced by this abandoned woman; who, hoping
to gain more by the conviction of the boys, than by longer keeping
them, appeared, in order to take their lives. She swore to their
robbing the little girl, Mary Davis, of a bundle of linen; the whole
most likely planned by this cruel, infernal, and diabolical woman.
The penetrating eye of the Recorder of London, before whom the boys
were tried, saw some lurking villainy in the evidence, and he
proceeded to sift it from her.

After much labour he brought her to acknowledge, that she had long
made a practice of seducing children from their parents, or to steal
them in the streets, and by a regular course of instruction, to
train them up in every species of villainy and debauchery, first
destroying, as a preparatory step, all sense of shame and decency,
by putting many of each sex into beds together, locking them naked
in the same room, and encouraging scenes too painful to relate.

The learned and humane judge directed the boys to be taken care of;
and ordered the bawd to confinement in Newgate, for perjury. A
prosecution was commenced by the parish against several houses in
the infernal neighbourhood, where every species of crime was
engendered; but had the magistrates been active in their duty, under
the authority of the vagrant act alone, many unfortunate children
might have been rescued from infamy, passed to their respective
parishes, and thus have become useful members of society; while the
keepers of such hellish depositaries would have been handed over to
the strong hand of Justice.



NICHOLAS MALLARD
Sentenced to Three Years Imprisonment, for an Assault
Committed in a Singular Attempt to Commit a Robbery
on the 16th Of April 1774

This most ungrateful and daring transaction, though no robbery was
effected, we deem fitting a place in our Chronology, in order to
caution people against admitting strangers into their houses, of
equivocal character.

On the 24th of January, about eleven o'clock in the morning, Mr.
Cator, an eminent attorney at law, in Lincoln's-Inn, was intruded
upon by a man, who afterwards appeared to be one Nicholas Mallard, a
Frenchman, who began a long story of his distresses, and prevailed
upon Mr. Cator to give him a small sum of money. Still the object of
his charity did not appear satisfied, upon which Mr. Cator, having
at that time no clerk in his office, pretended he had business out,
and must lock the chambers.

While turning for his hat, the infernal villain knocked him down,
and with a stone, brought for the purpose, repeated the blows, with
such sudden violence, as to render resistance in vain. Concluding
him dead, the assassin began to rifle the chambers; but, while thus
employed, the wounded man recovered his senses, and opening the
window, soon raised the whole inn, in consequence of which the
Frenchman was seized, in attempting to make his escape, though
before that could be effected, he had almost reached the gates of
the square.

No stolen property having been found upon the prisoner, and as he
did not burglariously enter the chambers, Mr. Cator laid his
indictment merely for the assault; though it is a matter of doubt,
whether it would not have been held upon the black-act, which we
have already explained.

He was sentenced to be imprisoned in Newgate for three years; a poor
satisfaction to the prosecutor, who was beat about the head with
such violence, as to have some of his teeth knocked out; and in many
parts was badly wounded.



WILLIAM CARR
Convicted in the Ecclesiastical Court for Slander,
May 4, 1774, and Sentenced to be Imprisoned Four
Years

WE introduced this case, for the purpose of showing, that our
constitution recognized courts, yet severer, according to the limits
of their power, than the Old Bailey or Westminster-hall. These are
Ecclesiastical Courts, or the tribunals of the dignified clergy;
from which we most seriously warn our readers to beware, for though
small may be the crime, great will be the punishment.

We have already given, the definition of "The Benefit of Clergy."
When the rapacity of the priests arrived to the pitch we have
stated, and it became necessary to check their impositions, they had
resort to these Bishop's Courts, where, for an unguarded oath, or
the slander of passion, laymen, like ourselves, may be liable to a
gloomy imprisonment for so long a time as four years.

For offences far more injurious to community than the crime of
William Carr, the court of King's Bench has sentenced offenders to
only three month's imprisonment. That court, the pride of our laws,
is merciful. It admits men to bail, for the purpose of allowing the
accused, until the forms of law call for his appearance, an
opportunity of earning bread for himself, and perhaps, as was the
unhappy case of Carr, for a wife and three children. This court
never, except in cases of flagrant breaches of the peace, or some
enormous offence against the government, or perhaps a scandalous
libel; in short, hardly in any case inferior to felony, does it
sentence a man four years imprisonment! And now mark, reader,
another difference between courts civil and ecclesiastic. The tender
mercies of the church, as priests call their actions, will take no
surety but the body that offends against its dignity, and there it
must lie, without bail or mainprize, the number of years which a
bishop, in his meekness and humanity, order the devoted layman to
linger in a gloomy prison.

We are highly gratified at finding the case of Thomas Carr, noted by
the philanthropic Howard, in his researches into the haunts of
misery. Could we make our bishops into Howards, what a blessing
would they prove to the land! Then would humanity, generosity,
meekness, pity and comfort, be found in each prelate, going about,
like Howard, searching the wretched out, and administering to their
misfortunes. Howardand if ever mortal was immortalized, it surely
must be Howardin his State of Prisons, contains the following
observation on the case of William Carr: 

"In the old prison of Rothwell, in Yorkshire, I saw, both times I was
there, one William Carr, a weaver: he had given a bad name to a
woman, who, it is said, did not deserve a good one: She cited him to
the Ecclesiastical Court and he was imprisoned. He had a wife and
three children."

We shall conclude this hard case, with the singular curiosity of a
copy of the formal part of the Ecclesiastical Writ, which deprives a
layman of his liberty, without bail or mainprize; and, perhaps, for
no other crime, as Mr. Howard insinuates, than telling a strumpet
that she was a whore.

"Forasmuch as the Royal Power ought not to be wanting to the holy
Church in its complaints. Attach William Carr, until he shall have
made satisfaction to the holy Church, as well for the contempt, as
for the injury by him done to it."

Mr. Howard adds, that this victim to the offended church, was
released only by the insolvent act.



STRICTURES ON THE OBSERVATIONS OF MR. HOWARD
Respecting Prisons, and the Treatment of Prisoners

Each line of the pen of this great philanthropist is, worthy a plate
of gold. So disinterested and active a friend to his fellow-
creatures in distress, as Mr. Howard, no other nation can boast:
thus, particularly the poor prisoner, all men must revere his
memory. The singular example of disinterested patriotism and public
spirit here displayed, in behalf of some of the most miserable, but
unseen, unknown, and therefore disregarded, part of our fellow-
creatures, demands the particular attention, and sincere
acknowledgement of all who have the feelings of humanity.

The subject more immediately attracted our author's notice, when he
was sheriff of the county of Bedford in 1773, on many innocent, or
acquitted, and unprosecuted prisoners, after having been confined
for months, dragged back to gaol, and locked up again, for sundry
fees to the gaoler, clerk of assize, &c. More scenes of calamity,
which he was anxious to alleviate, on further enquiry, presented
themselves to his view; and, to gain more perfect knowledge of them,
he visited most of the county-gaols in England. To inspect the
bridewells, which had before escaped him, he travelled a second time
into all the counties, examining houses of correction, city and town
gaols. In many of them, as well as in the county gaols, he beheld a
complication of distress; but his attention was principally fixed by
the gaol-fever and the small-pox, which he saw destroying
multitudes, not only of felons in their dungeons, but of debtors
also. [Note: In the year 1772, the gaol-fever raged in Old Newgate
to so alarming an height, that many persons who had business there
died of infection. In consequence, a new ventilator was made, and
other precautions used to prevent its again spreading. Among those
was a pipe to carry the fumes of vinegar into the Sessions-house
during the trial of the prisoners. A malignant fever broke out in
Dublin, 1776, occasioned by a criminal infected with the gaol-
distemper, being brought into the Court of Sessions without
cleansing, produced very fatal effects, and alarmed the whole city.
Among others who fell victims to the violence of the contagion, were
Fielding Ould, Esq. High Sheriff; the Counsellors Derby, Palmer,
Spring, and Ridge; Charles Caldwell, Esq. Messrs. Bolton and Ereven;
with several attornies and others, whose business it was to attend
in Court]

On this subject he was examined by the House of Commons, in March,
1774, and most deservedly received their thanks; an honour which
reflected on themselves. To this were owing two humane bills,
brought in by Mr. Popham, and which passed that session, "For the
relief of prisoners who should be acquitted, respecting their fees;"
and "For preserving their health, and preventing the gaol-
distemper." But as there are still many disorders that ought to be
rectified, and the gaol-fever is not yet totally eradicated, Mr.
Howard now submits the results of his enquiries to the public,
hoping that he "shall not be deserted in the conflict," and that the
present Parliament will finish what the last had so laudably begun,
Their attention encouraged him to extend his plan, repeating his
visits and travels over the kingdom; at first, no doubt, with great
danger of infection, from which vinegar and change of apparel (with
God's blessing) happily preserved him; but afterwards with less
hazard and caution, partly from use, and from the alterations made
in some gaols by the last of the forementioned acts.

The distress in prisons, which our author justly imputes to the
inattention of sheriffs and magistrates, originates, he observes,

First, from want of necessary food, some bridewells having no
allowance at all, and finding twelve debtors only in all England and
Wales, (Middlesex and Surrey excepted,) who had been able to obtain
their groats. [Note: Or aliment, to which they have a right from
their creditors by the 32d of Geo. II. but the means of procuring it
is so very expensive, as to be generally out of their reach.]
	Secondly, from the demands of gaolers, &c. for fees.
	Thirdly, the extortion of bailiffs.
	Fourthly, the defect of water and air.
	Fifthly, the want or offensiveness of sewers.
	Sixthly, to their being in many gaols and in most bridewells,
no straw allowed for prisoners to sleep on.

These evils affect their health and lives. Among those which are
pernicious to their morals, the complaints of debtors and felons,
men and women, young beginners and old offenders, being confined
together; and in some few gaols idiots also and lunatics. [Note:
viz. Hull and Swaffham Bridewells, and Lancaster gaol.] No one,
therefore, will wonder at the havoc made by the gaol distemper, of
which many dreadful instances are here enumerated; or, at the
general spread of wickedness, by the confined and discharged. The
same humanity with which we treat our prisoners of war Mr. Howard
wishes us to extend to our own unhappy countrymen. This part of his
subject naturally leads him to mention the dreadful hardships he
himself suffered at Brest and Morlaix, when he was taken prisoner in
a Lisbon packet, in the last war; and his own sufferings, as he
observes, on that occasion, probably increased his sympathy with
other prisoners. To the above grievances he adds several bad customs
prevalent in gaols, and these are, the demand of garnish or footing,
"pay or strip;" the frequency of gaming; the loading prisoners with
heavy irons; the varying the towns where quarter-sessions and
assizes are held, so that prisoners must walk in irons, and
sometimes to towns that have no prison; [Note: At Wells there are
assizes and no prison; at Ryegate there is no prison, yet quarter-
sessions; and the quarter sessions of Surrey are held at four
different towns, Ryegate, Guildford, Kingston, and Southwark] gaol-
delivery being in some counties but once a year (at Hull it is only
once in three years; it used to be but once in seven) the fee still
demanded by clerks of the assizes and of the peace,[Note: Some of
these gentlemen (in particular the clerks of the western circuit)
have started a new demand for the Judge's certificate of
acquittance] and for which acquitted prisoners, contrary to the
express words of the act, are still detained; the non-residence of
gaolers, debtors crowding the gaols with their wives and children;
and some gaols being private property. Of all these complaints
instances are given.

The whole number of prisoners in England and Wales, in the spring of
the year 1776, was, "Debtors, 2437, Felons, &c. 994, Petty
Offenders, 653; total 4084." To these adding twice the number of
dependents (the usual average,) the whole number of the distressed
is 12,252. To obviate all the grievances, Mr. Howard discusses the
proper situation, plan, structure, and management of prisons, which,
he insists, should be airy, and built, if possible, near a river or
brook, or else on an eminence, raised on arcades, &c. But for
further particulars, important as they are, we must refer to his
plan and books, observing only, that we hear with concern, that New
Newgate has "some manifest errors," not specified indeed, and it is
now too late, save only that "the prisoners, without more than
ordinary care, will be in great danger of the gaol-fever;" and that
that Chelmsford new gaol seems to exceed in splendour, but in other
articles, more essential, to fall short of his ideas. Of the opulent
county of Essex we must add, with as much pain as Mr. Howard
observed it, that "there had been no Divine service for above a year
past, but to condemned criminals;" of Cornwall, that "the chaplain's
salary has been lately reduced from 50l., to 30l.; and of
Huntingdonshire, that "Mr. Brock, the late chaplain, who officiated
constantly twice a week, and had a salary of 20l. was dismissed. He
would have continued his attendance without the salary, but an order
was made expressly forbidding it." Can these Worshipfuls be men or
Christians! If they are either, they would recollect, that by an act
of the 13th of his present Majesty, each county is empowered to
appoint a chaplain, "with a stipend not exceeding 50l." Little did
Parliament foresee that any gentleman would be so mean as to
retrench, or rather withdraw, a much smaller pittance, and even
refuse gratuitous duty.

The other county-gaols which have no chaplains ought also to be
specified; they are Westmoreland, Cambridgeshire, Rutland,
Warwickshire, Worcestershire, Sussex, Monmouthshire, and five Welsh
counties. Are these counties poor in purse, or poor in Christian
spirit? Yet one of them boasts a University.

We must add, that though the act 32d of Geo. II. expressly requires
a table of fees, signed by the justices, and confirmed by the judge,
&c. should be hung up conspicuously in every gaol, and declares all
other fees illegal, and the demand punishable by a penalty of 50l.
to the person injured; yet no less than fifty-seven instances are
mentioned, in which this is neglected: though the act 24th Geo. II.
in like manner requires the three clauses against the use of
spirituous liquors, to be also hung up and renewed, under the
penalty of forty shillings every default; this, too, is neglected in
forty-two gaols; and fifty-seven instances occur, where water, so
essential to health and comfort, is not accessible to prisoners. In
many places, notwithstanding the late act, there has been no
amendment, no cleaning, white-washing, &c. To show what misery
prevails in some prisons, particularly in such as are private
property, and also to give a specimen of the author's manners, we
beg leave to quote the following:

"Chesterfield gaol, for the hundred of Scarsdale, is the property of
the Duke of Portland, to whom, or to his steward, the gaoler pays
18l. 12s. a year. Only one room with a cellar under it, to which the
prisoners occasionally descend through a hole in the floor. The
cellar had not been cleaned for many months. The prison door had not
been opened for several weeks when I was there first. There were 
four prisoners, who told me they were almost starved: one of them
said, with tears in his eyes, "he had not eaten a morsel that day;"
it was then afternoon. Their meagre sickly countenances confirmed
what they said. They had borrowed a book of Dr. Manton's; one of
them was reading it to the rest. Each of them had a wife; and they
had in the whole thirteen children, cast on their respective
parishes. Two had their groats from the creditors, and out of that
pittance they relieved the other two. No allowance, no straw, no
firing: water, a halfpenny for about three gallons, put in (as other
things are) at the window. Gaoler lives distant." As the noble
proprietor is also humane, when he knows the evil, he will doubtless
redress it.

Waiving, at present, farther particulars, we must now observe, that
in pursuit of his grand object, this son of benevolence has
travelled not only these three kingdoms, but also France, Flanders,
Holland, and Germany, twice, together with Switzerland. Of
everything peculiar to the prisons of these countries he gives an
account; and in them nothing seems more striking than the
cleanliness of most of them, and the utter exemption of them all
from our gaol distemper. Dr. Tissot, at Lausanne, expressed his
surprise at it, and added, "It was not to be found in Switzerland,
nor had he heard of its being anywhere but in England." And Dr.
Haller, at Bern, ascribed it to "our gaols being overcrowded." No
French prisoners were in irons; no new prisons abroad have under-
ground dungeons; all the German prisons are near rivers; they are
exemplary in their care of legacies and donations; in most of them
each criminal is alone in his room; all the felons have somewhat
more to live upon than bread and water; and, on the whole, such are
their cleanliness, industry, health, and decorum, as sometimes to
put the visitor to the blush for his native country, and fully to
prove that the design of reforming our own prisons is not
chimerical.

We shall dismiss this important work for the present, with our
author's conclusion, which may serve as an epitome of his design:

"If this publication shall have any effect in alleviating the
distresses of poor debtors and other prisoners, in procuring them
clean and wholesome abodes, and thereby exterminating the gaol-fever
which has so long spread abroad its dreadful contagion, in
abolishing, or at least reducing, the oppressive fees of clerks of
assize and of the peace, and checking the imposition of gaolers, and
the extortion of bailiffs, in introducing a habit of industry in our
bridewells, and restraining the shocking debauchery and immorality
which prevail in our gaols and other prisons. If any of these
beneficial consequences should accrue, the writer will be ready to
indulge himself with the pleasing thought of not having lived
without doing some good to his fellow-creatures, and think himself
abundantly repaid for the pains he has taken, and the hazards he has
undergone. Nothing effectual will, I am persuaded, be done in
reforming the state of our prisons, till a thorough parliamentary
enquiry concerning them be set on foot, in which may be grounded one
comprehensive statute, for their general regulation. Should this be
undertaken (relying still upon that KIND HAND, which has hitherto
preserved me, and to which I desire to offer my most thankful
acknowledgments,) devote my time to one more extensive foreign
journey, in which the Prussian and Austrian territories, and the
most considerable free cities in Germany, would probably afford some
new and useful light on this important national concern."

Rome, who decreed a civic crown to the citizen who saved a single
life, would certainly have rewarded the unprecedented labour of
love, with a statue in the forum. But Britain has not been
ungrateful. Mr. Howard has received from our legislators the
greatest honour they can confer, in common with our Marlboroughs,
our Hawkes, our Nelsons, and a long list of heroes. But vain and
trifling are all human praises, when compared with the self-
approbation of conscience, the blessings of many that were ready to
perish, and the reward which this true and faithful servant shall
receive from that KING OF GLORY, whom, in the person of the poor and
destitute, he visited and comforted, when "sick and in prison."



CHARLES PIPKINS
Executed at Tyburn, October 23, 1776, for Burglary

This was a villain of the lowest and worst description of thieves.
In order to carry on his depredations he vagabondised through the
country, as drummer to a puppet show, and in this character he
gained information where and whom to plunder.

In the night of the 7th of August, 1776, in company with another
vagabond showman, who escaped justice, he broke open the house of
Mrs. Watson, of Finchley, near London. That lady was suddenly awaked
from her sleep, by the screams of her maidservant, who slept in the
same room, and immediately by the light of one of the lamps used to
dance the puppets with, which Pipkins had in his hand, perceived him
entering at the chamber window, from which he descended and came to
her bed-side, with horrid imprecations, demanding her money. Another
ruffian followed, calling out, "Damn her, blow her brains out." She
entreated them not to use her ill, and offered her money. They took
from her sixteen guineas, and then examined every part of the
chamber, taking what articles were most portable, and among them a
gold watch, with which they went out the way they came in. Both Mrs.
Watson and her maid having seen Pipkins drumming up the ignorant to
attend the paltry show, immediately knew him, and giving information
at the public office in Bow-Street, he was soon apprehended, with
part of the property, brought to trial, condemned, and executed.

At the same time with Pipkins, there suffered William Wood, for
breaking into the house of the late Solomon Fell, Esq. in Lincoln's-
Inn-Fields, in the absence of the family, who were then in the
country, and robbing it of a quantity of silver plate, wearing
apparel, &c, and Robert Walker, for coining.

Wood appeared full-dressed; Pipkins, in a beggarly suit: and Walker,
as became his unhappy situation. Wood addressed the spectators,
wherein he acknowledged his guilt, and warned them to avoid evil
company, who had brought him to his ignominious death.



HYMAN ISAACKS
An English Jew, Executed at Ostend, in the year 1777,
for Forging on the Bank of England

Forgers on the Bank of England are pursued in their fancied refuge
on the continent of Europe. Let no man, therefore, who has committed
this crime, hope to evade the punishment of death.

In the year 1777, one Hyman Isaacks, otherwise called Hyman Baron, a
Jew, had committed forgeries on the Bank of England, and when he had
passed as many as he could in the British dominions, without being
taken, the fear of the officers of justice urged his flight to
France. There, and in other different parts of Europe, he continued
to circulate his spurious paper, for Bank of England notes,
throughout the civilized world, bearing their intrinsic value. At
length he was seized by order of the King of Prussia, and executed
at Ostend. Every court of Europe had issued orders for his
apprehension. He had circulated forgeries to the amount of several
thousand pounds.



JOSHUA CROMPTON
Executed at Gangly-Green, near Guildford, in Surrey,
July 31, 1778, for Forging Bank of England Notes

IT would seem, from the manner in which this man was brought to
justice, that forgery, a crime so dangerous in a commercial county,
like murder, is not to remain long unpunished.

After committing the very worst species of forgery, that of
counterfeiting the notes of the Bank of England, he made his escape
to France, from the prison to which he had been committed, on
suspicion. From whence he was allured to return to England by a
false friend, who had assured him of safety. He was immediately
betrayed, and again committed to gaol. His trial came on at
Guildford, on the 31st of July, 1778. His indictment contained two
charges of forgery, and he was convicted on the following:

"For forging, and uttering the same, knowing it to be forged, a
certain instrument in writing, purporting to be a note of the Bank
of England, dated the 5th of May, 1773, marked K, No. 56, payable to
Thomas Harris, Esq. or bearer, on demand, signed by the Governor and
Company of the Bank of England, and subscribed Thomas Grant."

The testimony of several witnesses leaving little doubt of his
guilt, he was condemned to death. He behaved becoming his unhappy
situation. At the gallows he acknowledged his crime, and prayed the
forgiveness of man, observing that he had firm reliance on, and that
he had made his peace with, God. He prayed to God to forgive his
false friend, who, he said, artfully drew him back to England, and
was the means of hanging him for ten guineas. His unhappy fate was
much lamented, while the surrounding crowd heaped execrations on the
head of his betrayer. Of such a man, though his treachery tended to
the public weal, we might almost be tempted to repeat, from
Shakespeare,

"Why, I can smile, and murder while I smile;
"And cry content to that which grieves my heart,
"And wet my cheeks with artificial tears,
"And frame my face to all occasions."



FRANCES PEARCE
Convicted of Privately Stealing, in October Sessions,
1778, at the Old Bailey, and Sentenced to be
Imprisoned for Three Years

THE following case, though not capital, we insert in order to show
that, as well as the numerous gangs of men depredating upon the
public, females also associate for the same purpose. This woman,
along with Ann Arrogany, and Catherine Davis, were tried for robbing
Henry Kitchen, Esq. of bank notes to the amount of 550l. and other
bills and securities to a considerable amount.

Mr. Kitchen deposed that he was passing on foot along the Strand,
about ten o'clock at night, and that near the New Church he was
surrounded by three women, who picked his pocket of his pocket-book,
containing bank notes, and other securities, to the value of 14 or
15,000l. He saw four hands held up; he cried Watch and Stop Thief!
and instantly secured Peace, but did not see the pocket-book in her
hand. The other women ran away.

Elizabeth Mills, an unhappy woman of the town, deposed, that she saw
Simpson and Arrogany near Mr. Kitchen; that there were one on each
side of him. This deponent saw there only two women at that time.
When Mr. Kitchen came near the New Church, Davis ran away, and the
other fell down in attempting to run off, Mr. Kitchen cried out,
"Stop thiefI am robbed." Five or six women standing near the
church, he seized one of them, and said, "I have got you; I have got
you." On the cross-examination, this evidence said, that the woman
had walked with Mr. Kitchen from St. Clement's church-yard, arm in
arm; and that when he came near the New-Church, five or six women
were standing together; and he said, "I have got you all." To
invalidate the testimony of this witness, Samuel Price a bailiff,
was sworn, who deposed, that he had known her ten years, and that he
did not believe she was such a woman as deserved credit on her oath.
Mary Hayes likewise deposed, that she was a very abandoned woman,
that she had assumed several names, and ought not to be believed
even under the sanction of an oath. Amelia Burchell swore, that she
saw the prosecutor seize Pearce, and that he said he was robbed; and
Elizabeth Thompson deposed, that she had likewise heard him say that
he was robbed; that she saw Davis having hold of his arm; that
Arrogany was four yards behind him, but at what distance Pearce was
she did not know.

The jury having considered the whole evidence, acquitted Arrogany
and Davis, and found Pearce guilty of the charge, in consequence of
which she received sentence to be imprisoned three years.

The notes thus stolen from Mr. Kitchen were passed into the hands of
some Jews; but, by the diligence of the peace officers, about half
of them were recovered.



WILLIAM FLINT
A Pick-Pocket, Twice Sentenced to Hard Labour on the
River Thames, for Privately Stealing

This man's crimes were marked with singular ingratitude. He had been
capitally condemned, and received a pardon on condition of working
for the public on the river Thames, for a limited time. In
consequence of a favourable report having been made of his good
behaviour and apparent contrition for his past crimes, he was soon
released on a general pardon.

No sooner had this most ungrateful wretch regained his liberty, than
he commenced a still worse course of life. For this purpose, having
been himself brought up to a mechanical business, he took several
boys as apprentices; but instead of instructing them in his branch,
he taught them to way-lay other apprentices, and errand-boys, and to
rob them of the goods with which they might have been entrusted. Out
of this plunder he rewarded them.

Mr. Tookie, silversmith, deposed before Mr. John Fielding, that he
had sent a parcel, in which was a quantity of gold manufacture and
other valuable articles, to a customer in the Borough, by his
errand-boy, a lad of thirteen years of age, and by the way he was
met by Flint's apprentice, who, entering into conversation with him,
gave him two-pence to do a pretended errand for him, promising to
take care of his parcel until his return, and on the errand-boy's
questioning him, he pulled out an handkerchief, and gave it to him
as a security, which satisfying the boy, he parted with his parcel,
and never saw it more. Other charges of a similar nature were made
against Flint, and he, with his apprentices, were committed to
prison. A man who lived in high style and kept a country house,
supposed to have been the receiver of the stolen goods, gave bail
for their appearance, but proof could not be adduced to convict
them.

Such practices, however, could not long be carried on under the
strict police then established in London; as we find that, at the
sessions held at the Old Bailey in September, 1778, William Flint
was indicted for stealing a silver watch, value 40s, the property of
Aaron Coats, privily from the person of the said Aaron, on the 16th
of August. Mr. Coats deposed, that being at a fire in Nicholas-lane,
on the evening of the 16th of August, he staid about half an hour
from motives of curiosity; and that on coming from the fire he felt
for his watch in Lombard-street, and missed it: but he owned that he
had not seen the prisoner at the fire. Mr. Coats advertised his
watch for four days afterwards, and soon learnt that the prisoner
was at Sir John Fielding's, charged with that and other offences: on
which he went to Bow street where his watch was produced to him.
William Adley, a pawnbroker in Cow-cross, deposed, that the prisoner
brought the watch to him, to offer it in pledge; that he asked him
two guineas, that he lent him a guinea and a half on it; and Flint
took a duplicate of it in his own name. Moses Morant, one of Sir
John Fielding's officers, deposed, that he went to apprehend Flint,
two boys, and another person; that in Flint's parlour he found the
duplicate of Mr. Coats's watch, an old seal which had belonged to
it; and the watch being produced, was sworn to by the prosecutor.
The prisoner, by way of defence, said that a person had given him
the watch to pawn for him; but the jury gave no credit to this
assertion, and found him "Guilty of stealing the watch, but not
guilty of stealing it privily from the person." Flint was put to the
bar at the close of the sessions, to receive his sentence, which
was, "That he should work at ballast-heaving five years." He was a
manufacturer in the silver branch, and lived in West-Smithfield. He
had two apprentices whom he trained up to the art of thieving.



WILLIAM MEYER, ESQ.
Executed at York, April, 6 1781, for Murder

Whether to condemn most the act of madness, which prompted this man
to call for his pistols, or the woman who brought them to him, we
leave to the determination of the reader. Men, who by imprudence
throw themselves in the jaws of bailiffs, are seldom in a calm or
settled state of mind, and little fit to be aggravated or given the
means of doing mischief.

It appeared on the trial of Mr. Meyer, who was of a most respectable
family in Yorkshire, that he had been arrested for debt, by an
officer of the sheriff named Joseph Spinke, in whose custody he
remained till the morning after the caption was made, when the
officer, by Mr. Meyer's request, was to go to Kirkhammerton, the
seat of his father, for bail or money to pay the debt. About ten at
night, after the prisoner and his wife had whispered together, she
went out and brought in a pair of pistols under her apron, and gave
them to her husband, saying, "There are your pistols, to fulfil your
foolish humour." He ordered them to leave the room; which they
refusing to do he fired and shot Spinke in the neck, the ball went
through the windpipe. Thomas Meyer instantly said, "Now, Mr. Meyer,
you have done for yourself." The servant-maid, on hearing the
pistol, ran upstairs, and met hr: mistress, who exclaimed, "By the
Lord God, here is a man killed." Meyer was secured: Spinke died in a
few hours, forgave the prisoner and his wife, but laid his death to
their charge.

They were both tried for this fact at York assizes, March 20, 1781,
when William Meyer, Esq. was sentenced to die for the same on the
22d of the same month; but afterwards obtained a respite, which did
not avail him long, being hanged on the 6th of April.

His behaviour to the last was very unsuitable to his awful
situation: he severely accused his wife, and thought his sentence
hard: nor had he such an affecting sense of his crime as to repent
of it as became him, but wasted his few remaining moments in a light
and trifling manner.



JOHN LEE, ESQ.
Who, from the Honourable Post of Captain in the
British Army, Degenerated into the Humiliating Employ
of a Strolling Player, wherein he Committed Forgery;
and for which he was Executed at Tyburn, on the
fourth of March, 1784

THE fate of this unfortunate gentleman calls for our pity. He was
bred a soldier, and was captain of a company, when he became
fascinated by the lures of a stage actress, and actually fell so
deeply into her snare, as to marry her. Among the many females
brought up to this scandalous way of life, how very rare is it to
find one possessed of worth and modesty. Their morals, with
continual examples of profligacy before them, soon become corrupted,
for there is not upon earth, a more debauched set of lazy people,
than strolling players.

Captain Lee soon felt the effects of his imprudence. His pay, ample
for himself, was very inadequate to the additional expense of such a
wife; but the die was cast, he was under the necessity of selling
his commission, and when the product was dissipated, to have
recourse to the stage. As a player, the captain, now the humble Mr.
Lee, commenced a vagabondizing life, strolling from town to town,
the mockery of kings, queens, and heroes; and anon, as lovers,
substituting the belly's pain, from long want of food, for the pangs
inflicted by some cruel fair, the mimic mistress of a pining heart.

There is no profession that requires so many accomplishments, both
of nature and art, as that of an actor; and yet there is none that
the idle and dissolute youth, of both sexes, think themselves so
well qualified to practise with success. By this fatal error society
is deprived of many who might have been useful and happy in the
employments for which they were designed, and who became the most
contemptible, and at the same time the most wretched vagabonds, that
at once injure and disgrace the community. It may, perhaps, prevent
some vain, unthinking, dissipated, and ignorant wretches, from
increasing the number of these out-casts, to acquaint them that, the
life of a stroller is less eligible than that of a sifter of cinders
at a shilling a day; that they are dissolute and undone, without
virtue, and without friendship, not allied even by that kindness and
fidelity which is found among other associates in misfortunes, not
excepting even beggars and thieves. Their exhibitions expose them to
the derision of mechanics and clowns; their distresses excite not
pity, but laughter, and frequently, instead of being treated with
tenderness, they are committed to prison. Those who live by chance
are always improvident of casual supplies; so it happens, that those
people who are frequently without victuals, are yet frequently
drunk. When this happens on a night when their performance is to be
exhibited, one of the company is obliged to perform two characters,
that ought to be on the stage together. Yet, so many are the graces,
even in this mimic life, that some of its female votaries have
become in reality, the ladies whom erst, in well-glossed petticoats,
tinselled all over, spangled with tin, and daubed with foil, they
oft had counterfeited. The humble girl who first acted the character
of Polly Peachum, in Gay's Beggar's Opera, became Duchess of Bolton;
and the Misses Farren and Brunton are now Countesses. Kemble, the
meaner offspring of a strolling company, is now announced in the
London papers among the men of rank, fashion, and consequence, who
regale at each other's overflowing board, while his many old
contemporaries are starving on a crown a week and an inch of candle!

Such was the life this unfortunate officer was reduced to pursue.
When, with his wife, he had struggled through many miseries, and had
strolled so far as Aberdeen, the Scotch took pity on them, and
patronized Mrs. Lee so far as to promote an establishment for her,
as governess of a female seminary of education. Thus settled, for a
while they left the stage; but Lee's habits of expense and idleness
contracted in the army, led him into many expenses which his income
could not support. Happily for his partner in misery, she died at
Aberdeen, a year or two after being so patronized; and he left the
town, to join again the first strolling players he could find.

This unfortunate man could never rise to any perfection in the mimic
art; and his failing, in getting neither applause nor money, to
supply the necessaries of life, soured his temper, and rendered him
desperate. He had last been with the Portsmouth strollers, and from
that town came to London, without a penny in his pocket, and
actually starving. Too proud to beg, he boldly went to a tavern,
where he had formerly spent large sums, and dined. He then asked the
landlord for the loan of a guinea and a half, and as security, he
deposited with him a forged bill of exchange on the ordnance office,
for which he forfeited his life.



JOSEPH RICHARDS
A Most Ungrateful and Barbarous Villain, Executed at
Kentish Town, near London, February 27, 1786, for
Murder

THE excellent fable of the husbandman who took the adder from the
snow, and fostered it in his bosom, until the treacherous reptile,
gaining warmth and strength, stung his benefactor, is, in this case,
fully verified. The young wretch acted the fatal part of the adder,
by murdering his kind and indulgent protector. May we never again
have to record such dreadful and unheard-of ingratitude!

Walter Horseman, a milkman, at Kentish Town, several years before
took pity on a poor orphan boy, who was half starved, for the want
of both food and raiment. He was put to do such services for his
kind protector, as were fitting to his years, but he did not appear
to possess any sense of gratitude. At length his behaviour growing
from bad to worse, Mr. Horseman turned him away.

In revenge, the remorseless wretch entered the house of his late
employer, in the dead hour of night, and arming himself with an iron
window-bar, he advanced to his chamber, where he slept with his
little daughter, of four years of age, by his side; and, shocking to
relate, beat him about the head, until his skull was split asunder,
and one of his eyes beat out; and then made his escape. Mr.
Horseman's wife, with a sick child, was on the next floor; and his
son, two men, and a boy, on the same floor where the murder was
committed. In this most dreadful state the miserable man lingered
eight days before death came to his relief. So inhuman a murderer
could not long find shelterthe fell deed was done on the 11th of
February, and he was hanged near the spot on the 27th, at eighteen
years of age, amid the execrations of a multitude of spectators.



THE MILKMEN OF LONDON
And Their Impositions upon the Public

In the environs of London, so great is the consumption of milk in
the metropolis, that milk-men and cow-keepers are rich. Willan, a
man of this description, has acquired a lordly fortune. His wife,
once a low uneducated woman, by many years selling out milk, now
rolls about in her carriage, proud as any lady; and had she still
practised a little of what she had been taught in adversity, and
remembered to whom she was of kin, she might have been hailed "Queen
of the Milk-maids." Among the abuses and frauds committed upon the
public, that practised in the article of milk loudly calls for
regulation. On this subject we shall quote the observation of Mr.
Middleton, who has exposed a number of impositions upon the public:

"Among the number of petty frauds," says this author, "may be
included the adulteration of milk in the metropolis, which not
merely affects the pockets, but the health, of the inhabitants of
London.

"The number of milch cows kept for the purpose of supplying the
metropolis with this article is stated, after very diligent enquiry,
at 8,500, and each cow is supposed to afford nine quarts of milk per
day. When the families of fashion are in London for the winter
season, the consumption, and consequent deterioration, of the milk
are at the highest; during the summer months, when such families are
for the most part in the country, the milk may probably be of rather
a better quality. The milk is always given in its genuine state to
the retail dealers; and as it is sold to them by the cow-keepers
after the rate of two-pence and 1/8th of a penny per quart, and is
retailed by them at three-pence halfpenny per quart, the profit is
surely so large, as ought to prevent even the smallest adulteration.
But when it is considered how greatly it is reduced by WATER, and
impregnated by WORSE ingredients, it is much to be lamented that no
method has yet been devised to put a stop to the many scandalous
frauds and impositions in general practice, with regard to this very
necessary article of human sustenance. It is certainly an object
well deserving the particular consideration of the legislature. It
cannot be doubted that many persons would be glad to make some
addition to the price now paid for it, high as that price is,
provided they could, for such advanced price, procure so useful an
article in domestic economy perfectly genuine.

"Not satisfied with the profit here stated, which, considering the
difference of measure, is above one hundred per cent, it is a common
practice, with the retailers of this useful article, to carry the
milk first home to their own houses, where it is set up for half a
day, when the cream is taken from it, at least all that comes up in
that time, and it is then sold for new milk. By which means, what is
delivered in the morning is no other than the milk of the preceding
afternoon, deprived of the cream it throws up by standing during
that time. By this means a farther considerable profit accrues to
the retailer, and the milk is greatly reduced in point of strength
and quality. This cream, poor as it is, they again mix with flour,
chalk, and perhaps other more baneful ingredients, and yet it finds
a ready market in the metropolis.

"Five or six men only are employed in attending three hundred cows.
As one woman cannot milk above eight or nine cows twice a day, that
part of the business would necessarily be attended with considerable
expense to the cow-keeper, were it not that the retailer agrees for
the produce of a certain number of cows, and takes the labour and
expense of milking on himself. Every cow-house is provided with a
milk-room (where the milk is measured and served out by the cow-
keeper) and this room is mostly furnished with a pump, to which the
retail dealers apply in rotation; not secretly, but openly, before
any person that may be standing by, from which they pump water into
the milk vessels at their discretion. The pump is placed there
expressly for that purpose, and, indeed, is very seldom used for any
other.

"A considerable cow-keeper in Surrey has a pump of this kind, which
goes by the name of the Famous Black Cow, (from the circumstance of
its being painted black) and is said to yield more than all the rest
put together. Where such a pump is not provided for them, things are
much worse, for in that case the retailers are not even careful to
use clean water. Some of them have been seen to dip their pails in a
common horse-trough. And what is still more disgusting, though
equally true, one cow-house happens to stand close to the edge of a
stream, into which runs much of the dung, and most of the urine of
the cows, and even in this stream, so foully impregnated, they have
been observed to dip their milk pails.

A cow-keeper informs me, that the retail milk dealers are for the
most part the refuse of other employments, possessing neither
character, decency of manners, nor cleanliness."



ROBERT JAQUES
Convicted at the Old Bailey, July 11, 1790, of Being
a Party in a Conspiracy against the Warden of the
Fleet Prison, and Sentenced to be Imprisoned and
Pilloried

This was a crime of so public a nature, so very artfully planned,
and so daringly attempted to be carried into execution, that in
order to give the reader a general view of the transaction, we shall
transcribe, verbatim, from the sessions-paper, the speech of Mr.
Silvester, then leading counsel for the crown, and now recorder of
London; and which was very clearly and fully proved in evidence, on
his trial, which began at eleven in the morning, and lasted till
eight at night. The case was thus opened by Mr. Silvester, as
follows:

"May it please your lordship, and you, gentlemen of the jury.

"This indictment has been stated to you, charging several persons
with a conspiracy, Robert Jaques, John Tronson alias James Smith,
Richard Bailey, Elizabeth Tronson, and Francis Shanley. The
conspiracy is, that these persons conspired to charge the warden of
the Fleet with a sum of one thousand three hundred pounds, he being
answerable in case of the escape of any of his prisoners.

"The prosecutor is the warden of the Fleet: the defendant, Mr.
Jaques, is a person whose character, perhaps, you have heard of, if
not you will find it recorded in the several commitments and records
of the several courts of justice in this kingdom: the defendant, Mr.
Tronson, was originally a servant, he then became apothecary,
afterwards a perfumer, and last of all a quack doctor; the next de
fendant, Richard Bailey, is the brother-in-law of Jaques, keeping a
public house in Lime Street, a man in great distress; Elizabeth
Smith, otherwise Tronson, is the mistress of Mr. Tronson, who I
described to you before; and Francis Shanley, alias Loftus, is a
young man, an Irishman, who having spent most of his fortune, and
spent great part of his time in the several prisons of this
metropolis, and the last we hear of him is in Newgate, where Tronson
was confined for debt.

"The question is, whether they are or are not concerned in one of
the foulest conspiracies that ever was invented? Jaques, the prime
mover and planner of the conspiracy, applied to the warden of the
Fleet that he might be admitted to the place of clerk of the papers,
stating that there was nothing against him but his character,
particularly that there were men like him, who had been guilty of
the worst offences, and had afterwards become useful officers; we
have his letter to the warden, in which he writes as follows:
'Whoever you engage with let it be a man that knows the world, that
he may be able to guard against the tricks which your situation
subjects you to.' Jaques then, perfectly aware that the situation of
the warden of the Fleet subjected him to many tricks and
contrivances, and he, being that person of experience, knew very
well his power, upon which Jaques having been offended with the
warden locking him up, having broke through the rules, the first
thing he does is to apply to a person of the name of Abbot, to get
some person who was willing to be arrested, that he might escape,
and the warden to be fixed with the debt; Abbot refused: the next
was a man of the name of Kane; he told him it was a matter very
easily managed, if he could get any one person that was willing to
be arrested, that whatever was the debt, they would fix the warden
and divide the money. Kane refused: the next person he applied to
was Tronson; Tronson, the friend of Jaques, was applied to, to get a
proper person, who from his appearance might impose on the turnkey,
and escape disguised; Tronson recollecting that his friend Shanley,
with whom he had spent his time in Newgate, was of a fair
complexion, small, and likely to be disguised as a woman, applied to
him; he was the man fixed on to be the prime mover in this
transaction, of which Jaques was the planner: the way to do it was
to have two warrants of attorney; upon which Alder, the relation of
Tronson's mistress, was to be the plaintiff in one, that was four
hundred and fifty pounds; Tronson, to carry this into execution,
applied on the 5th of August to Mr. Crossley, the attorney; he told
him that he wished to arrest a person for a friend of his, a Mr.
Alder, a gentleman who was a money-broker, one of those people who
lend money to distressed officers, living at Chelsea, in Sloane
Street: he lent a sum of money to an extravagant young man, and they
were afraid he was going to Ireland; upon which a warrant of
attorney was produced, and he was directed particularly, immediately
to arrest Shanley: Shanley was described as a young gentleman of
character and fortune, a dressy man, known by being dressed in blue 
and gold; upon which a particular direction was given to Mell, the
officer, that this Shanley was to be arrested: he was arrested on
the 15th of August, and carried down by Mell, the officer, to
Simpson's house; Tronson was continually there, and it created some
little suspicion in the officer, and likewise in the attorney, that
the man who was so active to arrest the defendant that they should
be in habits of intimacy together; but so it was, Tronson was
continually with Shanley while he was there; having given this
description of Alder, the plaintiff, that he was a money broker, and
it turning out afterwards that Mr. Alder kept a little register
office in Fetter-lane, only having a back room, so distressed that
he had not a bed to lay on, forced in the summer to work at hay-
making, and obliged to live for three days on the produce of a pair
of nut crackers; but, says Mr. Tronson, he has offered to pay part
of the money; Mr. Crossley went to the officer's where he saw Mr.
Shanley in custody; he admitted the debt was just and true: you see
by this means Tronson had got Shanley into the custody of the
officer; this was on the 15th of August.

"The next thing is, Jaques comes; and therefore it is necessary his
warrant of attorney should be for a more considerable sum; he has a
warrant of attorney likewise for eight hundred and sixty-nine
pounds; the plaintiff upon that is Bailey, the brother-in-law of
Jaques, keeping this public-house in Lime-street, a distressed man,
his goods having been seized, and himself ruined; Jaques writes to
Price, his attorney, and sends him the warrant of attorney with this
letter: 'Sir, I have sent you a warrant of attorney, which I shall
be obliged to you to enter up, and take out execution on
immediately; as the defendant is in custody at Simpson's, in Brook-
street, and I am told he will settle the matter, you may depend on
this being a straight forward business: you see I have not taken the
warrant in my own name, nor never will any more; but you will see,
by the indorsement on the back, that it is in truth for me; if you
have any offer of settlement you may take half down, and a warrant
of attorney for the remainder, but not otherwise; I have sent two
guineas per bearer, for money out of purse: you need only lodge the
writ in the Sheriff's-office; in the other writ you sent me there is
a mistake, therefore I shall not serve it till I see you. I am, Sir,
your humble servant, Robert Jaques.-Pray send me an answer by the
bearer. The witness to the warrant of attorney is my brother.' So
that the supposed plaintiff is my brother-in-law, the supposed
witness is my brother Jaques, but I, Mr. Robert Jaques, am the real
plaintiff in the business.

"Having thus got him arrested, and charged in the office of the
Sheriff, the next thing is to get him into the Fleet; how is that to
be done? Jaques knew that is to be done by habeas corpus; who should
be the attorney? there are a number of attorneys, and we will open
the book and see how many there are of one name; it turns out there
are two Mr. Martins: Martin is the man; there are but two Martins,
and they will not know which of the two it was; now it turns out to
be neither of them, for they are both here; so that from the
beginning to the end it is a complete fabrication; now the next
thing was how to get him out of the Fleet; that was to be done;
because unless that could be done it would not do, the warden would
not be charged with the debt.

On Saturday the 22d, I think he was brought to the Fleet: on the
Sunday they dined together; the company consisted of Mr. Robert
Jaques, and his lady, Mr. John Jaques, and his wife, who from her
size and appearance might very well pass for a man, and Mr. Shanley
being from his appearance to pass for a woman, the transition was
easy; Mr. Robert Hopper, and his wife, Mr. Shanley, and Mr. Tronson;
Mrs. Hopper and Mr. Hopper coming in about four o'clock on the
Sunday: Mr. John Jaques, with his lady Mrs. Jaques: they transferred
their appearances, Mr. Shanley placed his blue and gold coat round
his waist, to make some hips, and with a gown of Mrs. Jaques's he
walked out; Mrs. John Jaques was left in company with Mr. Robert
Jaques, Mr. Shanley went out of the gate between eight and nine in
the evening, in the very same gown, in the very same dress and
appearance that Mrs. John Jaques came in about four; they led a
child out with them. Unfortunately Clipsom the turnkey (now whether
Jaques knew this before) had been sent for to his mother, in the
country, and therefore the door was kept by an under-turnkey; he had
not the least suspicion; was not on his guard: the next day it was
found that Mr. Shanley had escaped out of prison, and he was traced
by some means or other to the lodgings of Mr. Tronson, in Sloane-
street: they took coach directly, and went there; Mrs. John Jaques
sent for her clothes, and they were returned; the next thing was to
get Shanley out of the kingdom; because if he was here he might be
taken by an escape warrant, and the whole would be discovered; he
therefore the next day took a post chaise and went to Dover, and in
company with Mr. Shakeshaft, a person he met with on the road, took
boat, and went to Calais. They went to Tronson's the 29th; Tronson's
lodgings was in the most miserable situation, scarce a table or a
chair: Clipson charged him immediately with having aided and
assisted in the escape; Tronson was exceedingly angry at it, and
being told that he should be charged with a conspiracy, said, he did
not care, that as to going to the Fleet again, he never would put
his foot there again, for now he had got his friend out that was all
he wished; he had his ends, therefore he did not care a penny about
it.

"Gentlemen, upon this Tronson wrote a letter, and sent it to a
friend of his, of the name of Alder, who was the plaintiff in that
business; now in that letter he writes in these words: 'Dear Frank,
I have this moment received yours; and have only time to inform you
that there has been six men here searching for you this moment.
Matters are arrived to such a height, that I can neither call on
Jaques, nor can he send to me at present, therefore I must request
you will defer drawing, till you hear from me again. Rely upon it, I
shall either call or send to him as soon as I can with safety. They
have threatened to indict us all for a conspiracy. I must once more
request you will live as saving as you can: God bless you. Yours
sincerely, James Smith.' Here Tronson takes the name of Smith, and
writes to his friend, Frank Shanley, at France, 'You must direct no
more at Chelsea, as follows: Mr. Smith, 97, Fetter-lane, Holborn,'
(that being the place where this man, Alder, had a place for a
register office.) 'I hope you will have the goodness to excuse this
this scrawl, for by G-d, nothing but Botany-bay stares us in the
face. Do not doctor me over any more in your letters." This letter
is directed to Monsieur Loftus, Calais, France.

"This letter was afterwards produced; and by that means it was found
that Shanley was in France, under the name of Loftus. Many letters
afterwards passed from one to the other, from Shanley to Tronson,
and from Tronson to Shanley; those directed from Shanley were
directed to Mr. Smith, Fetter-lane; those from Tronson were directed
to Mr. Loftus, in France. The next correspondence is a letter from
Jaques; and I will just read one of them to you, (for there are more
than one;) for Jaques who not only is a very good manager, but a
very good actor, not only can plan, but can execute very well,
either in his own hand or in a feigned hand sometimes, which this
day will be proved to you; for some of those letters are in a
feigned hand; but his tricks are so well known, that it will be
proved to be his own hand writing.'Dear Sir, if this meets you, our
friend Tom (Thomas Hopper) will have seen you, and informed you that
villain, Clipson, the turnkey, set off for Calais this morning to
you, to get you to do some wicked act against your friends, they all
rely upon you with the greatest confidence. You will have heard that
some of your letters fell into the enemy's hands, in consequence of
a traitor; but all will yet be well, so you are safe, and out of Old
England. October 16th, 1782,' directed to 'Monsieur Loftus, Calais.'

"Then there is another letter to his friend Tom, which says,'Dear
Tom, if this should meet you, it is just to inform you that Clipson
set off for Calais, to endeavour to find the same person you went in
search of, to persuade him into something: I think some step might
be taken to punish the villain; you have nothing to fear from us;
everything here goes on to your satisfaction: particulars I cannot
relate. I wrote to Ls, that is Loftus. Yours, sincerely, you know
who.' This is Mr Jaques's letter likewise.

"Now, Gentlemen, these letters, you will say how came we into the
possession of them because application being made to the Secretary
of State's office, these letters were intercepted. Mr. Jaques I see
had not heard of this before; he now hears of it; and he will see
the letters produced, and proved to be his hand-writing. Gentlemen,
the information he gave, was perfectly true and correct; for having
learned that this man was in France, that Shanley was in France by
the name of Loftus, on the road he met with Mr. Thomas Hopper, who
went by the name of Johnson, and said he was clerk to Lady Loftus,
in France. Clipson came and found at the French hotel there Mr.
Shanley under the name of Loftus; Shanley being accused of this,
went before a magistrate, and has made a full and clear discovery of
the whole transaction; he has discovered how the plot was laid by
Jaques; he has discovered how he escaped out of prison; and he, in
short, has related every fact, and how he escaped.

"Gentlemen, that will be read in evidence before you; for he is one
of the defendants in this very conspiracy; you will therefore have
not only what has passed between Tronson who is not here (though he
ought to be here, having given notice of his trial,) but you will
have what passed between Shanley and the persons concerned, during
the transaction of the persons being in pursuit of Shanley. Jaques
was not idle: Tronson was not asleep: it was necessary, if possible,
to recover the money; and therefore instructions were to be given by
Tronson to Mr. Crossley, to sue the warden for the debt due to
Alder; and Jaques applied to his attorney, Mr. Price, to sue the
warden for the debt due under the warrant of attorney.

"Gentlemen, this scheme would have taken place; the actions would
have gone on; but the iniquity was so full, the acts came out so
strong that the attorneys who were applied to, gave up their papers,
and gave every information in their power.

"Gentlemen, Tronson having applied very frequently to Mr. Crossley,
giving intimation to a lady, a Miss Brooks, who lived in London,
that he had escaped, telling her to come abroad to him, desiring Mr.
Crossley, to proceed on it; by way of imposing on Crossley, to bring
the action, clothes were sent by Tronson to Mr. Alder, for the
purpose of dressing himself up to go to Mr. Crossley, to desire him
to go on with the action. Alder was out; he had been passing the day
with Tronson; he returned, and complained of being ill (for he began
to be shocked at the idea of the iniquity); he soon died; he died,
and then application was made to the widow, with an offer to her, if
she would stand in the shoes of her husband, they offered her two
hundred pounds; the clothes which he had to dress himself in were
returned to Tronson. Jaques, with in a very few days after the
escape, was the first person to carry the intelligence; to be sure
he was the person that knew it better than anybody; he applies to
Price, and desired him to proceed to recover the money, which was
eight hundred and sixty pounds, anxious to get it on, thinking if he
could get the money, he should be able to put it into his own
pocket, or share it among them.

"Gentlemen, in this state of the case, it will appear to you
clearly, that these two warrants of attorney are fabricated: the
witness to one, is a Mr. Brown, who will not appear to prove his
signature. The situation of Alder was such, that he could not lend
Shanley a farthing. In regard to Jaques's warrant of attorney, he
confesses it was his own; he writes to his attorney; it is his own,
though taken in the name of his brother; and the witness, his
brother, John Jaques, who I believe he will not call, I wish to see
him here; I wish to examine him. Then as to Mr. Bailey; Bailey is a
brother-in-law of Jaques; so distressed, that he borrowed money
before he went to the public house in Lime-street: so distressed,
that he borrowed it of his brewer and of his distiller; and before
he borrowed that money, he assigned all his effects over to Jaques
his brother; this is the man he made use of as the plaintiff in the
charge; and Mr. Bailey being applied to for money, says, why says
he, I shall not be able to pay you now; but the moment we can
recover some money from the the warden, I shall be able to pay some
of my debts; so that he is to have some share in the concerns.

"Gentlemen, these are the facts I am instructed to lay before you; I
have endeavoured to state them to you as shortly as I possibly
could; because a case like this requires no comment; it requires a
mere narrative of facts in the plainest way it possibly can; and I
am sure if I prove them in evidence, there cannot be a doubt in the
mind of any man that hears me, that a fouler conspiracy could not
enter the mind of man. Jaques knew perfectly well from his
situation, that the warden of the Fleet was answerable for the
persons in custody; he knew very well the warden was answerable for
the escape; the only question therefore was, how he was to get this
money in his pocket; that was to get fictitious plaintiffs and
fictitious defendants; and to get a man that would look like a
woman, and dress him in the habits of a woman, and impose upon the
poor turnkey.

"Gentlemen, a fouler conspiracy I believe never came before this
court, and any jury. I have not opened a circumstance which I am not
instructed I shall prove: these facts in my mind are irresistible;
they prove the connection between Jaques and Tronson: they prove the
connection between Jaques and Shanley; they prove that Shanley was
sent to France after the escape had been contrived.

"Gentlemen, so accustomed is Mr. Jaques to prisons of this kind, so
hardened in iniquity, that he has not done it for the first time;
but this is a common trick.

"Gentlemen, I do not wish that the character of Jaques, infamous as
it is, should have any weight on your minds at all; judge him on the
facts I have opened to you; and if he is as guilty as I am
instructed he is, you will have no difficulty in pronouncing your
verdict. As to Tronson, his character is not so black as Jaques's,
but black enough of conscience. Shanley, if he is a gentleman, has
disgraced himself by associating himself with these people: as to
Bailey, a relation of Jaques's, I shall say nothing of. I set down
perfectly satisfied, that I shall prove such facts, such
connections, between the parties, as not to leave the least doubt in
the mind of any man, but that they are all guilty of this charge;
and it is high time that justice should overtake these delinquents."

The prisoner conducted his own defence, and cross-examined the
witnesses with some ingenuity. He addressed the court with
considerable ability; and when his case was going to the jury, he
exclaimed, "For God's sake, Gentlemen, consider my family; I have a
large family." He was however, without hesitation, found guilty of
the conspiracy. He then made the following appeal to the Bench:

Mr. Jaques. My Lord, can I ask on which account I am found guilty?
	Court. Yes, you may ask that certainly.
	Mr. Silvester. Third and fifth.
	Mr. Jaques. My Lord, I trust your lordship will, in passing
sentence, have some consideration as to my family: I have a very
large family entirely dependent on myself.

Court. It is not my province to pass the sentence; but now you have
brought it to my mind, I find by the evidence, you had it in
contemplation to bring an action against the worthy Recorder; if he
therefore has any difficulty in passing the sentence, I shall
solicit the assistance of my brother Wilson, and pass it for him.
	Mr. Jaques. My Lord, if I had been indicted under the act for
effecting the escape of a prisoner, you know the punishment that is
inflicted under that act; if you will suffer me to transport myself
from this country; or otherwise I should be glad if sentence of
death could be passed upon me.

SENTENCE."Robert Jaques, the offence of which you stand convicted
is one of the foulest crimes which man can commit; it is so
extensive in its consequences, and so dangerous in its example, that
at all times the Court are bound to inflict a very heavy and severe
punishment for it: in your case it has been attended with every
circumstance than can aggravate so black a crime as this; and
therefore in passing the sentence upon you, which the court in their
discretion think the case requires, I cannot make any allowances for
any supposed mischiefs or inconveniences, which may arise from what
you have yourself stated to have been your former situation of life:
you have deprecated of the jury, that they would not incline against
you, because your life hitherto has been very bad: it is a strange
defence to come out of the mouth of any person: perhaps you may have
heard that it did succeed here in one case better than it ought, and
therefore might succeed again in blinding a jury. The fact has been
clearly proved against you beyond all possible doubt: and the
offence is of that enormity, that the Court think themselves bound
to inflict that punishment which the justice of the case requires,
and they must rely on the officers of the Court that the sentence is
executed with proper severity. The sentence of this Court is: that
you be Imprisoned in his Majesty's gaol of Newgate for the space of
three years, and that during that time you be once set in and upon
the pillory at the Royal Exchange for the space of one hour, between
the hours of twelve and two o'clock."

During Jaques's imprisonment, in pursuance of this sentence, Sir
James Saunderson was robbed to a considerable amount in cash and
notes. Part of the latter were brought into Newgate, (that
receptacle of stolen property.) and Jaques contriving to get
possession of them, under pretence of raising money thereon, gave
immediate notice to Sir James, who, by this means, recovered the
principal part of his property. We are not, however, to believe,
that this was a spontaneous act of virtue in Jaques; he saw in it a
gleam of hope, in prevailing upon Sir James, in return, to do him
the kind office of getting, at least, the more hateful part of his
sentence, the pillory, remitted. In this he succeeded; Sir James was
a man of influence, and Jaques was pardoned. Yet, it seems, that
this fortunate escape was not warning sufficient to Jaques, who
often appeared at the criminal bar; for we find him, shortly
afterwards, convicted of wilful perjury, from which he fled to parts
beyond the seas.



JAMES WATTS
A Quaker, convicted of Robbing his Employer, at the
Manchester Quarter Session for 1787

It is not often that we find Quakers' names on the criminal dockets.
Their frugal habits, added to much cunning, and considerable
industry, commonly secure them from the necessity of committing
depredations on the public, through distress. We have, however,
already introduced Quaker Watts to the reader, not, indeed, as the
ROBBER, but as the man ROBBED; and now we must reverse his
character, and bring him criminally to view.

It will be remembered, in our report of the case of Abraham Durnford
and William Newton, that a banker's clerk was decoyed into an empty
house, No 21, Water lane, Fleet-street, under the pretence of being
paid the amount of a bill of exchange, due to the Quaker bankers,
Smith, Wright, and Gray, robbed of his pocket-book, and narrowly
escaped being murdered, for which Durnford and Newton were hanged,
as we have already laid before the public. That very banker's clerk
was the identical Watts there described, who, upon the trial of the
robbers, would not, according to the tenets of this singular set of
puritans, swearand on a trial affecting life, nothing but oaths
will convict.

Quakers assume that which no other description of men arrogate to
themselves, viz. the privilege of exemption from taking an oath
according to the law of the land. A Churchman is bound to swear
upon, and kiss the holy book, whereon he tenders his oath, with his
head uncovered. A Quaker will tell you, "I will not doff my beaver,
neither will I bend my body," and thus stiffly do they affirm (for
they call their affirmation swearing) before their God, with their
hats on, and their body upright. In regard to James Watts, we shall
show, that though he would not swear, yet he would steal. It
appears, that he left the employ of the London bankers, and went to
Manchester, where he also got employment. At the quarter sessions of
the peace, held in that town, in the year 1787, the said James
Watts, and another villain of the name of Andrews, were convicted of
robbing their employers, and sentenced to two years imprisonment in
the castle of Lancaster.



JOHN MEAD
The Boy Incendiary, Executed before Newgate, August
31, 1791, for Setting Fire to his Master's House

A very few weeks had but just elapsed since the execution of Wood
and Underwood, and on the very next day of execution in London,
another boy, scarce sixteen years of age, was brought to the
gallows. This wretched young creature was a pot-boy to a public-
house, and named John Mead. Such places are the sure road to the
ruin of those children whom misery has placed amid the most
reprobate class of society, who waste their time, and impoverish
themselves and families in public-houses.

Though nature requires so little drink, and when she calls, pure
water is the most wholesome, and, in fact, let drunkards deny it as
they please, the pleasantest beverage, yet we find, melancholy as is
the sight, every bench in every small pot-house, at night filled
with sottish fellows, while often at home their children are crying
for food. It is, then, little to be wondered at, that the boys and
girls employed to draw beer for, and to wait upon such characters,
come to an ignominious end.

John Mead was employed by Walter Cavardine, who kept the sign of the
Wheat-sheaf, in Redlion-street, Holborn, London. Having been
reprimanded for neglect of his business, the graceless lad
determined upon revenge. He found that no mode presented itself so
easy and effectual, as that of burning his master's house, and
therefore he burnt it in the night of the 5th of July, 1791. To
commit an act of villainy is easy; but to conceal it, very
difficult. This wicked youth conceived that he had nothing more to
effect, than lighting a torch, and running off; but suspicion
instantly fell upon him. He was pursued and apprehended; when, in
terror, he confessed his crime. This confession was read in court
upon his trial, and such a number of corroborating proofs of his
guilt was adduced, that the jury, however reluctant, found little
doubt upon his case.

His youth could not preponderate in the scale of mercy, against the
atrocity of his crime. He was executed along with the following
malefactors:

Thomas Godfrey and John Smith, for robbing Mr. John Mazinjay on the
highway, near Enfield.
	John Finch, Joseph Hunt, and David Rango, for robbing Mr.
Isaac Gillet, on the highway in Newgate street, of a pocket-book,
containing notes, &c. They beat Mr. Gillet so unmercifully, as to
break his leg. They were a part of another gang of pick-pockets and
foot-pads.



HOLDERNESS, THE WATERMAN
Convicted and punished for Ill Treatment to his Fare,
1792.

AN unlucky suitor in the court of King's Bench entered an adjoining
coffee-house, and vented his chagrin upon the law and the lawyers.
He paced the room in rage, and left no disgraceful epithet unuttered
against the profession. A young counsellor sat unobserved, in a
corner-box, conning over his brief, in another cause, and was thus
unseasonably interrupted. A moment's consideration sufficed to rid
himself of the intruder. Rising, therefore, in an assumed rage,
great as that of the losing suitor, he vociferated, "Who is he that
abuses the lawha! is it you. Sir: you, who at this very moment are
more indebted to the law than any man living!" "How so," returned
the astonished client, "for I have just lost a good cause." "But
since you have saved your life," continued the barrister, "you have
degraded the law, and were it not for the respect I have for the
law, I would kill you; therefore avaunt! lest I make of you a grim
spectre." The now doubly distressed suitor left the lawyer to his
studies.

If, reader, we were not protected by the law, against the evil
machinations of watermen and hackney-coach men, the first might
drown us, and the latter break our necks, and both grossly impose
upon us.

Of this description of watermen, was Holderness. He plied a few
gentlemen, who went into his wherry: when seated, and as he pushed
off, he asked the usual question of the men of the oar, "Up or
down;" they answered, "Down," on which he swore he would not carry
them. The company insisted that he should; he swayed the boat, and
in a few minutes filled it, and sunk it in fourteen feet water. If a
life had been lost, should not this fellow have been hanged? Though,
fortunately, they escaped a watery grave, yet were they brought
little better than half drowned, on shore, by a vessel passing at
the time of the outrage.

The injured gentleman complained to the Waterman's Company, who
dismissed them on the ground that no sculler was obliged to go
farther down than Cuckold's Point, nor farther up than Vauxhall, as
below or above those places there were no settled fares. They were,
however, of opinion, that no waterman, plying for passengers, could
demand where they would be landed, or endanger their lives. Yet they
awarded no satisfaction to the party aggrieved; but thanks to the
laws of the land, this "Jolly young waterman" was, at the quarter-
sessions, Westminster, sentenced a year's imprisonment in Newgate.



JOHN BURKITS
Sentenced to Twelve Months Imprisonment, for Dog
Stealing, October 13, 1789

STILL find we novelty in the black art of thieving; still is the
reader, far as we are advanced in our work, presented with new
instances of wickedness and cruelty.

"The devil behind him, pleas'd and grinning,
"Patting this fell savage on the shoulder,
"Declaring nought was ever bolder,
"Admiring such a novel mode of sinning."

Most true it is, that as well as horse-stealers and sheep stealers,
we have in our London catalogue of rapscallions, a set of cruel men,
prowling about, to rob families of their most faithful domestic
their dog; for the base inhuman purpose of killing him, for the
price of his skin!

The dog is the most intelligent of all known quadrupeds, and the
acknowledged friend of mankind. It seems beyond the power of ill-
usage to subdue the faithful and constant qualities inherent in him.
The dog, exclusive of the beauty of his form, his swiftness, and his
vivacity, possesses all those internal qualifications that can
endear any creature to man. In his domestic state, his sole ambition
and desire is to please. With a kind and affectionate humility, he
crouches before his master, and is happy to offer his strength, his
courage, and all his useful talents, for his service. He waits his
orders, and implicitly obeys them. He is friendly without interest,
grateful for the slightest favours, and sooner forgets injuries than
benefits. His only pleasure is to be serviceable, his only terror to
displease. He licks the hand just raised to strike him, and disarms
resentment by submission. Ever assiduous in serving his master, he
is also a friend to his friends, and indifferent to all the rest.
The dog is the only animal whose fidelity is unshaken. When the
master is attacked, the dog will defend him to the utmost of his
power; and when his master dies, he laments his loss; some have been
known to pine away, and others to follow the corpse to the grave.
There are, therefore, few species of domestic property which men
more delight in than their dog; and no animal in the brute creation
repays his kindness with more gratitude, and obedience, than his
faithful dog. All the day he toils in the field, in the chase, or
guards his master's flocks and herds; and at night he defends him
from attack of ruffians, in the shape of man.

We could recount, at least, a hundred instances of the affection,
perseverance, and resignation, of the canine raceof the lives they
have saved; the property they have rescued from destruction; and
their being at all times ready to risk their lives in defence of
their master's. Men followed by their dog, oft have met fatal
accidents, by sudden death, and when their bodies were found, the
affectionate animal was apparently watching his master's sleep, and
guarding him from intrusion

The late earl of Harcourt was found in a well in his own domains. He
had fallen in head-foremost, in the act, it was conjectured, of
stooping for a little water for his dog, which had followed him. The
water was not deep, but the bottom being muddy, the unfortunate
nobleman stuck fast by the head, and his feet alone remained above,
upon which, some few hours after life had fled from the man, the dog
was found, looking with anxiety to the bottom, for the remainder of
his beloved master.

"Stooping to drink, the hermit found a grave:
"All in the running stream his garments spread,
"And dark damp verdure ill concealed his head;
"The faithful servant of that fatal day,
"Watch'd the lov'd corpse, and hourly pined away;
"His head upon his master's cheek was found,
"While the obstructed waters mourn'd around."
PRATT.

It would require a separate volume to fully describe the excellent
qualities of that faithful animal, which such villains as John
Burkits, the detested subject of this essay, seek to kill, for the
paltry price of his skin. Dogs of high breed bear a valuable
proportion to the racer, and often sell for twenty, and even fifty
guineas, or more; while the owners of others would not, by gold, be
tempted to part with them. Yet, for a paltry half-crown did Burkits,
and many other cruel scoundrels, kill such beautiful and faithful
animals.

The method used to get possession of the dog, is of a piece with the
finishing blow; they have recourse to treachery, for no open means
could prevail upon the betrayed creature to suffer the ruffian's
hand to touch them. These dog-stealers have a paste, wherein is a
certain drug, the flavour of which, as the oil of rhodium will draw
rats, dispels every other object, and they irresistibly follow the
person carrying the deceitful composition.

The case of Burkits will fully apply to this observation. On his
trial, in the hopes of escaping with a trifling punishment, he
confessed, that the dog which he was charged with stealing, followed
him from the Haymarket, and that he hung him in a field leading to
Hampstead; that he had hung several dogs, and that he followed the
practice for a living; that the skin of a common sized dog would
fetch 1s. 6d.for a degree larger, 2s.and for a very large one,
from 2s.6d. to 3s.6d.; that he always sold them to a tanner in Long-
lane, in the Borough, who asked no questions. He was fined, and
sentenced twelve months' imprisonment.

Note: "As to friendship," says Montaigne, "the beasts sometimes have
it, without comparison, more lively and constant than men have. King
Lysimachus's dog Hyracan, his master being dead, lay upon his bed,
obstinately refusing either to eat or drink; and the day that his
body was burned (the custom of the time) he took a run, and leaped
into the fire, where he was consumed. As also did the dog of one
Pyrrhus; for he would not stir from his master's bed from the time
that he died; and when they took his master away, suffered himself
to be carried with him, and at last leaped into the pile, where they
burnt his master's body.

"There are also certain inclinations of affections which sometimes
spring in us, without the consultation of reason, and by a
fortuitous temerity, which others call sympathy, of which beasts are
as capable as we. We see horses take such an acquaintance with one
another, that we have much difficulty to make them stir or travel, 
when separated: We observe them to fancy a particular colour in
those of their own kind, and, where they meet it, run with great joy
and demonstration of good will; and have a dislike or hatred to some
other colour."



JOHN HORNBY MORELAND
Convicted at the Lent Assizes 1790, at Bury, in
Suffolk, For Bigamy

THE crime of bigamy is a serious offence against the law; and
contrary to the order of society among Christians. It is the offence
of marrying again, in the lifetime of the first, who is in fact the
only wife, because the law admits not of two; and by an act of
Parliament, passed since the conviction of this man, is punished
with transportation.

This was not the first time of his being arraigned for bigamy, for
we find him indicted at the Old Bailey, and tried at the January
sessions preceding his conviction at Bury. He was there arraigned
for feloniously marrying Mary Symmonds, on the 25th of September,
then last past, he being before married to Ann Chapman, who was then
living.

The evidence adduced on the part of the prosecution was perfectly
satisfactory; but Mr. Garrow, counsel for the prisoner, took two
exceptions upon a point of law, to the evidence of the two
marriages, both upon the same grounds, namely,"That in both
marriages, being by licence, the female being under age, and no
consent of either parents or guardians, they were informal, and of
course void, by the statute of the 26th Geo. II."  The court ruled,
that in regard to the objection to the prior marriage, it would not
hold, inasmuch as the proof of the want of consent either of the
parent or guardian, lay upon the defendant. With respect to the
latter marriage, it was admitted, because the father of Mary
Symmonds, had he been consulted, would have totally disapproved of
it. The court was therefore under the necessity of acquitting the
prisoner; but ordered him to be transmitted into Yorkshire, to stand
his trial for the prior marriage, he being before that married to a
former wife.

Thus we find a strong suspicion of his having three wives; but
before he was carried into Yorkshire, we find him at the bar of
justice at Bury, and found guilty of marrying Mrs. Hardcastle, of
Ipswich, and Miss Lambeth, near Richmond, in Yorkshire. He was
sentenced to be burnt in the hand with a red hot iron, which was
done before he left the court, and to be imprisoned twelve months,
in the gaol of Ipswich, during which time his head was to be shaved,
to wear the habit ordered for criminals, and on his feet wooden
clogs. He was farther ordered to be kept, during the time, in close
confinement, except two hours each day, when he was allowed to
breathe the fresh air.



PIERRE AUGUSTINE, ALIAS PETER AUGUSTINE, ALIAS PETER
CHUMLEY, ALIAS PETER CHAPMAN, ALIAS PETER DEVAL
Executed before Newgate, August 31, 1791, For Robbing
his own Countryman

WE have already adduced instances of too many foreigners violating
the rules of hospitality, in plundering the people of this country,
while under their protection. When a traveller finds himself
hospitably received in a foreign land, and more especially when he
is there enabled to support himself by his industry, it is
ingratitude, in the worst degree, to violate the laws of his adopted
country, for the purpose of plunder. It is a trite saying, that
British subjects, in a distant land, protect each other, but how
often have we shown, that Frenchmen in England prey upon each other;
even before the visionary rights of equality were attempted to be
enforced. We have shown a Mercier murdering his patron, and
plundering his effects; a Le Maitre, robbing a public museum, where
he was generously admitted, and other daring violations of our laws
by Frenchmen, who existed alone under their protection, and a
Mallard, after receiving charity, attempted to murder Mr. Carter.

The treacherous foreigner, whom we now bring forward, had long
continued his depredations on our unsuspicious countrymen; which may 
be readily conjectured from the numbers of feigned names assumed,
and under all which he was indicted. Monsieur Alexander Delarade was
a French gentleman of fortune, and in the time of peace between his
country and Britain, paid a visit to London. There he became
acquainted with the subject of this report. Monsieur Delarade,
speaking English imperfectly, employed him as interpreter, and for
this he made him his confidential friend. He had, it appeared, long
contemplated to rob his countryman and benefactor; and for this
purpose, one evening, when he had attended him to the play,
pretending an excuse, he returned to Monsieur Delarade's, and robbed
them of property to the value of two thousand pounds. These effects,
consisting both of money and goods, he carried off in a hackney
coach; but the number being fortunately taken by a neighbour, who
suspected some foul play, he was traced thereby to Bristol, and
seized, with the greatest part of the property, at the instant of
his embarking to a distant land. This being fully proved, he was
convicted and executed.



THOMAS DUNN
Convicted, Pilloried, and Imprisoned, at Lancaster,
September 2, 1794, for Perjury

This perjured man appeared as a witness against Mr. Walker of
Manchester, a gentleman in high estimation, and nine other innocent
men who were put upon their trials on a charge of high treason.

Mr. Sergeant Cockell, Counsel for the prosecution, entered very
fully, and with great feeling, upon the nature of the charge, which
contained no less than ten different perjuries imputed to Dunn, the
Defendant. Taking advantage of some local circumstances and
prejudices in the town of Manchester, this man had accused several
innocent and respectable individuals of the greatest crime known to
the law, viz. High Treason. Two witnesses, however, being required
to every treasonable act, they were indicted only for a
misdemeanour; but had the Jury who tried them believed the
diabolical fabrication of this Prisoner, (then a witness,) the
effects must have proved ruinous and destructive to these parties
and their families. And if any second person could have been found
equally detestable with him, Mr. Walker and nine of his other fellow
subjects must have forfeited their lives and properties, and have
suffered public execution, although totally free from any offence
whatever.

It pleased one of the magistrates of Manchester to accept this Dunn
as a fit person to be evidence against these gentlemen, who upon his
examinations, (not once only, but repeatedly taken before him,) were
tried and acquitted as above. But previous to their trial, Mr. Paul,
one of them, had been committed for treason, and lingered for more
than two months in Lancaster Castle. During this interval also Dunn
felt the sharpest compunction for the accusation he had made, and
voluntarily sought occasion to see Mr. Walker, who admitted of this
with all possible precaution, having persons of character present
during the whole time of his stay, and never being alone in his
company. Dunn, in their hearing, begged pardon for the injury he had
done to Mr. Walker; said that he had been bribed to do what he had
done, and that he had sworn falsely when before the Grand Jury.

At Mr. Walker's trial, being questioned as to these confessions, he
answered, that no such thing ever passed. The record of Mr. Walker's
trial being read, Mr. Gurney, who took notes of it at the time, read
from them what Dunn had sworn on his evidence for the Crown, and on
his cross-examination. To prove the falsehood of the facts sworn to
by Dunn, various witnesses were called; and first as to his reading
and writing. The Rev. Mr. Griffith, the Magistrates before whom
Dunn's informations were taken, and who upon them issued warrants
against Mr. Walker, Mr. Paul, Mr. Jackson, and several others, for
high treason, swore that he had seen Thomas Dunn write his name, and
that he had no doubt of his being able to read and write. This was
confirmed by his clerk, Mr. Painter, who had seen Dunn write his
name, and had also seen letters which he believed to have been
written by him. Two other witnesses deposed to the same effect.

Mr. Ridgeway and Mr. Jones stated that they saw Dunn at Mr.
Walker's, house, on the 18th of March; that he fell upon his knees,
and begged Mr. Walker's pardon; said that he had injured his
character, that he had accused him falsely, and that he had been
bribed to what he had done; and that when Mr. Walker refused to be
alone with him, he threatened him, and said, that it should be worse
for him. Several other witnesses were called, who corroborated the
above facts. Mr. Scarlet made an able and ingenious defence for the
prisoner. Mr. Justice Rooke then summed up the evidence in a very
full and perspicuous manner, and the Jury returned their verdict
GUILTY. He received the judgement of the Court, that he should be
confined two years in Lancaster gaol, and stand once within that
period in the pillory.



WILLIAM TILLEY, JOHN CROSSWELL, GEORGE HARDWICK,
JAMES HAYDEN, JOHN HAWDEN, SIMON JACOBS, JOHN
SOLOMONS, JOHN PHILLIPS, AND JOHN HENLEY
Convicted at the Old Bailey, July 1, 1795, of a
Conspiracy, and Sentenced to Transportation.

(A Singular piece of Jewish Iniquity)

A most desperate attempt was made on the fourth of April, 1795, in
the morning, between one and two o'clock, to rescue Isdwell, a Jew,
who stood charged with being concerned in a forgery on the stamp
Office, but who in the scuffle lost his life in the following
manner: Isdwell, who was confined in New Prison, Clerkenwell,
persuaded two of the turnkeys that an aunt of his, who was very
rich, then lay at the point of death, and that he had been informed,
that, could she see him before she died, she would give him a
thousand pounds; and therefore, if they would let him out, and
accompany him to the place, he would give them fifty guineas each
for their trouble; and that the matter might be effected without the
knowledge of the keeper of the prison, or any other person, they
having the keys of it at night, and the time required being very
short.

To this proposal the turnkeys agreed; and accordingly about one
o'clock in the morning, the gates were opened, and Isdwell, with his
irons on, was conducted in a hackney-coach by one of them, armed
with a blunderbuss, to the place directed, which was in Artillery-
lane, Bishopsgate-street, where they gained immediate admittance on
ringing a bell; and, enquiring for the sick lady, were ushered up
one pair of stairs. Isdwell went in to the room first, on which
several fellows rushed forth and attempted to keep the turnkey out;
but not succeeding in that respect, they put the candles out, 
wrested the blunderbuss out of his hand, and discharged it at him;
at this instant, it was supposed Isdwell was endeavouring to make
his escape out of the door, as he received the principal part of the
contents of the blunderbuss in his back, and fell dead; the turnkey
also fell, one of the slugs grazing the upper part of his head; and
the villains, by some means finding their mistake, though in the
dark, beat him in so shocking a manner with the butt end of the
blunderbuss, while he lay on the ground, as to break it to pieces,
fractured his skull in two places, and bruised him dreadfully about
the body; the noise which the affair occasioned brought a number of
watchmen and patrols to the house, who secured ten persons therein,
mostly Jews.

There is every reason to suppose, that they would have completely
murdered the turnkeys, had not timely assistance been afforded. They
were all examined on the fourth, before the above magistrate; as
also the turnkeys, who related the foregoing story, and who, as well
as the others, were ordered to be committed for further examination.
The plan of Isdwell's escape appeared to have been formed by the
widow of the late notorious Laurence Jones, she having taken the
lodgings in Artillery Lane, and though in reality aunt to Isdwell,
had cohabited with him ever since her husband's death. The bed in
the room where the business happened was decorated with all the
paraphernalia of a sick person; a number of phials standing on an
adjoining table, and to make the farce (which in the last act proved
a tragedy) more perfect, the image of a woman's head, with a cap on,
appeared just above the bed-clothes.

The parties supposed to be concerned in this assault and murder were
tried at the Old Bailey, on the 21st of April, and after a trial
which lasted from eleven to half past one next morning, acquitted;
the darkness of the deed excluding the possibility of full proof;
but they were detained, on an indictment for a conspiracy.

Day, one of the turnkeys, related the story of his and Croswell's
agreeing to let Isdwell go to Artillery Lane; that Tilley and Jacobs
frequently came to the prison; and on Good Friday the former said to
Isdwell, that Moses Solomons (who was confined in Bridewell upon the
same charge) was to be suffered to go home and keep the passover
with his family. This had some weight in inducing the witness to
consent, and at night he accompanied him to Artillery Lane, in which
he met Tilley, but did not go in to the house where he was so
dreadfully beat, and Isdwell was shot.

Moses Solomons was a servant of Isdwell, and, as on the former
trial, gave a detail of the circumstances of Jonathan Jones taking
the lodging in Artillery Lane; of Isdwell's being expected that
night; that the trick of a sick aunt was to be played off on the
turnkey; that Isdwell did come; that most of the prisoners were
there; and that after the accident, he, and all the rest, were taken
into custody. Mrs. Cumming, who kept the house, and a little boy,
her son, proved that they had seen Hardwick, Jacobs, and Hayden,
come to Mrs. Isdwell.

Ray, Spencer, and Brummel, were the persons who apprehended all the
prisoners but Tilley, Jones, and Croswell, in and about the house;
and they were all particularly sworn to by Day and Moses Solomons,
as being in some way concerned, except Delaney, who was no otherwise
identified than as being taken in the house.

In their defence, Tilley said he was employed by the Isdwells, as
their attorney: and as the two brothers were confined in two
different prisons, the going backwards and forwards from one to the
other, occasioned his seeing them oftener than he otherwise should.
He denied that he ever made use of the expression about Moses going
out, as sworn to by Mr. Day, or that he had the smallest knowledge
of any intention of an escape.

John Crosswell left his defence to the council.

Jonathan Jones, also indicted, did not deny that he had taken the
lodging for Mrs. Isdwell, but he had not done it secretly; for, on
her husband's being taken up, she sent for him to come to town from
Gosport; he did so; and as she was obliged to leave her house at St.
Mary Axe, he had taken this lodging for her; and in so doing,
thought he did no more than his duty for a niece. Before the
accident happened, he had returned into the country; all of which
was admitted to be true by the witness Solomons.

George Hardwick stated himself to have been employed as a porter, to
assist in carrying the goods to the lodging, and not having been
paid the whole of his demand, had gone that night, and was waiting
to get the remainder.

 Hayden said, his wife washed for Mrs. Isdwell; and that she being
lame, he had gone to Mrs. Isdwell's with some things that night, and
was staying for some money. John Hayden had been out drinking, not
being able to work from its being Good Friday, and was so much
intoxicated, that he could not say how he came into the house.

Henry Delaney, also in the same indictment, said, he was passing by
the door, just after the accident, that he stopped to see what was
the matter, that he was pushed in by the mob, and had not been in
the house before.

Simon Jacobs described himself to be a brother-in-law to Isdwell,
that he was constantly going backwards and forwards to him; and that
by his desire, he passed most of his time at their lodgings. He had
no doubt but Day was the man who shot his brother. He then entered
into a long and vehement attack upon the keepers of Clerkenwell,
both for their conduct to Isdwell and to himself, after he was
taken; drawing a conclusion with respect to the former, that the
governor, lieutenant-governor, and turnkeys, were principals in the
escape; and that he and his fellow prisoners, even had they intended
to assist, could only be accomplices; and that it could not be just
to punish accomplices before the principals; nay, more, he insisted
the escape was made the moment he was out of prison, and
consequently long before they could be concerned with it.

John Phillips and John Solomons related the same story, namely, that
upon a promise of a reward of two hundred pounds, they were
endeavouring to get the dies from Mrs. Isdwell, by which the stamps
had been forged; and upon their making her some promises, she had
appointed them to come that evening. John Henley said, he had called
upon Mrs. Isdwell, that night, respecting a watch he had bought, and
which had been stopped. A great number of very respectable witnesses
were then called to their different characters. Mr. Justice Buller
summed up the evidence with much attention and perspicuity; after
which the jury went out for near half an hour, and then returned a
verdict of guilty, against the nine already named, acquitting
Jonathan Jones and Henry Delaney. They received sentence of
transportation.



GEORGE COLLEY, MICHAEL BLANCHE, AND FRANCIS COLE
Murderers and Pirates, Executed at Execution Dock,
January 22, 1796

This was the shocking case of a motley set of desperadoes composing
the crew of an American ship, rising and murdering their commander,
in order to possess themselves thereof. This desperate gang
consisted of seven villains of different countries, viz. 
	Samuel Dearbon, Archibald Hart, and John Cassado, American
citizens of the United States;

Francis Cole, an American Savage of the Cherokee nation;
	George Colley, an Irishman;
	Emanuel Batha, and Michael Blanche, Spaniards;
and who were apprehended in the Isle of Wight, on a charge of having
murdered William Little, and possessed themselves unlawfully of the
ship called, "The American Eagle," upon the high seas, and within
the jurisdiction of the admiralty of England. They were brought to
trial at the admiralty sessions in the Old Bailey for 1796, and
thereon Dearbon, Hart, and Cassado, were admitted evidence for the
crown.

It appeared from their depositions, that the murder of William
Little, the captain of the American Eagle was committed at twelve
o'clock at night, of October 27, 1795, within three days' sail of
the chops of the channel, and the command of the vessel was then
taken by George Colley, who before had been appointed mate, in
consequence of the death of Richard Little the original mate. The
circumstances attending this murder were truly horrid and
diabolical. Cole, the savage, was the chief murderer, Colley the
director, and the two Spaniards, Blanche and Batha, the assistants.
Between one and two o'clock the witness Dearbon was alarmed at the
cries of the captain, who called out murder, while some one was
saying, "Rub him down, dn him, rub him down well;" he then was
heard to say, "I am not dead though you think me so," and in a short
time after exclaimed in a faint voice, "Cook, for God's sake let me
lie down and die quietly;" these last words must have been addressed
to Cole, as he acted in the capacity of cook. Michael Blanche then
came down from the deck, and attempted to murder the witness
Dearbon, who was lying in his hammock; when a scuffle ensued, and
the witness got upon deck and begged his life of Colley, who then
directed the body of the captain to be drawn up from the cabin and
thrown overboard. During this operation, Cole said, I can haul him
up with a hearty good will; and when the body was drawn up and
thrown overboard, Colley said, "There, let him go to hell and be
damned;"the body had no covering but a shirt, pair of stockings and
drawers: the trousers having been stripped off by Cole who kept
them. Colley then took possession of the captain's effects, among
which were 245 dollars, which were afterwards sold by him at Cowes,
and divided between the witnesses and the others, together with the
clothes of the deceased. Colley the mate had entered in the log-book
that the deceased died on the 27th of October, of a yellow fever: on
the ship's arrival in the Isle of Wight Colley attempted to make an
alteration of the entry of the death he had recorded before, and
place it at a former period.

A variety of other circumstances appeared, which tended to prove
that the part the witnesses took in this horrid transaction was
entirely through fear, and that the origin seemed to have been set
on foot by Colley. Blanche and Batha being Spaniards, and
unacquainted, with the English language, had an interpreter who
explained every circumstance of the evidence to them: they, denied
being actually guilty of the murder, though they acknowledged they
knew of its being done. Cole said it was perpetrated by Colley, and
Colley said it was done by Blanche and Cole, but did not say who
directed it to be done. The manner of the murder was exceedingly
barbarous, a knife and an iron tea-kettle being used to effect it. 
	Batha, in his defence, delivered a paper, translated from
Spanish, which was as follows-"I, Emanuel, declare before God, that
I am innocent of having any share whatever in the death of Captain
Little. I was at that time at the helm, and could not have concerted
with any one as I cannot speak English at all, and my language is
that of the Bay of Biscay." Foreigners appeared to his character,
one of whom said he was an angel of God, meaning a good man. The
jury acquitted Batha, and found the rest Guilty. Blanche expressed
much astonishment at the verdict.

Sentence was immediately passed by Sir James Marriott on the
prisoners, to be hanged on the ensuing Monday at Execution Dock, and
afterwards dissected and anatomized. Sir James Marriot afterwards
respited the execution of the three prisoners to the following
Thursday, on account of the tide, but desired they might be told not
to flatter themselves on that account with any hopes of further
time. On that day, pursuant to their sentence, they suffered at
Execution Dock. The concourse of spectators who attended to witness
this act of justice was immense. Cole laughed and behaved in the
most indecent manner. He and Hart (the witness) were Americans of
colour. Colley was an Irishman. They would make no confession, but
remained obstinate and sullen. Their bodies were brought back to
Surgeon's Hall, and publicly exposed.



MICHAEL COX, ROBERT M'LAURIN, JOHN SULLIVAN, MARTIN
EALEY, AND WILLIAM MORRISON
The Mutineers of the Grand Fleet, Executed at the
Yard-arm of the Defiance Man of War, March 8, 1796

ON the morning of that day, the signal gun was fired by the
Defiance, while the yellow flag of death was hoisted, for the
execution of the above disloyal seamen, who had been sentenced to
death by a general court-martial. A lieutenant, in a boat manned and
armed, was immediately sent from each ship to witness the awful
scene. The crews of the respective ships were called on deck, and
the articles of war read to them by their captains, who afterwards
warned them to take example from the fate of the unhappy men about
to suffer.

The Rev. Dr. Hatherhall, chaplain of the Sandwich, (who has
constantly been with the prisoners since their condemnation)
administered the sacrament to all of them, except Michael Cox and
Martin Ealey, who were Roman Catholics; after praying with them
until near eleven o'clock, they were brought on deck; and the ropes
fixed around their necks, when John Flint, George Wythick, John
Lawson, and William Handy, were made acquainted, that His Majesty
had been pleased to pardon them. Handy, who had a wife and child on
board, immediately ran down and fainted in her arms; Lawson,
addressing the clergyman, said, "I am afraid I shall never again be
so well prepared for eternity."

At a quarter past eleven the signal for the execution of the
remainder, was made by firing a gun, when Michael Cox, Robert
M'Laurin, John Sullivan, Martin Ealey, and William Morrison, were
launched into eternity. After hanging the usual time, their bodies
were sent on shore to the agent at sick quarters for interment. This
awful spectacle had a due effect upon the several ships companies,
who behaved in a very proper and becoming manner on the occasion.



VALLERIE COFFRE
A Frenchman, Executed at Winchester, July 11, 1766,
for the Murder of his Fellow-Prisoner

IT is a melancholy reflection on the state of human nature, to find
men under the misery of imprisonment in a foreign land quarrelling
with each other, to a height ending in murder. That men, side by
side, fighting the battles of their country, and by the fortune of
war made prisoners by their enemy, in their confinement, to begin to
murder each other is a dreadful reflection.

Vallerie Coffre was a French prisoner of war, confined with a number
of his countrymen, at Portchester Castle, in Hampshire. He
quarrelled with his countryman and fellow-prisoner, Nicholas
Chartier, and by a secret stab with his knife, an instrument all
Frenchmen carry about them, chiefly for the purpose of cutting their
food, deprived him of life. This was fully proved on his trial. He
pleaded intoxication, and behaved with great contrition. He was a
well made young man, and only twenty-two years of age. He was
attended by a catholic priest, and was very earnest in his
devotions. The whole of the French prisoners were guarded to the
place of execution, to witness the dreadful example. He signed a
confession, according to the custom of his country, acknowledging
his crime, and the justice of his sentence, and asking pardon for
it. The priest who attended him, just before he was turned off, read
the paper to the prisoners assembled, which it is hoped had a good
effect on them. The following is a correct copy of the paper above
mentioned:

"In the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.
	Fatal drunkenness! without which I should not have killed my
friend, since I loved him, and regret him sincerely, and with all my
soul. Truth obliges me to say, to the end, that I have no knowledge
of that which I did then, so much were my senses lost; nevertheless I
have committed a great crimeI acknowledge the justice of my
condemnationI entreat pardon for it from my friends, from all those
who were witnesses to it, and above all, from God, who is the Father
and the Saviour of all men, and to whom I recommend my soul, trusting
myself to the merits of Jesus Christ, and blessing his divine bounty.
I die a member of the Apostolic Roman Church.
	Vallerie Coffre."
	Witness, Delabaye.

After execution his body was immediately delivered to the surgeons
for dissection.
Note: At French tables, knives are seldom laid with each plate. A
carver is sometimes found near the dish of roast meat, but there is
little occasion for this; their victuals, being always cooked, as we
would express it, to rags. Thus they easily pull it to pieces with
their three-pronged forks. With one of these and a knife, the latter
each individual takes from the pocket, aided occasionally by their
fingers, they consume an enormous quantity of salad, greens, and
bread; with no small allowance of overdone animal food. Of this part
of their aliment, stews, ragouts, and soups, are excellent, but no
Englishman can relish their roast beef, their steak, or their leg of
mutton.



JAMES O'COIGLEY
Executed on Penningdon Heath, June 7, 1798, for High
Treason

THE solemn, impressive, dying declaration of this unfortunate
gentleman, must certainly create a distressing pause in every
reader. We have frequently shown, that obdurate and ignorant
criminals have died in a declaration of innocence, when crimes have
been proved against them, beyond the very shadow of doubt; but when
a man, born and educated a gentleman, a scholar, and receiving the
last sacrament of his religion, appeals to his God, before whom, ere
a few minutes of life to him remained in this world, solemnly avows
to the surrounding multitude, gathered together to witness his
untimely end, his perfect and entire innocence of the crime for
which he has been convicted, charity will force us to question his
guilt.

The times in which he suffered were dangerous to the constitution of
the kingdom. There were then, both in England, Ireland, and Scot
land, many disaffected men, the leaders of parties assembling for
purposes inimicable to the public weal. Many had been apprehended,
and several had already suffered death, acknowledging their crimes;
and others, by all ranks deemed guilty. In cases of this nature, the
public mind is in a state of alarm, and all accused stand condemned
by individuals; thus those charged of joining in a plot against the
nation, an inward detestation against them is felt in every loyal
breast; and hence the minds of jurymen must feel a strong bias
against their fellows, arraigned for their lives, on which they are
to determine. These are the irresistible workings of nature; and it
might so unfortunately have turned out, that Mr. O'Coigley was a
victim. We offer these observations as a tribute of charity for the
departed man, yet we truly hope, dreadful as the alternative in
thought may be, that he died fairly convicted of the crime for which
he suffered. His best friends must certainly admit that suspicion
might well fall upon any man thus connected with Arthur O'Conner, an
apostate Irishman, who certainly attempted to sell his country to
the foe; and is now high in rank in the service of the tyrant
Buonaparte. Such was the ill fate of O'Coigley; who, together with
the above-named O'Conner, John Binns, John Allen, and Jeremiah
Leary, were arraigned at the Lent assizes for Kent, in the year
1798, of whom O'Coigley alone was found guilty; sufficient proof,
however guilty the remainder in conscience were, not being adduced
to convict them.

The indictment was read by Mr. Knapp, who afterwards stated the
charges it contained in a summary manner. He said there were three
distinct species of treason charged in the indictment, and seven
overt-acts. The first treason was compassing and imagining the death
of the king: the second, was adhering to his enemies: the third, was
compassing and imagining, inventing, devising, and intending to move
and stir certain foreigners and strangers, that is to say, the
persons exercising the powers of government in France, to invade
this kingdom. The first overt act was, conspiring to levy war at
Margate, in the county of Kent: the second overt-act, sending
intelligence to the enemy: the other overt-acts were, attempts to
hire vessels, and to leave the kingdom. The trial lasted two days. A
pocket-book had been found in O'Coigley's great-coat, in which a
paper was found addressed to the Executive Directory of France, from
the Secret Committee of England.

O'Coigley, in his defence, addressed the jury as follows: "It is
impossible for me to prove a negative; but it is a duty I owe to
you, and to myself, solemnly to declare, that I never was the bearer
of any message or paper of this kind to France, in the course of my
life. That paper is not mine; it never belonged to me. It states
that it was to be carried by the bearer of the last; this is
something which might have been proved, but it is impossible for me
to prove the negative. There is also in this paper an allusion to
secret committees and political societies. I declare that I never
attended any political society whatever. With these considerations,
I consign my life to your justice; not doubting but that you will
conduct yourselves as English jurymen ever do, and that your verdict
will be such as shall receive the approbation of your own
conscience, your country, and your God."

The jury, after about half an hour's consideration, found O'Coigley
"Guilty," and acquitted the other prisoners.  Mr. Justice Buller, in
an address to O'Coigley, which he read from a written paper,
previous to his passing the sentence, observed, that he had been
clearly convicted of the most atrocious crime which could be
committed in any countrythat of meditating the destruction of a
Sovereign, who was one of the best, the most just, upright, and
amiable of princes that ever graced a throne; and he could not
conceive what were the motives which could actuate any man, even to
wish for the death of such, who had ever been the father of his
people. The prisoner was also found guilty of conspiring to overturn
the constitution of these kingdoms; a constitution which, from the
experiment of years, had been found to be the best calculated of any
that ever existed in the world, to insure the liberty, security, and
happiness, of the people who lived under it. These atrocious crimes
became still greater from the manner in which they were intended to
be perpetratedthat of inviting a foreign enemy to come and invade,
and conquer these countries. Those people, who had thought such an
event a desirable one, ought to think seriously what the
consequences of it would be, provided it was possible to be
accomplished. Did they suppose that, (desperate as their present
situation might be) their condition would be bettered by having
their country put into the possession of people who were-holding out
the delusive hopes of what they called liberty to other nations?
Could such persons hope that they themselves should enjoy liberty,
even supposing the conquerors to have enjoyed as free a constitution
as any in the world? No, they would become suspected, be despised,
and destroyed by them. A celebrated writer (Montesquieu) very justly
observed upon this subject, that a country conquered by a democratic
nation always enjoyed less liberty, was more miserable, and more
enslaved, than if that country happened to have been conquered by a
nation whose government was monarchial. But if there was any
illustration of this observation wanting, one had only to look to
the conduct of the French at this moment towards Holland, Italy,
Switzerland, and every other country they had conquered. His
Lordship believed that the prisoner might have been actuated by
motives similar to those which used formerly to induce many people
to think that the killing of men of a different religion would give
them a claim to canonization. But though the motives might be
similar, the subjects connected with them were very different. In
the present times, he did not believe that any person entertained
such sentiments about religion. On the contrary, he was sorry to
find that religion was too much neglected, and that the peace and
tranquillity of numbers of people were destroyed in consequence of
having lost all belief of the existence of a Divine Providence, and
totally abandoned all hopes of a future state. He was afraid that
the prisoner had been infected with this infidelity, and if he was,
he (the Judge) prayed that the Almighty God, in his infinite mercy
and goodness, would change his heart, and cause him to repent of his
sins.

His lordship then, in a solemn and awful manner, passed the
following sentence: "That the prisoner be taken from the bar to
prison, and from thence to the place of execution; there to be
hanged, but not until he be dead, to be cut down while yet alive,
and then to have his heart and bowels taken out and burnt before his
face; his head to be severed from his body; and his body to be
divided into four quarters." Mr. O'Coigley listened to this address
and sentence with attention, but at the same time with the greatest
coolness. He bowed his head when the Judge concluded; his
countenance expressing at once resignation and firmness.

Immediately after the sentence was passed on O'Coigley, Mr.
O'Conner, supposing himself at liberty, attempted to withdraw, when
a warrant was served on him on another charge of high treason,
signed by the Duke of Portland, and dated March 22. On this some
swords were drawn, and a general confusion ensued, when Mr. O'Connor
addressed the Court to this effect: "My Lord, I am surrounded with
drawn swords,I am prepared to die; and it would be better for the
Court to doom me to death at once, than that I should linger out my
life in a gaol-Have the goodness to send me to the dungeon where my
brother is in confinement, after having been acquitted on a charge
of high treason in Ireland. At all events, will your Lordships order
that my agent may be permitted to come to me?" The Court said they
could make no ordertheir commission ended with the trial.

O'Coigley on Wednesday, June 6, 1798, between four and five in the
afternoon, received information that he was to die next day, without
apparent emotion. He spent the evening very calmly. He had but one
thing, he said, on his mind which created any anxiety; that was, an
apprehension that he might be misrepresented after his death. He was
anxious to be faithfully reported, and that was all he wanted. On
Thursday, at a quarter past eleven o'clock, O'Coigley left the gaol.
He was dressed all in black; his hair was cropped and powdered, his
shirt-collar open, and he wore no neck-cloth. His elbows were tied
behind with ropes, and over his shoulders was the rope with which he
was executed. He stepped into the hurdle, and on his sitting down a
chain was put round his waist to fasten him. The executioner sat
opposite to him. He had nothing on his head. He continued all the
way earnestly reading a prayer-book. Mr. Watson, the gaoler,
followed the hurdle, which was surrounded by above 200 of the
Maidstone Volunteers. The deputy sheriff, and the Rev. Mr. Griffiths
followed. The whole was preceded by about 20 javelin-men. The hurdle
was drawn up close in front of the gallows, on Penningdon-heath, and
the horses were taken out. The military formed a small square. The
prisoner being unchained, he rose up and stood in the hurdle, and
read two prayers, one of them aloud in Latin. He then took out of
his pocket an orange, and also a pen-knife, but being unable to cut
the orange, from his hands being bound, he gave it to a friend, whom
he beckoned to come near him, saying, "Open this orange with my pen-
knife; it has been said, they would not trust a pen-knife, lest I
should cut my throat; but they little knew that I would not deprive
myself of the glory of dying in this way." He desired his friend to
keep the pen-knife for his sake, and to hold the orange, several
pieces of which he eat. After finishing his devotions, the clergy
man gave him absolution, to whom he returned the prayer book; and
having ascended the platform, he took farewell of the gaoler,
thanking him for the many civilities he had shown him. On his being
tied up to the gallows, he made the following speech: "I shall only
here declare, that I am innocent of the charge for which I suffer. I
never was in my life the bearer of any letter, or other paper or
message, printed, written, or verbal, to the directory of France,
nor to any person on their behalf; neither was I ever a member of
the London Corresponding Society, or of any other political society
in Great Britain; nor did I ever attend any of their meetings,
public or privateso help me God! I know not whether I shall be
believed here in what I say, but I am sure I shall be believed in
the world to come. It can scarcely be supposed, that one like me, in
this situation, going to eternity, before the most awful tribunal,
would die with a falsehood in his mouth; and I do declare, by the
hopes I confidently feel of salvation, and happiness in a future
state, that my life is falsely and maliciously taken away by corrupt
and base perjury, and subornation of perjury, in some cases
proceeding from mistake, no doubt, but in others from design.
Almighty God forgive all my enemies!I beg of you to pray that God
will grant me gracefor I have many sins to answer for, but they are
the sins of my private life, and not the charge for which I now
die." (raising his voice) "Lord thave mercy on me, and receive my
soul!" A white night-cap was then drawn over his face, and he made a
signal by dropping a handkerchief. The board was then let down, as
at Newgate, and he remained suspended for twelve or thirteen
minutes; he was then taken down, the head taken off by a surgeon,
and the executioner held up the head to the populace, saying, "This
is the head of a Traitor!" Both head and body were then put into a
shell, and buried at the foot of the gallows.



SAMUEL BURR
Convicted of a Forgery, in the year 1787

Though this is a very extraordinary case, yet we have met with
similar instances of men being so very weary of life, as to commit a
crime, in order that their lives might be taken by the law! and
thereby prevent them from becoming their own murderers. Such an
instance was the following:

On the fourth of September, 1760, when North America entirely
belonged to our country, a Mr. Robert Scull, with several gentlemen,
were playing at billiards in Philadelphia; when Captain Bruluman,
late of the Royal American regiment, came into the room, and without
the smallest provocation, levelled a loaded gun, which he had
brought with him, and shot Mr. Scull through the body, just after he
had struck his ball, for which murder he was tried and executed.

This desperate man had been brought up a silversmith, which business
he left to enter the army, where he was an officer in the Royal
American regiment, but was broke on being detected in counterfeiting
or uttering base money. He then returned to Philadelphia, and
growing insupportable to himself, and yet unwilling to put an end to
his own life, he determined upon the commission of some illegal
crime, for which he would certainly be hanged by the law. Having
formed this design, he loaded his gun with a brace of balls, and
asked his landlord to go a-shooting with him, intending to murder
him before his return, but the landlord being fortunately
particularly engaged at home, escaped the danger. He then went out
alone, and on the way met a man whom he was about to kill, but
recollecting that there were no witnesses to prove him guilty, he
suffered the man to pass. He then went to a tavern, where he drank
some liquor, and hearing people playing at billiards in a room above
that in which he sat, he went up-stairs, and entered into
conversation with the players, in apparent good humour. In a little
time he called the landlord, and desired him to hang up the gun. Mr.
Scull having struck his antagonist's ball in one of the pockets,
Bruluman said to him, "Sir, you are a good marksman, now I'll show
you a fine stroke." He immediately took down his gun, levelled it,
deliberately took aim at Mr. Scull (who imagined him in jest) and
shot both the balls through his body. He then went up to the dying
man, who was still sensible, and said to him, "Sir, I have no malice
or ill-will against you; I never saw you before, but I was
determined to kill somebody, that I might be hanged, and you happen
to be the man; and I am very sorry for your misfortune."

Mr. Scull had just time left in this world, to send for his friends
and make his will. He forgave his murderer, and, if it could be
done, desired he might be pardoned. Bruluman died on the gallows,
exulting in his fate.

The same volume from which we make the above extract, contains
another of the like nature, and, if possible, more extraordinary. We
shall, therefore, before we give the particulars of Samuel Burr, add
this fatal precedent for the commission of the deed by which he
sought his own death.

A youth of the name of David Williams, who, when about fifteen years
of age, was one day, against his wish, detained from school, by his
father-in-law, who greatly wanted his assistance on the farm. While
thus employed, a log rolled on one of his legs, which injured it to
such a degree, that it became nearly useless; and by another
accident he soon after hurt the other limb, so that he was rendered
almost a cripple, before he had attained the years of man. At these
misfortunes he continually repined, blamed his step-father for
keeping him that day from school, whereby he received his first
injury; and, mortified at his appearance among his comrades, some of
whom, he said, ridiculed him, he became weary of the world, and
determined to end his misfortunes with his life. For this end,
suicide and murder presented themselves. The first he thought the
most eligible, but then it brought to his mind, the horrors of
appearing, by his own violence, before God, he would not be
pardoned; and therefore he was induced to abandon that for the
latter, which would afford him a better excuse to the Almighty;
besides, death, by hanging by any other hands than his own, he found
most desirable.

He familiarised himself to this act of desperation, by continually
thinking of it; so that in time it became a pleasing subject of
contemplation. The consideration of the grief which it must occasion
his mother, at times, almost unbent his resolution; but then the
idea of its proving a sweet revenge on his father-in-law, bore down
every other consideration. Thus determined, the next step of this
unhappy young man was, to select a proper subject on whom the deed
should be committed. A grown person or a child was the question. The
former, he concluded, must be under sin and guilt: therefore, by
sudden death, and thus unprepared, his damnation might be chargeable
to him, and he be double guilty; the latter, being innocent, he
might avoid that charge, and therefore resolved upon murdering some
child. Now, the particular object for this horrid purpose, was the
next thought; but he confessed, that though he thought of it more
than six months, yet none occurred, until within five minute of his
committing his long-determined and bloody deed. All the morning of
the fatal day, he said that he felt an unaccountable and far
stronger desire to commit murder, than before, to use his own words,
"Something like hankering after fruit." At this unfortunate moment
he chanced to spy a little boy, named Ira, the son of Mr. Lane, a
neighbour, gathering plums, and finding the parents absent,
determined on seizing the opportunity and subject. He instantly
seized a gun, fired at, and slightly wounded the child in the side
of the abdomen. Finding his victim yet alive, he limped to him, led
him to the house, placed him upon a bed, and took a station at the
door. Poor, devoted little Ira had strength left to get from the
bed, in order to see "whether his father was coming to cure him."
Williams answered, that his father would come by and bye, and bid
him go to bed again, and lie still. Again the murderer listened for
the dying groan of the boy, but finding his work incomplete, (horrid
to relate) he took an axe, went to the bed, looked upon the innocent
child, and while it held up its little hands for help, the monster
struck it on the head, and by repeated and accursed blows, chopped
it in pieces. The wretched murderer was a youth of extraordinary
mental talents for his years, until the fatal gloom over spread him.

After the horrid deed was done, he spoke of it with calmness,
observing, that though he had often considered the grief he should
bring on his own mother, it never occurred to him, the distraction
it must cause her who bore the murdered child. His whole intent was
to get himself hanged. He supposed that the perpetration of the
murder, under so many palliating circumstances, would excite the
pity and forgiveness of the Almighty. He farther admitted in the
account he gave of himself, that the example of a pious mother, and
an affectionate and good brother had no influence over his
determined purpose; that he had an evil temper, soured ever since
his father-in-law took him that unhappy day from school; but that he
had never committed a bad crime before. He was, in the eye of the
law, considered a lunatic, and as such treated.

The immediate subject of the present enquiry, Samuel Burr, was a
young man of fair character, but who laboured under so great a
depression of mind, as to render him weary of life. He did not,
however, seek death at the hands of the law, by shedding the blood
of his fellow creature; he pursued a still more effectual plan, as
he conceived, knowing that though the crime of murder, under
particular circumstances, has found mercy, but forgery is
unpardonable. Yet, in this he did not succeed, for when his
determination to die was known, the executive power would have him
live, and in pursuance, from time to time, his execution was
respited. That such was his fixed determination to die, will be
proved by his address to the Bench, on receiving sentence; and that
he was possessed of superior abilities, will be seen by the style of
his speech. Having been convicted of forgery, when the Recorder of
London called him by name, in the usual manner, to know what he had
to say, why sentence of death should not be passed upon him, he thus
replied;

"My Lord, I am too sensible of the crime I have committed, and for
which I justly deserve to suffer; not to know that my life I have
forfeited, and wish to resign it into the hands of Him who gave it.
To give my reasons for this, would only satisfy an idle curiosity; no
one can feel a more sensible heart-felt satisfaction in the hopes of
shortly passing into eternity; wherein, I trust, I shall meet with
great felicity. I have no desire to live; and as the jury and court
in my trial thought proper to recommend me to mercy, if his Majesty
should, in consequence thereof, grant me a respite, I here vow, in
the face of heaven, that I will put an end to my own existence as
soon as I can. It is death that I wish for, because nothing but death
can extricate me from the troubles which my follies have involved me
in."

We did not find any note of his being executed, therefore conclude,
that in pity to his mental derangement, he finally received a
pardon. The last time he is named, was in these words, "Samuel Burr,
the unhappy youth, who, under a depression of mind, abhorring the
guilt of suicide, committed a forgery in order to suffer death by
the law, was respited."



WILLIAM GRANT (A Negro)
In whose Conviction we shall Introduce a Sketch of
the Pawnbroker and the Jew

Already are our readers in possession of the mode of deception, and
the petty depredations of the lower tribes of Israel, in London. As
Judaism is marked on every Hebrew visage, so are their avocations
alike in every quarter of the globe. The meaner sort are pedlars in
trinkets, purchasers of second hand articles, and receivers of
whatever may be brought to them. They are, in fact, for their sins
and cruelties to the blessed Jesus, a wandering unlicensed race upon
the earth.

But in London we have a set of privileged receivers of goods, and
acting under the law, they can consequently do nothing, save what is
lawful; yet, we can safely add our opinion, that it would be more
for the general weal, was the act of parliament which they have
obtained, abrogated. This fraternity are that proud, insolent, and
unfeeling set of men, y'cleped, "Pawnbrokers." It is proverbial,
that "Had we no receivers, we should have no thieves;" it is equally
true, that "had we no Pawnbrokers we should have less distress."
These men, under no chartered restrictions as a trade, so late as
thirty years ago, conceiving themselves out of the statutes against
usury, demanded what rate of interest they pleased upon pledges,
generally worth double their pawn. In those times, every man who
could muster cash, could open a shop for receiving pledges; and
many, very many thousands of poor families, owe their ruin to these
pawntakers.

About the date already mentioned a young man of ancient family, to
supply his extravagance, had pledged a quantity of plate and other
articles with Parker, then of Princess-street, Haymarket, but since
Pawnbroker to the notorious Mrs. Clarke, while under royal
protection. The gay young gentleman, again in funds, wished to
redeem the ornaments of his sideboard, which, certainly had laid in
Parker's strong room several months; but applying for that purpose,
the demand of Mr. Pop, (we are sure Parker will pardon our
familiarity, because he knows we write from record) was so enormous,
that it alarmed the simple owner.

It happened that the attorney for the young man, (since succeeding
to his title) was Mr. William J'anson, of Bedford-row, than whom a
man of greater ability never practised in the courts of Westminster.
To this gentleman, was the case stated, who in due terms of law,
brought Parker, Priestman, and other pawnbrokers, into Westminster-
Hall, where he recovered against them the penalty of the statute of
Elizabeth, against "directly, or indirectly," taking more than
lawful interest for money lent. The fraternity of usurious money-
lenders were in alarm. They who had for years hoarded contrary to
law, and on the miseries of mankind, were compelled, wherever an
action was brought, (and the minor attorneys soon followed the tract
of J'Anson,) to disgorge their ill-gotten pelf. Thus defeated, the
body of Pawnmen consulted together, and procured an act of
parliament for the regulation of their dealings, which limits their
interest to twenty percent, and orders them, in case the pledges are
not redeemed within a year, to sell the same by public auction, and
return the surplus to the persons who pawned the same. This part of
the act is shamefully evaded. They give a colour to a sale, it is
true, but we never yet heard of a single miserable individual who
benefited by it. Thus the grievance advances in this unfeeling
traffic; the number of pawnbrokers increase rapidly, and the evil
will continue, unless we find another J'Anson, to keep them within
the strict letter of the law.

William Grant was a native of the Coast of Africa, a region of black
men, but little known to Europeans. A few of this nation, and we
could wish the British dominions purged of them, find their way
among us. This malefactor (like most of his colour, when taken from
their burning clime) was a thief. He was convicted of robbing his
master, Captain Ball, of a ruby ring, which cost ninety guineas. The
thief sold it (for so says the account) to one of these human
sharks, a pawnbroker, for four guineas; and he parted with it to a
Jew, for six! Modest, but ignorant pawnbroker: The son of Israel,
somewhat more cunning in his dealings, sold it to jeweller for
fifteen; and thus we see the progress of this kind of iniquity in
the degradation of manthe Negro, the Pawnbroker, the Jew, and the
Jeweller. But of all these, the jeweller was the greatest knave; for
he best knew the value of the precious stone, and it was surely
worth, even four times the purchase of the Jew. It is a vulgar
adage, that "Tricking is fair in love and war" but we hold it
despicable in trade. The ruby was traced to the dealer in stones; he
was obliged to yield it up, and black Bill was sentenced to
transportation at the Old Bailey, on the 22d of September, 1787.



JEREMIAH READING
The Scape-goat of Swindlers, Convicted of Forgery at
the Old Bailey, the Judgment Arrested, and the
Condemned Pardoned
(A very intricate Case.)

The forgery for which this man was tried was supposed to have been
committed by two swindlers, John King, and one White. There was much
hard swearing to bolster up a respectability to the character of the
former, but the learned Judge seemed to be of opinion, that the
prisoner was, to use his own words, "a scape-goat in their hands."

Jeremiah Reading was tried for forging the name of John King, as an
acceptance to a bill of exchange for 30l. with intent to defraud
William Dolben and Richard Brown, linen-drapers, in Bishopsgate-
street.

William Dolben being sworn, deposed, that in the month of February,
1792, the prisoner, who had been for a considerable time indebted to
them in 9l, applied to him, saying, he had now the means of
discharging the arrears, having received a note, which he wished to
have discounted. For that night he wished to receive only 10l, which
he had immediate occasion for. He described White, the drawer of the
bill, to be a reputable merchant in Bristol; and King, the acceptor,
a man of opulence, who resided in a large house in Berkeley-street,
Portman square, and kept a carriage, livery-servants, &c.

The witness remarked, that the acceptance in the bill appeared in
the place where indorsements are usually made. To this the prisoner
replied, that when he took the bill he made the same observation;
but that Mr. King assured him he always accepted his bills in that
way, and that it should be regularly honoured when it became due. He
then gave him 20l. for which he took his receipt. The prisoner not
returning for the remainder of the money, excited suspicion, and
induced the witness to make enquiry after the drawer and acceptor.
The result was, that White had once resided in Bristol, but had
disappeared for two years; but as to King, no such person was to be
found in Berkeley-street. The witness having occasion to pay a visit
in the King's Bench, found Reading a prisoner there, and brought him
on his trial.

A servant in the prosecutor's house corroborated this testimony; and
the collector of the taxes said, that no person of the name of King
was a yearly housekeeper in Berkeley-street, otherwise he must have
known him. This was the scope of the evidence for the prosecution.

In defence, one Clark appeared, who swore, that he lived as clerk in
the house of White, in Bristol, and recollected having copied the
note in question, and its being forwarded to King in Berkeley-
street. The witness underwent an examination of two hours, in which
he was required to give an account of himself. This he did in a very
extraordinary manner, beginning at the time when he was only three
years old; but it was found impossible to extract from him the
manner in which he employed himself for the last eighteen months.

Allen, a hair-dresser, deposed, that he lived near Soho-square, in
good business; and that, in the year 1792, he dressed a Mr. King, in
Berkeley-street, Portman-square. He recollected, that about the end
of February, the prisoner came to Mr. King, while he was dressing
him, and presented a bill, which he accepted. He added, that all
that conversation took place relative to the extraordinary mode of
indorsement, &c. which was related by the prisoner when passing the
bill upon Dolben. He also stated a circumstance of King's receiving
a letter addressed to him under the name of Nugent.

Several witnesses gave the prisoner a good character, amongst whom
was a Miss Davies, whose mother's house in Berkeley-street he
frequented for three years.

Mr. Justice Grose summed up this very intricate evidence in a very
able and circumstantial manner. He commented upon all the points; 
and when he came to that which regarded King's passing by the name
of Nugent, Miss Davies requested the liberty of interrupting him.
She said, that the mention of the name of Nugent called a
circumstance to her remembrance, which, as it may affect the case
before the court, she thought it her duty to state, though she could
not have done so in her direct evidence; the whole having been
suggested by the testimony of another witness. She then related,
that a person of the name of Nugent had taken lodgings at her
mother's, and refused to give any reference for character, saying,
there was no occasion for it, as he was a regular man, and would pay
weekly. He afterwards absconded in the night; and, on sweeping the
room one morning, she found a pawnbroker's duplicate of an article
pledged in the name of John King. Having never seen a pawnbroker's
ticket before, she showed it to a gentleman, and their mutual
curiosity led them to pay a visit to the pawnbroker. The latter told
them, that he had directions to stop any person who should apply
with the ticket; and that the instruction was given by the person
who deposited the pledge. On the affair being explained, the
pawnbroker gave a description of the man, which perfectly
corresponded with the person of Nugent. She was desired to produce
the ticket; but said, that having no idea that such a circumstance
would apply in evidence to this case, she had not brought it with
her, as she otherwise would have done.

The learned judge, after a short hesitation, proceeded to his
charge. He remarked, that what they had last heard went in a great
measure to confirm the evidence of Allen. If the jury should be led
to attribute the whole to a foul and fraudulent conspiracy of White
and King as an expedient for raising money, and that the prisoner
was only a scape-goat in their hands, it was not a forgery, as
charged in the indictment, and they must of course acquit him. They
were not to convict upon doubt, inference, probability, or
conjecture. The question to be considered was, whether the prisoner
uttered this instrument knowing it to be forged? If they believed
the evidence of Allen and Clark, corroborated by that of Davies, the
charge was fully rebutted; if not, the other evidence was sufficient
to convict him.

The jury, after retiring for a considerable time, re turned with a
verdict, finding the prisoner guilty on the second count of the
indictment "Guilty of uttering the bill, knowing it to be forged."
Death.

The learned judge, however, thought proper to reserve the case for
the opinion of the Judges; and accordingly, at the Sessions-House in
the Old Bailey, 1794, the judges were of opinion, that as the
indictment stated the bill to be directed to John King, by the name
and description of John King, and as there was no such person to be
found as John King, that their description was erroneous, and
repugnant to the precision the law required in the form of
indictments, and that therefore the judgment ought to be arrested.
The case, however, being of great public importance, the judges were
of opinion that the prisoner ought not to be discharged, as the
prosecutor was at liberty to prefer a new indictment against him,
The prisoner was of course detained in custody. However, on the
succeeding month, March, he received his Majesty's free pardon.



JOHN DAY
The Most Execrable Murderer of Father, Mother, and
their Servant
"My heart sinks in me,
"And every slacken'd fibre drops its hold,
"Like nature dropping down the springs of life"
DRYDEN

This inhuman monster, having been one night in bad company,
especially of lewd women, surfeiting in drunkenness, came home,
swearing and cursing vehemently, requiring money of his sorrowful,
terrified parents, who laboured to pacify him with good words,
entreating him to go to bed, and sleep that night; and if it
appeared in the morning, when he awaked, that he wanted money, he
should have it: little thinking that they nourished a viper in their
bosom, to sting them to death.

About midnight this graceless son, being come a little to himself,
got up with a murmuring mind, and getting softly into the bedchamber
of his parents, drew a large knife out of his sheath, and cut his
aged father and mother's throats. After which desperate wickedness
he remembered the servant-maid, who lay in the loft above, and that
she might not come as a witness against him, he went softly up, and
finding her asleep, ravished her, and then cut her throat from ear
to ear. Then musing upon the horrid villanies he had committed, the
devil put it into his head to set the house on fire, when he had
plundered what he thought fit, that the dead bodies being consumed,
it might be thought to have been by accident, and he not be
suspected. But God, who never suffers such monsters in wickedness to
go unpunished, even in this world, brought the discovery to light:
for though he denied to have been at home that night, and seemed
wonderfully sorry at the surprising misfortune, as he termed it, yet
living very profusely, and having spent all his money, he was forced
to sell the plate he had stolen, which being stopped, upon
examination, he confessed the fact. Upon which he was sent to gaol,
where he remained very sorrowful; and he affirms the ghost of the
murdered persons appeared to him in frightful shapes, pointing to
their ghastly wounds, and, in a threatening manner, summoning him to
appear at the dreadful tribunal of Almighty God, to answer for their
innocent blood, that cried for vengeance against him.

After he had sometime lain in this sorrowful condition, his trial
came on; when he pleaded guilty to this indictment, saying, his
youthful sins had brought this heavy judgment upon him, declaring,
before his sentence, he desired to die, as not being fit to live.

The court exhorted him to a serious repentance of his sins, and to
pray to God to deliver his soul from blood-guiltiness. He promised
to do what in him lay: and a minister was ordered to attend him, and
give him ghostly consolation, the short remainder of the time he had
to live. The minister who visited him prayed earnestly with and for
him, that God would look down in mercy upon him; and wash his sin-
polluted soul from blood-guiltiness in the precious blood of the
Lord Jesus. The same minister attended him to the place of
execution, which exhibited a very affecting scene: here he burst
into tears, and advised all young persons to beware of Sabbath-
breaking, drunkenness, swearing, and whoredom, as they valued their
peace here and hereafter. He was executed on Kennington-Common,
about the middle of September, 1792, and afterwards hung in chains
near the bloody spot.



WILLIAM WINTERBOTTOM
A Dissenting Preacher, Fined and Imprisoned for
Preaching Seditious Sermons

This factious priest, convicted before Mr. Baron Perryn, at the
assizes for the county of Devon, for preaching a seditious sermon at
Plymouth, on the 5th of November, 1792. In the course of this
discourse, the defendant talked a great deal about the revolution in
1688. He was sorry to see the laws so much abused as they were at
present. He also spoke of the French Revolution, and he did not
doubt but that would open the eyes of every Briton. He asked, why
the streets were so crowded with vagrants, the workhouses with
beggars, and the gaols with thieves? All this, he said, was to be
attributed to our oppressive taxes. It was high time for the people
of this country to stand forward and assert their rights. He made
mention of the national debthe denied that any part of it was paid
off; it was only like taking money out of one pocket, and putting it
into another. He said, His Majesty had no more right to the throne
than the Stuarts, if he did not maintain the laws and established
rules of the country. He urged, that the Revolution in France was
wisely calculated for spreading the gospel through twenty-five
millions of people.

The defendant was also indicted and convicted at the same time, for
preaching at Plymouth another seditious sermon, on the 18th of
November, 1792. He took his text from Romans xiii. 13. viz. "The
night is far spent, the day is at hand; let us therefore cast off
the works of darkness, and let us put on the armour of light." In
the course of this discourse, the defendant introduced several
strong observations. After the evidence on both sides had been
heard, the jury, without hesitation, found the defendant difficulty.
Judgment having been prayed by the king's counsel, Mr. Justice
Ashurst thus addressed the defendant:

"William Winterbottom, you have been found guilty of preaching two
seditious and atrocious sermons. The first act of this daring
profligacy you committed on the 5th of November, and the second on
the 18th of the same month. It has been stated, that you are a
dissenting preacher: of what sect of religion you are, I know not:
but I can collect from your preaching, that you are not at all
connected with the Christian religion; for the Christian religion,
after first regarding the duty of God, teaches and inspires love
for, and obedience to the established government; but the tendency
of your doctrine is to overturn all order, religion, morality, and
government, and to introduce anarchy and confusion.

"Your doctrine goes to the abuse of that toleration by which it is
meant, that every man may be at liberty to reverence God in the way
that his conscience may dictate. But your conscience dictates no
such principles; therefore the means that you have taken is a double
aggravation of your guilt, and merits a two-fold punishment.

"In one part of your sermon, you approve of the revolution of
France. As to your first proposition, it is sufficient that the
pernicious designs intended to have been executed, are frustrated.
As to your second opinion, that the French revolution would open the
eyes of the people of England, there I agree with you, it does open
the eyes of the peopleit has taken the veil from off the hackneyed
system of liberty and equality. All practical equality consists in
the affording equal protection. This chimerical project has been
tried in a neighbouring nation, the lamentable effects of which will
be handed down with sorrow to the latest generation. This system,
which has been tried must press upon the mind of men, and must
operate more forcibly than a volume of arguments.

"As to your second proposition, it is impossible to be justified;
you have alleged that the present form of government is a scourge on
the people; but that the yoke of bondage will be soon broken; that
persecution is near its end, and that every man will soon have to
boast of EQUALITY. As to your saying that the French revolution will
open the eyes of the people, I trust it will also open your eyes,
and be a scourge to those who wish to introduce anarchy and
confusion.

"This court having taken the malignity of your offence into their
serious consideration, do consequently order and adjudge that for
your first offence, you pay a fine of 100l. to the king, and that
you be imprisoned in the New Prison, Clerkenwell, in the county of
Middlesex, for the term of two years; and that for your second
offence, you pay a fine of 100l. to the king, and be imprisoned in
the New Prison, Clerkenwell, for the term of two years, to be
computed after the expiration of your first imprisonment; and that
at the end of your imprisonment, you give security for your good
behaviour for the term of five years, yourself in 500l. and two
sureties in 250l. each."

The defendant then wished to address the court; but Lord Kenyon told
him, "The court cannot hear you now. It would have been the duty of
the court to have heard you, if you had offered anything before
sentence was passed: notwithstanding the source of mercy is open to
you."

The defendant was immediately taken into custody.

The itinerant declaimers from the pulpit to ignorant auditors, are
often, not only a nuisance to society, but, as in the case of
Winterbottom, dangerous to the state. Let preachers of the gospel
stick to their creed; when they dare to dabble in politics, with
which they have no business, we hope to see them follow the
disaffected subject of this enquiry, into a prison.



CHARLES TALMAGE
Convicted along with Mary Mallet, of Burglary, and
Hanged at Winchester, March 12, 1794

The latter escaped for a time her punishment, under the plea of
pregnancy. This is a plea, granted by a very old statute, to females
convicted of felony, in arrest of judgment; in order that the living
fruit of the womb should not perish for the mother's sins. In such
cases a jury of women, called by the law, Matrons, that is, females
who have themselves borne children, are sworn, who, upon their
several and respective oaths, swear, after personal examination,
whether the condemned female is "quick with child."

In the instance of Mary Mallet, the jury of matrons were impanelled,
and brought in their verdict in confirmation of her plea, in
consequence whereof her sentence was respited until the next
assizes. This woman, along with Charles Talmage, were convicted at
the Lent assizes held in the city of Winchester, 1794, for
burglariously entering the house of Elizabeth Imber, of that city,
and stealing thereout a large amount in cash, a considerable
quantity of plate, and other valuable effects.

On the 22d of March, in pursuance of his sentence, Charles Talmage
was conveyed in a cart to the usual place of execution. He
manifested, throughout the whole of this trying scene, a great
degree of firmness; acknowledged that he had committed many
offences; but solemnly protested his innocence of the crime for
which he suffered. A label, containing the following words, was
affixed to his breast;"Be thou my Judge, O Lord, for I am
innocently betrayed." Talmage was a well-looking young man, aged
twenty-seven, a native of Winchester, where he left a father,
mother, and other relations.



ROBERT WATT and DAVID DOWNIE
Convicted of High Treason, at Edinburgh, with
Particulars of the Execution of a Traitor in Scotland

WE are now arrived at an alarming period at the modern history of
our country. Just engaged in the ruinous war with France, which
continues with increasing obstinacy, to the very hour in which we
write. Perplexed by treason at home, and threatened with invasion by
our enemy, the nation was in a critical situation. Confederate
bodies of dissatisfied men, were formed, from London to Edinburgh,
pursuing a systematical course of treason, and corresponding with
each other, until Government stretched out its powerful arm to crush
the traitors. Many writers charge the ministry with oppression, but
at such a time as this, better, surely, to support the constitution,
corrupt as may be its administration, than suffer its subversion,
and see ourselves thrown into that anarchy and confusion, sought for
by such men as we shall soon bring before the reader.

Watt and Downie were principals in the Scottish Conspiracy, and were
convicted of the crime of high treason. Their trial brought to light
the particulars of the plot, to overthrow the constitution of Great
Britain; and from which we shall, therefore, make a copious extract.

Their trial came on before the High Court of Justiciary, at
Edinburgh, on the 3d of September, 1794, when Mr. Anstruther stated
the case on the part of the Crown. He began, by observing, that such
was the peculiar happiness of this country, that we had been
unacquainted with the law of treason for nearly half a century. It
was not his intention, if he possessed the powers, of inflaming the
passions of the Jury against the prisoner: his object, was to give a
plain, a dry narrative of the facts, and a succinct statement of the
law.

The laws of treason were now the same in England and Scotland, and
the duty of the subjects of both kingdoms should be the same.
Scotland, in this instance, had reaped much benefit by the Union, as
her laws of treason, previous to that period, were much more severe.
The act of Edw. III. stated three distinct species of treason: 1.
Compassing and imagining the death of the king; 2. Levying war
against him; 3. Assisting his enemies. He would not trouble the
Court or Jury with the two last: the single species of treason
charged in the present case, was the compassing and imagining the
death of the king; which was defined by the conceiving such a
design; not the actual act, but the attempt to effect it. But the
law which thus anxiously guarded the sovereign, was equally
favourable to the subject: for it does not affect him until that
imagination is fully proved before "men of his condition." An overt
act of treason is the means used for effectuating the purpose of the
mind: it is not necessary to prove a direct attempt to assassinate
the king: for the crime is the intention, and the overt act the
means used to effect it. He wished not that these sentiments might
be held as the opinion of counsel: they were founded on the
construction of the ablest writers, Chief Justices Foster, Hale, &c,
and, whatever could be proved against the prisoners, which may
endanger the kings person, was an overt act of high treason, in the
language of the ablest writers. After explaining more fully the
distinct species of treason which applied to the present case, Mr.
Anstruther said, he trusted that if he could prove any design
whereby the king's person is in danger, that was an overt act; if he
was wrong, the judges would correct him. He would now state the
facts on which these principles of law were to be laid.

The present conspiracy was not that of a few inconsiderable
individuals: it had risen, indeed from small beginnings; from
meetings for pretended reforms. It had been fostered by seditious
correspondence, the distribution of libellous writings, and had, at
last, risen to a height, which, but for the vigilance of
administration, might have deluged the country, from one end to the
other, with blood. The proceedings of these societies, calling, or
rather miscalling themselves Friends of the People, were well known;
their first intention was apparently to obtain reform; but this not
answering their purpose, they proceeded to greater lengths. He meant
to detail the general plans and designs formed among the seditious,
and then to state how far the prisoners were implicated in them.

The first dawning of this daring plan was in a letter from Hardy,
Secretary to the London Corresponding Society, to Skirving, the
Secretary to the Friends of the People, here. He writes, that as
their petitions had been unsuccessful, they must use separate and
more effectual measures. Skirving answered, and admitted the
necessity of more effectual measures; that he foresaw the downfall
of this government, &c. Here also was the first notice of a
convention; a measure which it is no wonder they were fond of, when
they saw its effects in a neighbouring kingdom (France.) They meant
not to petition Parliament, but to proceed in their own plan, and
supersede the existing government of the country; and, in that case,
the king's life was put in danger.

Soon after, a convention, a body unknown to the laws of this
country, met; and in this there would have been little harm, had
their views been peaceable; but their objects were avowedly
unconstitutional, and their intention to carry on their plans by
force, and thus virtually to lay aside the prerogative of the king.
This convention accordingly met, using all the terms, regulations,
&c. adopted by the convention of another country, in which it might
be said there was in reality little harm, but it was surely a
marking proof of their designs. They meant not to apply to
Parliament; for whenever that was mentioned, they proceeded to the
order of the day. They resolved to oppose every act of Parliament,
which they deemed contrary to the spirit of the Constitution, and
were determined to sit, until compelled to rise by a force superior
to their own. The Convention, indeed, was dispersed by the spirited
conduct of a magistrate, (Provost Elder,) whose merit everyone was
forward to acknowledge, and to whose active exertions the country
was so much indebted; but another Convention was attempted to be
called, who were to frame their own laws, and to be independent of
the legislature; or, as they say, independent of their plunderers,
enemies, and oppressors, meaning the King, Lords, and Commons: their
resolutions will prove that they meant to create a government of
their own, to do away the authority of what they called hereditary
senators, and packed majorities; all which prove the intention of
putting the king's life in danger.

But what, it may be said, is all this to the prisoner at the bar?
who, surprising as it may appear, about two years ago wrote letters
to Mr. Secretary Dundas, offering to give information as to certain
designs of the Friends of the People. These letters were answered by
that right honourable gentleman with that propriety which has ever,
marked his public conduct. The prisoner then corresponded with the
Lord Advocate, the particulars of which would appear, as his
lordship was subpoenaed. Since September 1793, this correspondence
has ceased. Previous to that period, the prisoner was not a member
of the Society of Friends of the People, nor of the British
Convention; but his accession since to its measures, and the calling
of another Convention, could be substantiated.

The Convention, indeed, though dispersed, did not cease to exist. In
fact, a Committee of Correspondence, of which the prisoner was a
member, was instituted, the object of which was to carry into effect
the views of the last British Convention, and to elect delegates to
a new one. Mr. Watt attended this Committee, and coincided in its
measures, which were expressly to supersede the legislature: The
prisoner had moved for a Committee of Union; and another was
appointed called the Committee of Ways and Means, of both which he
was a member. This last was a Secret Committee, kept no minutes, was
permanent, and empowered to collect money to support "the great
cause." Mr. Downie was appointed treasurer, and it was to be the
medium through which all instructions and directions were to be
given to all Friends of the People throughout the kingdom, and was
to procure information of the number of those that would spare no
exertions to support the great cause. They corresponded with Hardy,
respecting the calling of a new Convention, which was to follow up
the purposes of the old one; and, as the prisoner was present, he
was in this way coupled with the British Convention.

Their next attempt was to debauch the minds of the soldiers, and to
excite them to mutiny; for which purpose a paper was printed, and
circulated among a regiment of Fencibles then at Dalkeith. This
paper, which was evidently seditious, would be brought home to the
prisoner, for the types from which it was printed were found in his
house, and a copy traced from him into the hands of a soldier.

The next charge to be brought against the prisoner, and the
Committee of which he was a member, was a distinct and deliberate
plan to overturn the existing government of the country. The plan
proposed was this:- A fire was to be raised near the Excise Office,
(Edinburgh,) which would require the attendance of the soldiers in
the castle, who were to be met there by a body of the Friends of the
People, another party of whom were to issue from the West Bow, to
confine the soldiers between two fires, and cut off their retreat;
the Castle were next to be attempted; the judges (particularly the
Lord Justice Clerk) were to be seized; and all the public banks were
to be secured. A proclamation was then to be issued, ordering all
the farmers to bring in their grain to market as usual; and
enjoining all country gentlemen to keep within their houses, or
three miles from them, under penalty of death. Then an address was
to be sent to His Majesty, commanding him to put an end to the war,
change the ministers, or take the consequences. Such was the plan of
the Committee of Ways and Means, as proposed by the prisoner.

Previous to this, it should have been mentioned, that all the
Friends of the People were to be armed; for which purpose, one
Fairley was dispatched round the country to levy contributions, and
disperse seditious pamphlets; for which purpose, he got particular
instructions from the prisoner. Reports were spread through the same
channel, that the Goldsmith's Hall Association were arming, and
that, it was necessary for the Friends of the People to arm also,
for they would be butchered either by them or the French. It would
be proved, that the prisoner gave orders to Robert Orrock to make
4,000 pikes; and also orders to one Brown for the same purpose.
These were to be used for completing the great plan; and Fairley's
mission was to inform the country of these intended proceedings.
Another representative body was also formed, called "Collectors of
Sense and Money," who were to have the distribution of the pikes,
and to command the different parties. In one instance, a person had
been desired to carry some pikes to the Collectors; who made answer,
that he could not do it, for the Collectors were not to be trusted
yet.

Mr. Anstruther then recapitulated shortly the different heads, and
concluded an elaborate and most clear and distinct pleading, of more
than two hours and a half, by requesting the jury to lay no farther
stress on what he had said than it should be proved, as it was meant
merely as a clue to the evidence which should be brought before
them.

The first witness called, was Edward Lauzon, a king's messenger.
Upon being asked if he was employed last summer to search the house
of one Hardy, in London, Mr. Hamilton, counsel for the prisoner,
objected to the question, and insisted that, before proving any
other matter whatever, some direct overt act committed by the
prisoner must be proved. Mr. Anstruther answered, that, before
proving the prisoner guilty of being concerned in a particular plot
or conspiracy, it was surely necessary first to prove that such plot
or conspiracy existed. In the trials in the year 1745, before any
particular overt act was attempted to be proved against any of the
accused, there was always evidence adduced to prove the existence of
a rebellion. The Court over-ruled the objection. The witness then
swore, that he seized several papers in Hardy's house, particularly
a letter signed by one Skirving, and several others: also a printed
circular letter, signed, "T. Hardy, Secretary." These letters the
witness produced. Mr. William Scott, Procurator Fiscal for the shire
of Edinburgh, gave an account of the seizure of Skirving's papers in
December, 1793, and of the after-disposal of them. He produced
several of these papers, particularly one intituled, "Minutes of
Debate in the General Committee;" also several papers that were
found in the lodgings of Margarot, Gerald, and Sinclair. Mr. Scott
swore to his being present at the dispersion of the Convention. The
letter by Skirving and Hardy being authenticated by Mr. Lauzun, who
swore he found it in Hardy's possession, was then read.

John Taylor, of Fleet-street, London, was then called. He swore he
was a member of the London Corresponding Society, and was acquainted
with Mr. Hardy, who was Secretary to that Society. Being shown
several letters and papers, he believed them to be Hardy's hand-
writing. The Society consisted of several divisions, about fourteen,
he thought, in number; there were several Committees, particularly a
grand one, which consisted of a member from each division, a
Committee of Secrecy, and a Committee of Emergency. The latter was
formed in May last. He attended a general meeting of the society at
the Globe Tavern, on the 20th of January last, about one thousand
were present. So great was the crowd, that the floor gave way, and
the meeting adjourned to the Assembly Room, where the secretaries
read the resolutions, which were afterwards printed. An address,
founded on these resolutions, was afterwards carried by a show of
hands. One of the resolutions was, that the motions of Parliament
were to be watched over; and if troops were to be brought into the
country, or the Habeas Corpus Act suspended, &c. that force ought to
be repelled by force. The witness produced a copy of these
resolutions, which he got from a person of the name of Moir, in the
presence of Hardy. He saw several other copies about the room. The
witness was also present at another meeting, held at Chalk Farm
(about two miles from London) on the 14th of April last. The meeting
was of the same nature as the former; there were about three
thousand persons present, and, among others, Mr. Hardy.

Henry Goodman, clerk to Mr. Wickham, London, was present at the
meeting at Chalk Farm, and heard the resolutions read. The
resolutions now shown to him were, as far as he recollected, the
resolutions passed at the meeting. He understood that it was the
intention of the society to arm themselves, to protect the members
in the same way that the National Convention of France had been
protected by the citizens of Paris; that he heard this talked of in
different meetings.

Alexander Atchison was a member of, and Assistant Secretary to the
British Convention, and wrote part of their minutes: he deposed,
that the papers now shown in Court to him, he had often seen before;
that he took down the minutes as accurately as he could; that he
recollected Mr. Callandar making several motions in the Convention;
and particularly an amendment to a motion which was referred to a
Committee. This amendment was read: it related to the agreement in
the Convention to continue permanent, and watch over the motions of
Parliament, &c. &c. that he knew Mr. Watt, the prisoner; and was,
together with him, a member of the Committee of Union. That
Committee met in January last, the Convention being previously
dispersed in DecemberThe purpose of this Committee was to keep up a
spirit of union among the Friends of Reform, and that he was sent
there by the Division of Cannongate. The great object of the
Committee was to obtain the same kind of reform sought for by Mr.
Pitt and the Duke of Richmond, about twelve years ago. That he was a
member also of the Committee of the Ways and Means which was
instituted for the purpose of paying past debts, and to defray the
expense of future delegates to another Convention, to be held
somewhere in England, which second Convention was meant for the same
purpose as the British Convention, namely, obtaining the Reform
first proposed by Pitt and Richmond; that he has often had
conversations with different persons on the subject of Reform; that
he recollected having seen a pike in the house of George Ross, in
the presence of several blacksmiths, which was shaped like the head
of an halbert. Being asked whether he ever gave a different account
of what he had now sworn at any other place, he believed he never
did; if he did it, it must be contrary to truth, and this he should
say, though he should be gullotined for it.

Mr. W. Erskine, also counsel for the prisoners, here stopped the
witness, who was removed. He said, that it was an established point
in the law of Scotland, that a witness could not be affected by
anything he had before said relative to the present subject of his
examination; nor could it hurt him in any degree. Mr. Anstruther
said, that this did not exist in the law of England. The Lord
President observed, that it appeared to him there was really a
discrepancy in the law in this respect. Mr. Anstruther here said,
that to put an end to the dispute, and, as Atchison had conducted
himself in such a manner, he would, so far from laying any stress on
his evidence, request the jury to throw out of their minds every
syllable he had used.

George Ross authenticated the minutes of Convention, and other
papers; knew the prisoner at the bar, and had seen him at his own
house.

Mr. Sheriff Clerk deposed as to the pikes being brought from Watt's,
and the fount of types, of which he had got an impression taken in
the precise state they came from Watt's house.

[Paper readAn Address to the Fencibles.]

James Sommeville, a printer, deposed as to the casting off the
impression from the types.

William Watson, of Dalkeith, once saw Watt at his own house, but
could not say whether the prisoner at the bar was the man.
Remembered a Fencible regiment in Dalkeith, which was about the time
he met with Mr. Downie, who carried him to Watt's, to get a hand-
bill about the Fencibles, which he had heard of, and was curious to
see, but could not get it there; and went to one Kennedy on the
South Bridge, from whence he received several copies.

The Lord Advocate said, that, except those (Downie and Stock,)
against whom bills were already found, he meant to bring no other
person to trial for treason.

Arthur M'Ewan, weaver, of Leith, a member of the British Convention,
and also of the Committee of Ways and Means, of which last Watt was
a member, deposed, that, at one of their meetings, Watt read a
paper, proposing to seize the judges, bank, &c. to decoy the
soldiers by a fire, &c. but did not know what was to be done with
the persons seized, nor whether it was to be done in the day or
night. Commissioners were to be appointed to take charge of the
cash, but knew not what was to follow this. Deposed as to the
proclamation to corn-dealers, and country gentlemen, and the address
to the king to put an end to the war, &c. Watt asked him to
accompany him to Orrock's, to whom he (Watt) gave orders to make
pikes as fast as he could, as he had 4000 to send to Perth, besides
what he had to distribute in Edinburgh. Orrock made a draft of one:
a gentleman's servant asking what was their use, was told, that they
were for mounting a gate. Knew that Fairley was sent into the
country, and had visited a number of places; that he reported
Paisley to be in a state of great readiness, but did not know what
that meant. The witness disapproved of these proceedings, and would
consent to nothing that would disturb the peace, or shed the blood
of his countrymen; and he thought the plan proposed would have that
tendency.  Watt produced, at one of the meetings, a paper containing
what was called fundamental principles, which he knew but little of.
William Bonthorn was a member of the Society of the Friends of the
People, but had resolved to withdraw, as things had passed he
disapproved of. Watt, at one of their meetings, read a paper, of
which he did not remember the particulars, as it confused him. The
paper contained something about seizing the castle, raising an alarm
by fire, &c. upon the supposition that numbers could be got to
assist them. Remembered nothing of particular persons being intended
to be seized; but thought the bank was mentioned; this paper
frightened him much; it mentioned also the seizing the guard-house;
recollected no numbers that were mentioned to carry this plan into
effect. M'Ewan showed an opposition to it. The circular letter of
the Committee was written by Mr. Stock.

Mr. Sheriff Clerk deposed as to the finding sundry papers in Watt's
house, one the drawing of a pike, and the paper sworn to by
Atchison, in the Sub-Committee.

John Fairley, of Broughton, a delegate to the Convention, deposed,
that his constituents met after the dissolution of that body. Heard
that pikes were making, and Watt informed him of this, or rather
showed him one. Watt said, that they were only intended for self-
defence, and that none were to get them but those who applied and
paid for them. Measures of government might drive them to despair,
and cause bloodshed; but Watt said, he hoped there would be none, as
the obnoxious or active against the cause of the people would be
imprisoned. The soldiers would be glad of freedom, and deputations
might be sent them. Watt proposed to show the arms to the
collectors, which the witness objected to, as hazardous. In going to
the West country, a parcel was left for him by Watt, containing
paper for distribution, which he left at Stirling, St. Ninion's,
Kirkintulloch, Glasgow, Paisley, &c. On his return to Edinburgh, he
went to the Committee of Ways and Means; that Watt, Downie, and
M'Ewan were there, to whom he reported the result of his journey,
Returned the instructions to Watt; they mentioned, he recollected,
something about a plan, and Britain being free, Downie paid him the
expenses of his journey.

 Dr. Forrest, at Stirling, gave an account of Fairley's calling on
him, showing him his written instructions, &c. In these instructions
there was a blank, which he supposed was to be filled up "arms."
Showed him the figure of a weapon like a halbert, which was
preparing for defence, and that these weapons could be furnished by
a person who he understood was about Edinburgh. Something passed
about arming the people, and disarming the soldiers.

Robert Orrock, smith, first heard arms mentioned in G. Ross's house
in March last. In April Watt applied to him to make a pike, and he
brought one to Ross's, where Watt and other members of the committee
were, and he left it at Watt's desire. In May, Watt desired him to
make more of that pattern, and some of a different kind. While
making them, a person (Martin Todd) called and showed a form of a
pike, which he refused to make. Brown also called, and told him he
was making pikes for Watt, and that 1000 were wanted: but spoke of
this as a secret, which alarmed the witness. The extent of his order
was five dozen which were ordered by Watt, but paid for by Downie.
He was told, if enquired about, to say they were for the top of a
gate: never had an order for pikes before; but had made one for his
own defence, without being employed by any person.

Martin Todd, smith, deposed as to calling on Orrock, to enquire
about the pikes.

William Brown, a smith, said one Robertson called on him to bespeak
several spears of a particular shape, for Watt; and at another time,
he made fourteen spears for Mr. Watt, like mole spears. Recollected
the conversation with Orrock, but did not say that such a number of
pikes would be wanted.

John Fairley was re-examined, at his own desire. He recollected Watt
saying, that the banks and public offices were to be seized. The
most active against them were to be imprisoned, and couriers sent to
the country to announce this. The Magistrates of Edinburgh were
particularly spoken of.

Walter Miller, Perth sent money to Downie, for relief of distressed
patriots in the cause of reform; never had authority for supposing
that the new Convention had any object but reform by legal means.

Here the evidence of the Crown was closed.

Defence of Watt.

Mr. W. Erskine, junior counsel for the prisoner, said, that as the
Court had sat so long, he would not trouble them with many words. He
would rest his defence upon the correspondence carried on between
the Right Hon. Henry Dundas, the Lord Advocate, and the prisoner, by
which it would appear, that he had attended the meetings of the
Friends of the People, with no other view than a design to give
information of their proceedings. A letter from the prisoner to Mr.
Secretary Dundas was read, which stated in substance, that, as he
did not approve of the dangerous principles which then prevailed in
Scotland, and was a friend to the Constitution of his country, he
thought it his duty to communicate to him, as a good subject, what
information he could procure of the proceedings of those who styled
themselves Friends of the People. From an acquaintance with several
of the leading men among them, he flattered himself he had this in
his power; and then went on to mention some of the names of those
leading men in Perth, Dundee, and Edinburgh. In the first of these
places, he said, he had been educated, and had resided in the two
last for a considerable number of years.  It concluded with
enjoining secrecy.

To this letter an answer was returned which was also read. It
acknowledged the receipt of Mr. Watt's and, after expressing a hope
that things were not so bad as he represented, desired him to go on,
and he might depend upon his communications being kept perfectly
secret Another letter from Mr. Dundas to Mr. M'Ritche, the
prisoner's agent, was next read, in answer to one from Mr.
M'Ritchie, requesting of Mr. Dundas what letters he had of the
prisoner's. The answer bore, that all the letters he had received
from Mr. Watt had been delivered to the Lord Advocate.

Mr. Sheriff Clerk authenticated the letter of Mr. Dundas.

The Lord Advocate being sworn, in exculpation, he gave a distinct
account of the transactions which he had had with the prisoner. He
had conversed with him several times at his own lodgings; and he had
at one time given him some information which he thought of
importance. This was respecting the disaffection of some dragoons at
Perth, which upon enquiry, turned out to be ill-founded. In March,
1793, his lordship said, an offer had been made to him to disclose
some important secrets, provided he would give the prisoner 1000l.
This he absolutely refused. However, sometime after, the prisoner
having informed him that he was much pressed for money to retrieve a
bill of 30l. his lordship, who was then in London, not wishing he
should be distressed for such a small sum, sent him an order for the
payment of it. All this happened previous to the meeting of the
Convention; since which time, at least since October last, he did
not recollect seeing or having any connection with the prisoner.

Mr. Hamilton contended, that the prosecutor had failed in bringing
the most criminal part of it home to the prisoner. He dwelt long on
correspondence between Mr. Dundas and Mr. Watt. He said, the
prisoner had not deserted the service in which he had engaged; but
had not had an opportunity of exercising it until the very time he
was apprehended. He contended, that he was a spy for government; and
it was well known that a spy was obliged to assume not only the
appearance of those whose secrets he meant to reveal, but even to
make part in their proceedings, in order to prevent a discovery. He
alluded to spies in armies, and mentioned a melancholy circumstance
which happened to one last war, a gentleman with whom he had the
honour of being acquainted. A spy in an army, he said, was obliged
not only to assume the uniform of the enemy, but even to appear in
arms; and it would be exceedingly hard indeed, if taken in a
conflict, that he should be punished for discharging his duty. He
concluded with hoping the jury would bring in a verdict, finding the
charges not proved.

The Lord President, after clearly defining the laws of treason,
summed up the evidence, narrating and explaining the various parts
with much candour; leaving it entirely to the jury to return such a
verdict as their judgment should direct.

The jury withdrew about half-past five o'clock in the morning, and
in about five minutes, returned with a verdictGuilty.

The trial lasted nearly twenty-two hours. The jury were upwards of
forty minutes considering the case of Downie: the majority agreeing
among themselves that he was guilty, they reconciled themselves to
this verdict a last, by unanimously consenting to recommend him to
mercy, which they did in a very strong manner. Shortly after the
following awful sentence of the court was passed upon these
unfortunate men.

"Robert Watt and David Downie, you have been found guilty of High
Treason by your Peers. The sentence of the Court is, therefore, that
you be taken from the place, whence you came, from thence you shall
be drawn on a sledge to the place of execution, on Wednesday, the
15th of October, there to hang by your necks till you are both dead;
your bowels to be taken out, and cast in your faces; and each of
your bodies to be cut in four quarters, to be at the disposal of his
Majesty: and the Lord have mercy on your souls!"

The unfortunate prisoners received the dreadful sentence with much
firmness and composure, and were, immediately conducted to the
castle. Robert Watt was ordered for execution, but a respite came
for David Downie: as soon as it was intimated to Downie, he started,
as from a dream, and exclaimed, "Glory to God, and thanks to the
king, for his goodness: I will pray for him as long as I live."
After which tears of gratitude flowed. He was transported for life.

About half past one o'clock on the 15th of October, the two junior
magistrates, with white rods in their hands, white gloves, &c., the
Rev. Principal Baird, and a number of constables, attended ty the
town officers, and the city guard lining the streets, walked in
procession from the Council Chamber to the east end of Castle-hill,
when a message was sent to the sheriffs in the Castle, that they
were there waiting to receive the prisoner. The prisoner was
immediately placed in a hurdle, with his back to the horse, and the
executioner, with a large axe in his hand, took his seat opposite
him, at the further end of the hurdle. The procession then set out
from the Castle, the sheriffs walking in front, with white rods in
their hands, white gloves, &c., a number of county constables
surrounding the hurdle, and the military keeping off the crowd. In
this manner they proceeded, until they joined the magistrates, when
the military returned to the Castle, and then the procession was
conducted in the following order:

The City Constables;
Town Officers, bare-headed;
Bailie Lothian and Bailie Dalrymple;
Rev. Principal Baird;
Mr. Sheriff Clerk and Mr. Sheriff Davidson;
A number of County Constables;
THE HURDLE,
Painted black, and drawn by a white Horse,
A number of County Constables.

The city-guard lined the streets, to keep off the multitude.

When they had reached the Tolbooth door, the prisoner was taken from
the hurdle, and conducted into the prison, where a considerable time
was spent in devotional exercise. The prisoner then came out upon
the platform, attended: by the Magistrates, Sheriffs, Principal
Baird, &c. Some time was then spent in prayer and singing psalms;
after which the prisoner mounted the drop-board, and was soon
launched into eternity.

When the body was taken down, it was stretched upon a table, and the
executioner, with two blows of the axe, severed off the head, which
was received into a basket, and then held up to the multitude, while
the executioner called aloud, "There is the head of a traitor, and
so perish all traitors." The body and head were then placed in a
coffin, and removed. Never was any execution conducted with more
solemnity and order. The procession advanced with slow step, and the
prisoner exhibited a most melancholy spectacle. He held a bible in
his hand; his eyes remained in a fixed posture, upwards, and he was
not observed to make one movement, or cast a single glance upon the
multitude. He was much emaciated, and his countenance so pale, that,
while on his way to the place of execution, he appeared almost
lifeless; but, when he came upon the platform, he seemed to be
somewhat revived, and behaved himself, during the awful solemnity,
with due resignation and humble fortitude. The impression the
situation had made upon himself seemed truly astonishing, as those
who had ever seen him before, declared, they could not have known
him to be the same person. His appearance was dirty, muffled up in a
great coat; and he showed signs of peculiar agitation and remorse
for the crime for which he was then going to suffer.

The surrounding multitude, during the execution of the awful
proceeding, did not discover any other emotion than is usual upon
occasions of any other executions. The town-guard, attended by the
constables, lined the streets.

Robert Watt was born in the shire of Kincardine, and was, at the
time of his execution, about thirty-six years old. He was the
natural son of a Mr. Barclay, a gentleman of fortune and
respectability; but like most other children of illegitimate
parentage, he was brought up and educated under the name of his
mother. He was, at about ten years of age, sent to Perth; where he
received a very good education. Being sixteen he engaged himself
with a lawyer at Perth; but being of a religious disposition, he was
disgusted at this profession, and soon withdrew from the desk of his
master. Soon after he went to Edinburgh, and engaged as a clerk in a
paper-warehouse, where he lived happily and respectably for some
years. His only complaint was a deficiency of salary. Having a
desire to share in the profits, as well as the toils, of the
business, he wrote to his father, and prevailed upon him to assist
him with some money, to enable him to procure a partnership with his
master. He then made proposals to the above purpose; these were,
however, rejected by his employer. Being provided with money, he
entered into the wine and spirit trade. His success in business
continued very promising, until he was almost ruined by the
commencement of the war. At this period, his acquaintance with the
Friends of the People commenced.

Several other leaders of this conspiracy in Scotland were seized. Of
those where convicted, the Reverend T. Fishe Palmer, William
Skirving, Thomas Muir, Maurice Margoret, and Joseph Gerald, who were
transported to Botany-bay. Numbers, to avoid the avenging arm of
justice, fled to the United States of America, where, with impunity,
they disseminated their treason, and poured out volleys of abuse
against their native land. These renegadoes were no sooner landed in
a new world, than they rallied round the footstool of faction there,
by commencing editors of, and scribblers in, newspapers, which swarm
in that boasted land of liberty. In their filthy columns, they
extolled the murderous revolutionists of France, and laboured to
incense Americans against their own injured country. It is fit these
apostates should be pointed at. John Thompson, of Scotland, printed
one of these inflammatory sheets, at Richmond, in Virginia: Matthew
Duane, of Ireland, another in Philadelphia. John Dinmore, late an
apothecary, at Walton, in Norfolk, planted his literary annoyance in
Columbia, the seat of the American government, and, for his
extraordinary scurrility against England, the Gallic-American
President, Jefferson, made him State Printer, and, heaven forefend,
a Justice of the American Peace. This inflammatory sheet he called
"The Expositor." In order to give the reader an idea of the infamy
of the abandoned scribblers, we shall quote a note from Mr. Janson's
History of America. Speaking of Denmore, says Mr. Janson,  "Among
the vile scurrility of his Expositor, last summer, was the
following: After noticing the introduction of the American minister,
Mr. Monroe, to the king, he adds, 'For once an honest man had
appeared at the Court of St. James's.'" Another paper, printed by
Mr. S. Snowden, at the same place, and preferring England to France,
makes this observation upon the paragraph, "It is, no doubt,
difficult for an honest man in the Doctor's (apothecary Dinmore's)
estimation of the word, to get admission there; yet, he cannot have
forgotten, that he himself was within a cable's length of having his
name announced to his Britannic Majestynot by Sir Stephen
Cotterell, but by the Recorder of London, and Ordinary of Newgate,
as joint Masters of the Ceremonies."

Cooper, the bosom-friend of the hoary apostate, Priestley, the
bitterest foe we had in the new world, so greatly misused the press,
that the country of his adoption threw him into a prison.

Inferior scribblers against Britain, are almost without number.



EDWARD COOKE AND HENRY PARISH
Soldiers in the Oxfordshire Militia, Condemned at a
General Court Martial, and Shot at Brightelmstone
(i.e. Brighton), June 12, 1795, for Mutiny

As we have already described the nature of Courts Martial we shall
immediately proceed to show the solemn ceremony of a military
execution.

From the hour of four in the morning of the day of execution the
whole line of encampment were ordered to hold themselves in
readiness: at five, however, in the evening the officers were given
to understand, that the execution of those two unfortunate men,
Edward Cooke and Henry Parish, was countermanded for that day. The
cause of the short respite was attributed to the absence of the
Prince of Wales's 10th regiment of light dragoons, which did not
march into the town till nine o'clock this morning, and of course
could not pitch their tents till late in the evening.

When this regiment were seen on the march to their station, all
hopes of an expected reprieve seemed entirely to vanish; the most
respectable people, however, of the place, took this opportunity of
one day's delay to repeat their petitions in favour of the two men;
but all proved ineffectual; for early on the 13th the Oxfordshire
Militia (the regiment to which the mutineers belonged) began their
march from the barracks at Blachington to this place to be made
awful spectators of their unhappy comrades' punishment, and to be
their executioners!

At four o'clock the whole were ordered to accompany them from the
ground to Colestoun Bottom, at which place they arrived about five.
The six men (for there were 13 mutineers) that were sentenced to be
flogged proceeded afterwards in a covered waggon guarded by a strong
escort, which was composed of select men, picked from every regiment
in the line: the two condemned to be shot followed in the rear in an
open cart, attended by the Rev. Mr. Dring, and guarded by a second
escort, under the command of Captain Leigh, of the 10th regiment of
light dragoons, and one of the captains belonging to the Lancashire
Fencibles. When they arrived, however, at the winding road which
leads to Colestoun Vale, and which is surrounded by an eminence,
both the escorts were commanded to halt. The six men sentenced to be
flogged were then taken from the covered waggon, and having been
marched through the whole line, who were under arms to receive them,
they were brought back to a whipping-post which were fixed in the
centre of the different regiments. The drummers selected to flog
them were men belonging to their own corps. Three of them received
three hundred lashes each; this was all the number they then
received, as, from their long durance, and consequent weakness, the
surgeon of the regiment pronounced that they could suffer no more.
The fourth was then stripped, and, after being tied to the flogging-
post, was reprieved; as were his two other comrades. This part of
the distressing ceremony being gone through, the two unfortunate men
condemned to be shot were taken from the cart, and marched, as the
others had been, up the line, with this difference only, of being
conducted also through part of the outer one, which was composed of
the prince's regiment, the Lancashire and Cinque Port Fencibles;
they were then marched to the front of the Oxfordshire Militia, were
their coffins stood to receive their bodies; the artillery being
planted on the right, with lighted matches, in the rear of the
Oxfordshire, to prevent any mutiny, if attempted, and the whole
height commanded by 2000 cavalry.

Cook and Parish being conducted to the fatal spot, exchanged a few
words with the clergyman, and then kneeled with the greatest
composure and firmness on their coffins: the first time, however,
they kneeled, it was done the wrong way: but being placed in a
proper situation, they put the caps over their eyes, and received
their death from a delinquent platoon of twelve of their own
regiment, at the distance only of six paces. One of them was not
quite dead when he fell, and was therefore shot through the head
with a pistol. This, however, was not the last awful ceremony the
line had to experience; for, to conclude the dreadful tragedy, every
regiment on the ground was ordered to file off past the bodies
before they were suffered to be enclosed in their coffins. The whole
scene was impressively awful beyond any spectacle of the kind ever
exhibited. No disturbance whatever resulted from the above
melancholy affair: everything was conducted with the greatest
solemnity and order: the awe and silence that reigned on the
occasion, infused a terror, mingled with an equal degree of pity,
that was distressing beyond conception. The Oxfordshire Militia
naturally experienced more afflicting sensations than any other
regiment on the ground.

Cooke and Parish were both young men, and behaved with uncommon
firmness and resignation; they marched through the lines with a
steady step, and regarded their coffins with an undaunted eye. The
former was called Captain Cooke, from his having headed the
Oxfordshire soldiers, at the fatal period of the mutiny.



TIMOTHY DUNN, EDWARD JONES, MATTHEW RILEY, AND DENNIS
CONROY
Soldiers, Executed March 21, 1796, for Murder

This, among numberless other mischiefs entailed upon the titular
saint of Ireland, is an instance of the dreadful licentiousness of
the lower order of that country, when heated with strong drink. The
17th of March is St. Patrick's day, and so copious are the libations
of his votaries on each eve of this their festival, that in all
parts wherever the lower class wander, they contrive to get drunk;
and then fall upon unguarded strangers; and beat, and often murder
them. These outrages, they will tell you, were committed for the
honour of St. Patrick; and so deeply rooted is this vile habit in
them, that while under the accursed influence, it must end in what
they call "A Row;" and if that cannot be effected among strangers,
they generally fall upon each other.

The unfortunate Irishmen, the subject of this enquiry, were
soldiers, and had lately returned from a four-year's service in
foreign parts. The regiment to which they belonged, was ordered into
winter quarters, in Leicestershire, Loughborough, Ashby de-la-Zouch,
and towns adjacent. On the evening of St. Patrick's Day, in the year
1796, in a state of intoxication, they sallied out, and attacked
every one they met, whom, without any cause being shown, they beat
without mercy. At length they met a poor boatman, of the name of
Henry Hutchinson, whom they murdered!

They were apprehended next day, the 18th, the judges being on the
circuit at Leicester, they were tried on the 19th; and on the 21st,
executed; thus allowing them but three days for repentance.

A short time before they were taken out of prison for execution, a
remarkable circumstance happened to Timothy Dunn: A regiment of
dragoons passing through Leicester, one of the private troopers, of
the name of Dunn, hearing that his namesake lay under sentence of
death, was led, through curiosity, to see the culprit. On being
admitted into the condemned cell, what must be his astonishment and
grief, on finding a brother, whom he had not seen nor heard of for
many years! The whole of these unfortunate soldiers died repenting
their crime, and imploring forgiveness of the Almighty. We cannot
dismiss the subject, without exhorting our fellow-subjects, born in
Ireland, to observe moderation, on this day. Their excesses serve
only to make them enemies, to disgrace their saint, and offend their
Maker.



ELIZABETH HALL
Convicted, Fined, and Imprisoned, for Cruelty to her
Female Apprentices

We have now before us another woman of the demoniac disposition of
Mother Brownrigg, and who like her might have satiated the utmost
extent of her ferocity, had she not been detected while the children
yet lived. She was prosecuted by the parish of St. Mary Magdalen,
Bermondsey, at the quarter sessions for Surrey, for assaulting Jane
Bray and Sophia Ingreen, her apprentices.

Jane Bray deposed, that she was bound apprentice to Elizabeth Hall,
a pin header on the 5th of April, 1796. [Note: Some of our readers
will be surprised to hear that there are several different branches
of business in the making of a pin] The prisoner for a little while
used her and Sophia very, well, but after some time began to beat
and kick them about, and would drag them up and down stairs, making
use of the most horrible expressions. She always kept a rod soaking
in brine, with which she used to beat them on their bare skin, when
they were undressed to go to bed: if she could not find the rod
immediately she would beat them with her fist, and sometimes with
the kettle ladle. They both did as much work as they could, but
their mistress made them begin at four o'clock in the morning, and
continue close at it until ten or eleven at night, always beating
them for no particular cause, and very frequently going out without
leaving them either a dinner or supper; they never had a belly-full;
sometimes they had nothing all day long but six potatoes and a
little salt for their dinner.

Ann Harland served her apprenticeship to Hall, and wrought there
three or four weeks with the children. She described them as very
good girls, but rather weakly, and said, they earned their mistress
from 1s. to 14d. daily, which was as much as she could do when she
had served twelve months of her time. She corroborated the evidence
of the child as to the beating and hours of labour, which she said,
were unusually long, as the custom of the trade is to work only
twelve hours.

Catherine Heman worked also for Hall, and generally carried her work
home to the shop. On calling one day, the [prisoner] was out, as she
learned from the children, drinking. When she came to the door and
knocked, the children begged her for God's sake, to go to the door,
as their mistress would knock them down as she came in. The witness
accordingly went to the door, and as soon as the prisoner was
admitted, she knocked the witness down. She then went down stairs,
and brought up a board, with which she beat the children very
severely. Bray had a large lump on her shoulder, and the little girl
Ingram's arms and hands were so bruised by continual beating, as to
be scarce able to hold her work.

The beadle of Bermondsey deposed, that he found the children
straying in the Street between nine and ten at night; he took them
home to the prisoner; on his going to leave them there the children
cried, and said they should be murdered. The mistress then said she
would not take them in at all as that was the case. He then took
them to the master of the workhouse; and the parish, much to their
credit, instituted the present prosecutlon.

The evidence is given as it relates to both, though the assaults
were tried separately, as the same witnesses were on both. Jane Bray
was only eleven years of age, and Sophia Ingram only nine.

The jury found the prisoner guilty of both indictments, and the
Chairman passed sentence, that she should pay a fine of 3s. 4d. and
be imprisoned in the House of Correction six months for each
offence: too lenient a punishment.



MARTIN LAAS
A Norwegian, Executed at Maidstone, for Murder

Villains, lurking in secret, ready to fall upon men, in order to rob
them, often commit murder. The horrid impulse generally arises from
the fear of opposition, of the dread of an appearance against them,
when arraigned at the bar of justice. But when we find that a man,
cowardly and brutally embrues his hands in the blood of an
unoffending, defenceless woman, our nature is appalled, and we vent
our most bitter execrations on the monster who commits so foul a
deed.

At the assizes at Maidstone, in Kent, not yet a year after the fatal
calendar of Newgate, at the sessions when the Recorder of London
gave his learned and humane advice to the condemned malefactors, one
hundred and fourteen prisoners were tried for felonious practices,
and fifteen sentenced to deatha greater number, we are told, than
ever before appeared at that bar of justice. The most infamous of
those was Martin Laas, a subject of the king of Denmark, born at
Bergen, in Norway. He was a sea-faring man, and, when a boy, came to
England in a Danish trading ship. Deserting the service of his
employer, he entered on board the British fleet, and had served as
an able seamen several years, two of which we find, was on board the
Fame, of 74 guns, one of the fleet under the command of the gallant
Rodney, in the West-Indies.

In this culprit we have another deplorable instance of dismissing
seamen, often penniless, at the end of that war, in which they often
have conquered. When foreigners enlist under our banners, and having
served our purpose, ought not government, at least, to send them
back to their own homes? But such traits of common justice are
forgot, amid the more mighty concerns of our ministers. Where, then,
in such cases, is Humanity to beg her boon?

Such was the case of Martin Laas; he was a distressed foreigner, who
had fought our battles, and his services no longer wanted,
misfortune overtook him, but hunger, which the proverb truly says,
"will break through stone walls," needs not to impel cruelty. It
appeared in evidence, and from his own confession, that the prisoner
was sitting on the side of the public road, when a beautiful young
country woman passed him near the Halfway-house, near Sandwich, of
the name of Mary Bax. At the instant, the devil, he said, whispered
him to kill and rob her. He therefore followed her, and had
proceeded near half a mile, when he asked her the road to Sheerness.
The unsuspicious maid courteously answered, that it was a great way
to Sheerness. He then said, he had no money, and must have some to
bear his expenses; to which the deceased answered, that she had
none. He then walked by her side, and on passing a ditch, pushed her
into it, and jumped upon her, into mud and water up to his middle,
and thus smothered her. He then took a bundle which she carried in
her hands, and her shoes from her feet, with which he made off
through the marshes, across the country towards Dover. Some of the
articles which he had taken from the unhappy woman, were found upon
him. During his trial, he behaved with unparalleled audacity,
insulting the witnesses, and mocking the court.

When the jury found him guilty, he gave three cheers, and became so
riotous that the judge ordered him to be seized and chained to the
floor, until the time arrived for his execution. He showed no
remorse when he confessed his barbarous crime. He was executed with
John Huntley, for murdering his wife on Wistwell Downs, whose body
was dissected; but that of Laas was burned under the gallows, as the
surgeons would not accept of it. Eight more, committed for capital
offences, died in prison; and William Hill Fairchild, for horse-
stealing, murdered himself.



EDWARD POWELL
Master Mast-maker of his Majesty's Dock-yard, at
Portsmouth, Executed near Winchester, for Murder

THE unhappy fate of Mr. Powell, serves to confirm the old saying,
"Never interfere between man and wife." This unfortunate man's
situation, under government, was very respectable, yielding an
income of between four and five hundred pounds per annum. He married
the daughter of Mr. Frampton, of Portsmouth, a gentleman much
respected, and with her, for a short time only, were his prospects
of happiness. The young wife, too inexperienced, perhaps, for the
marriage state, and too giddy for the sober and experienced years of
her husband, had, it seems, been reproved by him, on this head, of
which she, still more unadvised, complained to her father, who
taking her part, the husband sought revenge.

It appeared, he had long brooded on the destruction of the man,
though her parent, who interfered between him and his wife.
Accordingly, meeting Mr. Frampton on the Common Hard, at Portsmouth,
he pulled a pistol from his pocket, and fired at him without effect.
Finding his devoted subject unhurt, he took out another, and shot
him dead on the spot.

This horrid deed he was condemned at Winchester. He was carried to
the place of execution along with Gregory Bentham, quarter-master of
the Scipio man of war, for shooting with a pistol, in a scuffle,
William Barnes, coxswain of the said ship. The deceased, in this
case, had been sent after Bentham, who had exceeded his leave of
absence, and refusing to return, on the coxswain's proceeding to
enforce his orders, was shot. They were executed on a temporary
gallows, near Winchester.



REBELLIONS IN IRELAND IN 1803
Their Rise and ProgressAssassination of the Lord
Chief Justice and his Nephew.Particulars of the
Lives and Executions of the Principal Rebels

In 1790, a confederacy, calling themselves "The United Irishmen of
Belfast," was formed in the north of Ireland; on the 9th of
November, 1791, the Society of United Irish men of Dublin commenced
their meetings, choosing for their chairman the Hon. Simon Butler,
second son to Lord Viscount Mountgarret, and for their secretary the
celebrated James Napper Tandy, who at that time was a citizen of a
considerable interest and political influence in Dublin, and a
member of the Whig Club. This extraordinary demagogue was afterwards
convicted of high treason, pardoned, went into France, and died at
Bordeaux, a general in the service of Bonaparte.

After a recapitulation of grievances, they say, "In the present
great era of reform, when unjust governments are falling in every
part of Europe: when religious persecution is compelled to abjure
her tyranny over conscience; when the rights of men are ascertained
in theory, and that theory is substantiated by practice; when
iniquity can no longer defend absurd and oppressive forms against
the common sense and common interests of mankind: when all
government is acknowledged to originate from the people, and to be
so far only obligatory as it protects their rights and promotes
their welfare; we think it our duty, as Irishmen, to come forward
and state what we feel to be our heavy grievance, and what we know
to be its effectual remedy." This declaration then states several
resolutions, complaining of the English influence in Ireland, the
necessity of an equal representation of all the people in
Parliament, the rejection of a place bill, of a pension bill, and of
a responsibility bill; the sale of peerages in one house; the
corruption avowed in the other; the borough traffic between both,
symptoms of a mortal disease which corrodes the vitals of the
constitution, and leaves to the people in their own government but
the shadow of a name.

The society then specially resolves "that the weight of English
influence in the government of Ireland is so great, as to require a
cordial union among all the people of Ireland to maintain that
balance of power which is essential to the preservation of liberty,
and the extension of their commerce. That the sole constitutional
mode by which such influence can be opposed, is by a complete and
radical reform of the representation of the people in Parliament;
and that no reform is practicable, which shall not include Irishmen
of every religious persuasion."

From the above resolutions it is clear, that a principal object of
the society was completely to emancipate the Irish Roman Catholics,
and to admit them into the House of Lords and Commons; and, indeed,
a great majority of the society were of that religious persuasion;
and since its origin, the Catholic claims have been unceasing. Mr.
Emmet, and a few others, had, however, two different objectsfirst,
to separate Ireland from England; and, secondly, to establish a
republic. This party formed a private society among themselves, and
with them originated the system of insurrection which in 1798 broke
out into a rebellion, in which several thousands lost their lives,
and many of the promoters suffered on the scaffold, before it could
be suppressed.

England now charged Ireland with disaffectionIreland replied, that
beyond endurance, was she oppressed by her elder sister; and
brooding on her complaints, a well digested conspiracy against the
state (with which government was not acquainted till nearly the
moment of explosion) in 1803, threatened the city of Dublin with the
most serious calamities.

At an early hour on the evening of July the 23d, a variety of
inflammatory proclamations were distributed in every part of the
town, calling upon the people to unite as before, in opposition to
English oppression, &c. and at so early an hour as eight o'clock, a
large party forced into the Lord Mayor's house, and seized all the
arms and pikes which were in the house; and about ten o'clock, a
general engagement took place in the neighbourhood of James street,
Thomas street, and in every part of the Liberty.

One of their early acts was the murder of Lord Kilwarden (the Chief
Justice of the King's Bench) a healthy man, and about sixty years of
age, and his nephew the Rev. Mr. Richard Wolf. Miss Wolf, the
daughter of Lord Kilwarden, was with them in the post-chaise. They
were returning from his Lordship's country seat, drawn from thence,
as reported, by a forged message. Just as the carriage came along
the market house in Thomas-street, Lord Kilwarden was soon
recognized, and a mob hitherto concealed, rushed upon it in every
direction, armed with guns, blunderbusses, pikes, swords, &c. Some
seized the horses by the head, and dragged the postillion from his
seat; while others rushed on each side of the carriage, and opened
the doors. Miss Wolf sat between her uncle and brother, who were
dragged out by inhuman fiends from her side, one from each door. In
a state of distraction at this inhuman proceeding, and terrified by
the horrid banditti, who surrounded the carriage, Miss Wolf jumped
out, and was received in the arms of one of them, who carried her
through the crowd, unhurt, to an opposite house, where she remained
secreted, until four o'clock on Sunday morning, when she was
conveyed to the Castle.

Major Swan, with a strong detachment under his command, was ordered
by Government to repair to Thomas street, the principal scene of the
insurrection. A small part of the military had already skirmished
there with the rebels, and a considerable number of the latter were
killed and wounded. When the Major arrived there, he saw several
lying dead in the streets, and one man only with a pike who was
fired at.

Lord Kilwarden had been carried to the watch-house, in Vicar-street,
where Major Swan saw him lying on the guard-bed, dreadfully
lacerated; his nephew, Mr. Wolf, was killed on the spot. His
Lordship, although near expiring at the time, knew the Major, and
appeared perfectly in his senses. He eagerly enquired as to the fate
of his daughter; and, being assured by the Major of her safety, he
exclaimed, with an emotion of gratitude to Heaven, "Thank God" A
military gentleman present, naturally filled with indignation,
observed, that every man taken with a pike in his hand, ought to be
instantly hanged: which Lord Kilwarden overhearing, turned to Major
Swan, and most impressively exhorted him "to let no man be hanged
without being brought to trial." A detachment of the military, under
the command of Colonel Brown, who with Mr. Edmiston, and Mr. Parker,
of the Liberty-rangers, lost their lives in this most disagreeable
of all services, attacked a large body of the disaffected, in
Francis-street, and dispersed them, but not without a shocking scene
of slaughter. The unfortunate Chief Justice lingered in excruciating
pain, about two hours, and expired a martyr to his profession. He
was a great lawyer, and, what is more meritorious, a truly good man.
It was said, that he had frequently expressed a presentiment, that
he should fall by the hands of the assassin.

Dublin now became a scene of confusion and horror. The Habeas Corpus
Act was suspended, and the military were left uncontrolled by the
Civil Power. At length peace was somewhat restored, and large
rewards were offered for the apprehension of the principal actors in
this rebellion. We therefore proceed, without further comment, which
indeed our limits will not allow, to the trial of Emmet, the chief
of the rebellion.



ROBERT EMMET, ESQ
A Counsellor at Law, and Chief of the Irish Rebels,
in 1803; for which he was Executed

This unfortunate young gentleman was the son of Dr. Emmet, a
physician, in Ireland, a man of republican principles. At College,
he was distinguished as an orator, particularly in the Historical
Society; but his bold promulgation of democratic principles raised
him many enemies in the University; and at length being suspected of
disaffection to the British government, to avoid a prosecution, with
which he was threatened, he fled into France, in which country his
brother, Thomas Emmet, at that time resided. Early in 1803, Robert
Emmet returned to his native land, where he joined a band of
conspirators, who had escaped in the rebellion of 1798, and who had
determined upon seizing the castle of Dublin, and making the Lord
Lieutenant prisoner. On the 23d of July, 1803, this conspiracy broke
out into an insurrection about nine at night, and was completely
quelled before morning. Lord Kilwarden, the Chief Justice of
Ireland, was murdered in his carriage by a banditti, as already
stated; and Emmet, to adopt his own expression, instead of finding
himself a leader of a formidable insurrection, found himself without
any influence or command, in the midst of a ruffianly mob. With a
few adherents, he escaped into the mountains, but returned in a few
days, was taken near Dublin, tried for high treason, convicted, and
executed, being not more than twenty-four years of age.

This unfortunate youth had early imbibed, under the tutelage of his
father, those political doctrines, which caused his ruin. The object
of his enthusiastic mind was to separate Ireland from Great Britain,
and this he hoped to accomplish without any interference or
assistance from France, as appears from his address to the Court
after his conviction. These are his words:"God forbid that I should
see my country under the hands of a foreign power. The French should
come as a foreign enemy, Oh! my countrymen! meet them on the shore
with a torch in one hand, a sword in the otherreceive them with all
the destruction of war; immolate them in their boats before our
native soil shall be polluted by a foreign foe! If they proceed in
landing, fight them on the strand, burn every blade of grass before
them as they advance, raze every house; and if you are driven to the
centre of your country; collect your provisions, your property, your
wives, and your daughters: form a circle around themfight while but
two men are left; and when but one remains, let that man set fire to
the pile, and release himself, and the families of his fallen
countrymen, from the tyranny of France!"

As Robert had then recently returned from France, and from communing
with his brother, it is but fair to conclude, that on this point,
they coincided in political sentiments.

From the conduct of this youth, he appears an enthusiast in
politics, heated by a sanguine mind even to a degree of insanity,
which, though it may not excuse, must palliate, his offences. His
oratorical abilities were considerable; and his conduct at that
awful moment, when death stood before him, inexorable and
inevitable, proved his courage. He directed the executioner in the
preparations necessary to deprive him of life; and did all in his
power to impress on the minds of the spectators, that even in the
violent manner, in which he was about to lose his life, there was
neither fear nor terror"making a virtue of calamity"and leaving
the world without a tremulous nerve.

Robert Emmet was tried and convicted in Dublin, before Lord Norbury,
and a respectable jury, on Monday, September 19, 1803.

After the evidence, the provincial proclamation was read, to show
the object of the insurrection, and the resolution proscribing the
yeomanry, and other loyal subjects. The prisoner desired, that a
part of it should also be read, by which it was decreed, that no man
should suffer death, by court-martial, but for mutiny, until the
pleasure of the provisional government should be known: it was read
accordingly.

The proclamation addressed to the citizens of Dublin was also read.
The prisoner's counsel accounted for the intimate knowledge he had
of the provisional proclamation, by saying that it had appeared in
other publications. The following papers were then read:

No. I. (found in his lodgings by Major Sirr) was nearly as follows:-
"It may seem strange that a person avowing himself to be an enemy of
the present government, and engaged in a conspiracy for its
overthrow, should undertake to suggest an opinion on its conduct, or
expect that advice from such a quarter should be received with
attention. The writer of this, however, does not mean to offer an
opinion upon a point, in which he feels difficulty-on which his
candour might be doubted; his attention is to confine himself to
points on which he feels with the merciful, and as an Irishman; with
the English part of the present government, he will communicate, in
the most precise terms, the line of conduct which he may be
hereafter compelled to adopt; and which, however painful, would be
doubly so, if he did not try to avoid it by the most explicit
notification.

It is not the intention of the undersigned, to do more than state
what the government must acknowledge, that of the conspiracy he
knows nothing; and instead of creating terror in its enemies, and
confidence in its friends, it will serve, by the scantiness of its
information, to furnish new grounds of conviction, to those who are
too ready to accuse it for the want of that intelligence which no
sagacity could enable it to maintain. If then, it is unable by a
display of its discoveries, to evince its strength and vigilance, it
cannot hope to crush the conspiracy by the weight of its power. It
is only now that men have to learn, that entering into a conspiracy,
exposes them to be hanged. . . . . . Can it hope to injure the body
of the conspiracy, so imperceptibly woven as the present, by merely
cutting off a few of the threads? . . . . . . . . . . No system can
change the conduct which the U[nited] I[rishmen] will adopt for
effecting the emancipation of their country."

No. II. found on the prisoner's person."I wish particularly to know
how matters stand, if you are not afraid. What hopes there are from
abroad, and what they mean to do; and whether, if they pay us a
visit, we shall not be worse off than we are? . . . . . . He is very
desponding, and says the people are incapable of redress, and
unworthy of liberty; that he is confirmed in this by the late
transaction, which must have succeeded but for their barbarous
desertion and want of unanimity. He thinks that the invasion will
not take place at all, but that it is the plan to wear down the
English by the expense of frequent preparation."

No. III found in the desk in Thomas-street."I have but little time
to look at the thousand difficulties between me and the completion
of my wishes; that they would succeed I have ardent, and I trust,
rational hopes; but if that should not be the case, I thank God for
having gifted me with a sanguine disposition, so that I run from
reflection; and if my hopes are without foundationif a precipice be
opening under my feet, from which duty will not suffer me to depart,
I am thankful for that disposition, which leads me on to it, and
hurls me down, while my eyes are raised to the visions of happiness
which my fancy has formed in the air."

No. IV. was the manuscript of the Proclamation of the Provisional
Government, found in the desk in Thomas Street.

When this unfortunate young man was called upon to know if he had
anything to say why sentence of death should not be passed upon him,
he addressed the Court and Jury nearly in the following terms:

"I am asked if I have anything to say why sentence of death should
not be pronounced upon me. Was I to suffer only death, after being
adjudged guilty, I should bow in silence; but a man in my situation
has not only to combat with the difficulties of fortune, but also
the difficulties of prejudice; the sentence of the law which
delivers over his body to the executioner, consigns his character to
obloquy. The man dies, but his memory lives; and that mine may not
forfeit ail claim to the respect of my countrymen, I use this
occasion to vindicate myself from some of the charges advanced
against me.

"I am charged with being an emissary of France-'tis false! I am no
emissary-I did not wish to deliver up my country to a foreign power,
and least of all, to France.No, never did I entertain the idea of
establishing French power in IrelandGod forbid! On the contrary, it
is evident from the introductory paragraph of the Address of the
Provisional Government, that every hazard attending an independent
effort was deemed preferable to the more fatal risk of introducing a
French army into the country. Small would be our claims to
patriotism and to sense, and palpable our affectation of the love of
liberty, if we were to encourage the profanation of our shores by a
people who are slaves themselves, and the unprincipled and abandoned
instruments of imposing slavery on others.

"If such an inference be drawn from any part of the proclamation of
the Provisional Government, it calumniates their views, and is not
warranted by the fact. How could they speak of freedom to their
countrymen? How assume such an exalted motive, and meditate the
introduction of a power which has been the enemy of freedom in every
part of the globe; Reviewing the conduct of France to other
countries, could we expect better towards us? No! Let not, then, any
man attaint my memory by believing that I could have hoped freedom
through the aid of France, and betrayed the sacred cause: of liberty
by committing it to the power of her most determined foe: had I done
so, I had not deserved to live; and dying with such a weight upon my
character, I had merited the honest execration of that country which
gave me birth, and to which I would have given freedom.

"Had I been in Switzerland, I would have fought against the French
in the dignity of freedom, I would have expired on the threshold of
that country, and they should have entered it only by passing over
my lifeless corpse. Is it then to be supposed, that I would be slow
to make the same sacrifice to my native land? Am I, who lived, but
to be of service to my country, and who would subject myself to the
bondage of the grave to give her independenceam I to be loaded with
the foul and grievous calumny of being an emissary of France?

"My lords, it may be part of the system of angry justice, to bow a
man's mind, by humiliation, to meet the ignominy of the scaffold;
but worse to me than the scaffold's shame, or the scaffold's
terrors, would be the imputation of having been the agent of French
despotism and ambition; and while I have breath, I will call upon my
countrymen not to believe the guilty of so foul a crime against
their liberties and their happiness.

"Though you, my lord, sit there a judge, and I stand here a culprit,
yet you are but a man, and I am another. I have a right, therefore,
to vindicate my character and motives from the aspersions of
calumny; and, as a man, to whom fame is dearer than life, I will
make the last use of that life in rescuing my name and my memory
from the afflicting imputation of having been an emissary of France,
proclamation of the Provisional Government, it calumniates their
views, and is not warranted by the fact. How could they speak of
freedom to their countrymen? How assume such an exalted motive, and
meditate the introduction of a power which has been the enemy of
freedom in every part of the globe? Reviewing the conduct of France
to other countries, could we expect better towards us? No! Let not,
then, any man attaint my memory by believing that I could have hoped
freedom through the aid of France, and betrayed the sacred cause of
liberty by committing it to the power of her most determined foe:
had I done so, I had not deserved to live; and dying with such a
weight upon my character, I had merited the honest execration of
that country which gave me birth, and to which I would have given
freedom.

"Did I live to see a French army approach this country, I would meet
it on the shore, with a torch in one hand, and a sword in the other
I would receive them with all the destruction of war! I would
animate my countrymen to immolate them in their very boats; and
before our native soil should be polluted by a foreign foe, if they
succeeded in landing, I would burn every blade of grass before them,
raze every house, contend to the last for every inch of ground; and
the last spot on which the hope of freedom should desert me, that
spot I would make my grave! What I cannot do, I leave a legacy to my
country, because I feel conscious that my death were unprofitable,
and all hopes of liberty extinct, the moment a French army obtained
a footing in this land."

After some farther matter, he concluded thus:"My lamp of life is
nearly expiredmy race is finished: the grave opens to receive me,
and I sink into its bosom. All I request, then, at parting from the
world, is the charity of its silence. Let no man write my epitaph;
for as no man, who knows my motives, dare vindicate them, let not
prejudice or ignorance asperse them; let them and me repose in
obscurity and peace, and my tomb remain undescribed, till other
times and other men can do justice to my character."

The foregoing is a faithful report of this unfortunate young man's
exculpation of himself from the charge of co-operating with the
French in any design to invade this country; and whether voluntary
or involuntary, it is an evidence against the character of the
common enemy, which, coming from such authority, ought, and we
trust, will have the most salutary effect upon all who may have
participated in his principles or his treasons.

Whether the sincere conviction of his mind, or the imposition of
pride, anxious to rescue his memory from the foul shame of having
sought to deliver his country up to a foreign and a cruel enemy, he
is entitled to equal credit; and if anything were inscribed on his
tomb, most honourable to himself, and atoning to his country, it is
the character which he has given of the arch foe to the peace and
liberty of mankind.

The court listened to him with a great deal of patience; and
although indignation was visible in the countenance of every person
in court, at this public avowal of his guilt, yet not a murmur was
heard. Lord Norbury, after a salutary remonstrance to the prisoner,
and paying a handsome compliment to some of the respectable members
of the family to which he belonged, pronounced the awful sentence of
the law in cases of high treason.

Mr. Emmet, after his trial, was taken to Newgate, where dinner had
been prepared for him. He there requested to see Mr. MacNally, one
of his counsellors in his defence. To him, it is generally rumoured,
he made a full disclosure of all the means he had used to effect the
late insurrection, and authorised him to make it known to
government. He declared himself the chief mover and instigator of
that attempt to effect a revolution, and solemnly denied having any
associates in this country of either property or respectability. He
accounted for the expenses incurred in preparations for rebellion,
by stating that he had received, on the death of his father, 3,500l.
and that he had expended of that sum 2,500l. in purchasing the arms
found in the depot in Marshalsea-lane.

He also denied having solicited or received any assistance from the
French government, and protested, were this country invaded by
Frenchmen, from his information of their principles and conduct
wherever they went, that he would be one of the most zealous in the
expulsion of such treacherous, rapacious, and sanguinary miscreants,
At the place of execution he expressed the same sentiments.



EDWARD KEARNEY, alias CARNEY; THOMAS MAXWELL ROCHE;
OWEN KIRWAN; JAMES BYRNE; FELIX ROURKE; JOHN KILLIN;
JOHN M'CANN HENRY HAWLEY; JOHN M'INTOSH; THOMAS
KEENAN; DENNIS LAMBERT REDMOND and THOMAS RUSSEL
Other Rebels of 1803


EDWARD KEARNEY, alias CARNEY, was tried by a Special Commission, at
Green-street. The Attorney General addressed the Court and Jury, in
a speech, which lasted nearly one hour and a half, on the nature of
treason, and how the Act of the 25th of Edward the Third applied. He
explained the nature of the transaction of the 23d of July; that it
was a business of much narrower limits than those engaged in it were
willing to admit; that it was a visitation of Providence to rouse
the people to a greater exertion of loyalty, to make them put on the
armour of war; he dwelt with peculiar energy on the difference
between the governments of France and England. He then called the
attention of the Court to the conduct of government to the traitors
in 1798; some paid their lives as the forfeit of their crimes, some
were transported, and some escaped for want of legal evidence to
convict them. Many of them have changed from their former conduct,
but others have returned to disturb a constitution, the envy and
admiration of the universe. He read a part of the rebel
proclamation, and contrasted it with their conduct.

Patrick M'Cabe, who had turned approver for the crown, admitted,
that he was concerned in the rebellion of 1798: that he was informed
of the present business the day before the rebellion; he proved the
general circumstances of the transaction, but he did not prove the
identity of the prisoner.

The principal evidence against the prisoner was a lieutenant, and
Adjutant Brady, of the 21st regiment, who proved the finding him in
arms on the night of the 23d: this was confirmed by a private in the
same regiment, though there was some trifling difference in the
evidence. The prisoner's defence consisted of a speech of
considerable length, from his counsel, who endeavoured to excite
doubts in the minds of the jury, and on those doubts to decide a
verdict of acquittal. He paid many compliments on the moderation of
the government, and appealed to a similar principle in the minds of
the jury. The prisoner he represented as a poor, but honest and
industrious hawker of skins, who had been that fatal evening pressed
into the service of the insurgents. Certain evidences were adduced
to prove an alibi for him, and others to give him a good character:
he was, not withstanding, after the jury had retired for a few
minutes, found guilty.

Lord Norbury, previous to recapitulating the evidence, which he did
very minutely, laid down the law of high treason, and stated, from
several eminent law reports, the different mode of practice adopted
by the courts in England. His lordship was peculiarly affecting in
pronouncing sentence of death on the unhappy prisoner, whose levity
of manner, in the meantime, bordered on insanity, while aiming to
exculpate himself.

His execution was fixed for the following Friday, (September 2,)
when he was executed in Thomas-street, where he was apprehended
perpetrating his crime, and nearly on the spot, where the barbarous
butchery of the late Lord Kilwarden took place. He was taken from
the gaol to the place of execution, about one o'clock, escorted by a
strong military guard, and behaved in the same intemperate manner
which distinguished him on his trial. He was one of the lower rank
of society, and what is termed a skin-jobber by profession, (a
dealer in dry calf skins), and seemed to be between forty and fifty
years of age. It will be conceived that penitence had made no
impression upon him, when it is stated, that a short time before he
left the gaol, he swore by his Maker, he was not guilty. The Rev.
Mr. Archer and the Rev. Mr. Gamble took much pains in exhortation,
to bring him to a proper sense of his awful situation; he read a
Catholic prayer book for a short time before he left the prison;
but, alas! not with that coolness and resignation which evince
sincere repentance. The unfortunate malefactor had been much given
to intoxication in the course of his life, and which, no doubt, had
been his bane; he candidly acknowledged such excess, and was most
impressively entreated by Dr. Gamble, if he would make no other
acknowledgement, at least to do that to the multitude of the lower
class at the place of execution, and warn them against such ruinous
vice, and which this malefactor promised to do. He seemed to pay
more attention to the fate of his body than his soul, having several
times inquired before he left the prison, what was to become of it
after his death. At the fatal spot, however, he behaved with much
fortitude; and, addressing the crowd in a distinct voice, warned
them to return to their allegiance.

After he was hanged, his head was cut off by the executioner, who
held it up in his hand to the spectators, according to the law
against his crime, saying, "Behold the head of a traitor." His
remains were brought back in a cart to the prison, and afterwards
interred in the yard of Newgate. Notwithstanding the threat in the
Rebel Proclamation, "that the execution of the first man, who should
suffer as a traitor, should be the signal for a general rising," the
sentence was carried into effect without exciting the smallest
disturbance.

THOMAS MAXWELL ROCHE, an old man, about sixty years of age, and by
trade a slater, was the next brought to trial, September 1. The
evidence afforded nothing new, or materially differing from that
adduced on the trial of Kearney; like him, Roche was found in arms
in Thomas street, by Lieutenant Brady, and the party of the 21st
regiment under his command.

Some time before this hoary malefactor left the gaol for execution,
he persisted in declaring he was not guilty, but it appeared
equivocation; for on being exhorted in a most becoming manner, by a
reverend gentleman present, not to be dissembling in the presence of
the Supreme Being, adding to his crime, he at length declared at the
place of execution, that he was guilty of the crime for which he
suffered. From a discharge which he produced as to his character, it
appeared that he also, in his life time, had been addicted to
inebriety, that demon of destruction to the lower class. He suffered
also in Thomas-street.

OWEN KIRWAN, an old clothesman, was the third person indicted.
Benjamin Adams, a silk-weaver, in Plunket-street, swore, that he
knew the prisoner for ten or twelve years, who lived nearly opposite
to him; he recollected the night of the 23d; saw the prisoner
leaning over his door; also saw him go up repeatedly from his house
to Thomas street, with a green bag filled with something; saw him
between eight and nine o'clock going into his house, he was then at
the window on the third floor; beheld a rocket in the air go across
the street over the prisoner's house; prisoner then said, "There is
the rocket, my boys!" he then turned into his shop, put on a green
coat, and went out; his wife followed him, and made him come back,
and put on a cotton jacket. Prisoner put a pike on his shoulder, and
said, "God's blood, boys! the town is our own tonight." He then
said, "Any man that does not turn out to-night will surely be put to
death to-morrow. The prisoner then and his party ran up Plunket-
street, and turned into Thomas-street. The party were all armed with
pikes, and the prisoner at the bar had also a pike; in about half an
hour afterwards the witness saw a parcel of armed men pass down
Plunket-street, towards Patrick street; in about a quarter of an
hour after, sixty or seventy persons came down Plunket-street: some
of them stopped at the prisoner's door, and some lower down; they
got beer. Kirwan's wife had something prepared for them. In about
half an hour he heard a firing from the Coombe.

The prisoner called several persons, who gave him the character of a
sober industrious man, and one who they never heard was concerned in
any rebellious affair. The jury, however, found him guilty. The next
day (Friday, September 2,) he was brought up to receive sentence of
death, which was pronounced upon him with peculiar solemnity by
Baron George; who also addressed the prisoner in an affecting speech
of some length, concluding in nearly the following words:

"Do not suppose that the cause you engaged in, and for which you
have forfeited your life, is popular, and will rescue your memory
from the deserved odium which must attach to it, in proportion as
you die obdurate or unatoning. No! wretched man! your mad
atrocities, your horrible assassinations, will only be remembered,
and the detestation of posterity feature you in the blood you have
shed. In the last rebellion it was to be lamented, that wicked men
made use of arguments to mislead the weak, and to palliate treason;
but has any human creature said a single word in favour or
palliation of the insurrection to which you have been so actively
assisting? No! its sole object has been blood and desolation; and
the fate of him who could promote, in conspiracy or in action, such
an object, can never be attended with popularity. Discharge,
therefore, such a wicked and dangerous delusion from your mind, if
you should be so unhappy as to entertain it; think only of your
salvation, as a contrite Christian should, and do not leave the
world with a lie in your mouth, and go before your Maker, swaggering
in vain and boastful guilt. Believe me, unhappy man, that to
disclose all you know, and thus make your injured country and
offended God all the atonement in your power, will prove an
inexpressible consolation to you in your last moments, and infuse
into your soul that sweet consciousness of right, which can alone
sweeten the bitter draught you are about to take, and justify a hope
of future pardon and happiness. You were told that a rocket would be
the signal of insurrection. You knew of the mischief to be done; you
were evidently deep in the dreadful secret; and therefore again I
exhort you, as you value your eternal salvation, not to leave this
life until you do justice to your country, and make what return you
now can for the crimes with which you have disgraced it. But while I
thus urge you to the disclosure with which your duty should suggest,
do not think I am authorised to hold out any hope to you, or that
any disclosure will be an atonement to the law: but under any
consideration of your interest or duty, you must act in opposition
to both, whether in this world or the next, by denying the truth and
justice of the verdict pronounced upon you, and persisting in a
frame of mind in corrigible to repentance and atonement."

This unhappy culprit was executed September 8, in Thomas-street, on
the same gallows where his partners in rebellion and assassination
expiated their crimes. His conduct was decent, and he acknowledged
the justice of his sentence, and the impartiality of his trial.

JAMES BYRNE, who had been bred up to the baking business, which he
had successfully carried on for some years in the neighbourhood of
Naas, in the county of Kildare, was, September 2, found guilty on
charges of high treason, and the next day received sentence of death
from Baron Daly.

On the 5th (two days after) he was executed opposite the King's
stores, in Townsend-street, where a temporary gallows was erected
for the purpose. There was an immense concourse of spectators, whom
he addressed in the following very few words: "Gentlemen, I hope my
fate will be a warning to you all." He was a large man, and his
weight extended the rope by which he hung to such a length, that his
feet reached the ground; and, for want of any species of machinery
to ease him, the executioner was obliged to bend his legs backwards,
and tie them to his thighs. He hung for some moments, apparently in
great torture. After hanging twenty-three minutes, he was cut down,
and his head severed from his body.

On the 6th of September, FELIX ROURKE, a rebel officer, was also
convicted of high-treason. This man was a colonel in the rebellion
of 1798; previous to which he was serjeant to the Coolock yeomanry
corps, and joined in a conspiracy to murder Captain Ormsby, and some
other officers of the corps: a man of the name of Clinch was
executed for his crime. Rourke afterwards turned strolling player;
but, failing in that pursuit, he again turned his thoughts to real
scenes of human bloodshed, in which he acted a principal part. He,
with JOHN KILLIN, and JOHN M'CANN (two other convicted rebels) was
brought up on the 9th, and received sentence of death.

On this occasion, Baron George addressed the prisoners in a most
feeling manner, but particularly Felix Rourke, to whom he
represented the aggravation which his crime received from the part
which he took in the insurrection; not only committing treason
himself, but seducing others to a similar crime.

Before sentence was passed, Rourke addressed the Court in language
calculated to convey an impression that he was superior to the
vulgar herd: he, however, negatively admitted that he was a leader
of rebellion on the evening of the 23d of July, but solemnly
protested that he was never concerned in the spilling of blood. Few,
however, of those who heard him, believed that he was so in any
respect, whether of intention or action, free from the massacre of
that dreadful night.

Rourke, on his leaving gaol on Saturday, September 10, for
execution, endeavoured to affect fortitude, and to baffle a
shivering that he was seized with. Being asked, was he, easy in his
mind? he said he was perfectly composed: he went in a smart pace
from the gaol into the cart, and sat on the side going to the
gallows, and as he went from the prison, bowed his head to those he
saw in the windows, signifying farewell to his comrades: on his way
he looked much about him in the town, instead of paying attention to
his book. He was escorted by a strong party of horse, and the
adjacent yeomanry corps were assembled on the spot, to pre vent any
attempt to rescue the prisoner. Notwithstanding his assumed
boldness, and his protestations of innocence, he met his fate with
the most abject cowardice; and at the gallows confessed the justice
of his sentence, and recanted his bravado assertions of innocence.
He was executed in Rathcoole, in the neighbourhood of which he
lived; this town, at the time of his execution, seemed to have been
deserted by its inhabitants, there being not one in coloured clothes
to be seen.

The following Monday, Killin and M'Cann were executed in Thomas-
street: they conducted themselves with apparent penitence, and
acknowledged the justness of their conviction, and of their
punishment.

HENRY HAWLEY, another of these traitors, and who seemed to have
somewhat of a better education than any of the rest, (except Emmet,)
was a native of Roscrea, in the county of Tipperary, and had been so
active in the rebellion of 1798, that he was wounded in an attempt
to plunder a house, in that neighbourhood, of arms. When John
Hanson, the keeper of the tower, in the castle, went to arrest him,
this desperate man immediately fired at and shot him; for this crime
he was not indicted, but for that of high treason, September 27. The
fact of his having been employed in the manufacture of pikes was
proved by evidence similar to that produced on former trials; and no
attempt being made to rebut the charge, the jury, without going out
of the box, pronounced the verdict of guilty.

After a solemn appeal to the prisoner, on the enormity of his
offence, Baron George pronounced sentence of death on him. This
wretched man was executed September 29, 1803, according to his
sentence, at the front of the New Prison. Before the rope was
adjusted, he requested leave to address the people. The extreme
contrition and repentance which he expressed induced the sheriffs to
yield to his desire: he accordingly came out upon the platform, and
raising his voice so as to be heard to a considerable distance, said
nearly as follows:

"Good people, pray for me, and pray that I may be forgiven my sins,
which I heartily repent of. Good people, you see to what a situation
I am brought by my own folly, and by bad advisers. Good people, love
each other, and forget all animositiesrelinquish your foolish
pursuits, which, if you continue to follow, will, in the end, bring
you to the situation in which I now stand." He confessed that he
had, with his own hand, murdered Colonel Brown, of the 21st
regiment, on the night of the rebellion. He appeared fully sensible
of the enormity of his crime, as well as that of the murder of
Hanson, and exhibited an appearance of the deepest remorse, entirely
different from that sullen and ferocious apathy with which so many
of his accomplices had met their fate. His whole conduct excited a
degree of compassion, which it required the full recollection of his
crimes to overcome. He returned from the platform; and, having
prayed for a short time, was again led forth, and the trap falling,
he died without a struggle.

On the first of October, JOHN M'INTOSH was tried before the special
commission, on the same charges of high treason with those whose
trials preceded him. It appeared that the prisoner, a carpenter by
trade, had rented the house, No. 26, in Patrick-street, where the
explosion of gunpowder took place on the Saturday previous to the
insurrection. On that occasion he would not accept of the assistance
of his neighbours, but locked up the place, telling a man living
next door to him, who was more particular in his enquiries, that the
explosion was in consequence of an experiment tried by silk-dyers.
Mr. Wilson, a chief peace-officer, went to the house the following
evening, and ascertained the explosion to have been that of
gunpowder; a parcel of which he found in an unfinished state, and
some saltpetre. He also found in a chest about fifty fresh-cast
musket-balls, a volume of De Volney's Ruin of Empires; and in the
house were about two hundred pike handles, shorter than those with
which he had afterwards become more familiar; but, in an adjoining
house, he found a parcel of bayonets, with the sockets filled with
wood, and as if they had been sawed from off the handles, which were
in the first house. It appeared that, after the explosion in
Patrick-street, the prisoner went immediately to the depot, in Mass-
lane, where he continued until the 23d of July, preparing for the
insurrection, which broke out on that evening. When the insurrection
took place, he was actively engaged in it: he was one of those who
fired at the trooper who was killed; he was also among those
infernal assassins who stopped Lord Kilwarden's carriage; and stood
by while that lamented nobleman and his nephew were piked to death.
It did not appear that he inflicted any of the wounds, which were
all given with pikes, he having been armed with pistols and a
blunderbuss. After the defeat of the insurrection, he fled; and, as
he was passing through Arklow, in the county of Wicklow, he was
arrested by Mr. Coats, a magistrate, to whom he said that his name
was Magrath; that he was a mill-wright by trade, was going to
Waterford, had been working at Mr. Jones's, in the county of
Wicklow, and had not been in Dublin for three weeks previous to the
23d of July.

There was no tenable defence set up. Some persons were adduced to
character; and the jury, without retiring, returned a verdict of
"Guilty."

This culprit suffered October 3, 1803, in Patrick-street, opposite
the house where he had been manufacturing the powder for rebellion.

On the day of M'Intosh's execution, THOMAS KEENAN was tried on the
same charges of high-treason. It was proved that he was an associate
of M'Intosh, and was arrested along with him in the town of Arklow,
whither they had fled after the 23d of July. Like M'Intosh, he
assumed a feigned name and occupation, when questioned by Mr. Coates
the magistrate; and also said that he had been at work some time
before the 23d, and on that day for a Mr. Jones, of Kilnecary, in
the county of Wicklow.

It was proved by two witnesses, Fleming and Finerty, that he had
been in the rebel depot, in Mass-lane, in the course of the week
previous to the insurrection, at work as a carpenter, making pike
handles, &c.; and Fleming swore positively that he was one of those
who piked Lord Kilwarden. The jury, after five minutes' conference,
returned a verdict, "Guilty." Sentence of death was immediately
pronounced. The prisoner did not deny his having been one of the
conspiracy, but positively denied having been one of the murderers
of Lord Kilwarden. He was executed on the 4th of October, 1803, in
Thomas-street.

DENNIS LAMBERT REDMOND, a very principal person in this
insurrection, was tried for high-treason, October 5th. His trial was
intended for September 3d, on which morning, just before he was sent
for, the prisoner shot himself with a small pocket-pistol, which he
had, for some time about his person, concealed in his pantaloons. 
The city-surgeon immediately examined his wound, and reported it not
dangerous. Previous to this, he had offered to give information to
government of all persons concerned in the late horrid insurrection,
together with their plans and connections. This proposal, after
having been well weighed, was rejected: the charges against the
prisoner, who was not one of the deluded mob, being of such a nature
as to make him, if found guilty, a peculiarly fit subject for an
example. The double shame of guilt and treachery hastened the
commission of this rash act, which drew a veil between him and the
publication of his crimes. This wretched man, instead of
accelerating his death as he intended, only procrastinated it by
having thus postponed his trial and execution.

Pat M'Cabe, the accomplice, was the principal witness, who proved
the conspiracy to levy war, on the 23d of July, in Company with
Allen, who was tried along with Arthur O'Connor, at Maidstone, and
acquitted. It was also proved, that he employed carpenters in his
house to make pike-handles; and that a number of those weapons,
bayonets, &c. were found concealed in his house, in the Coal Quay,
particularly pikes under a part of the flooring, and more in three
cases, formed to resemble beams of timber. After the 23d of July,
the prisoner fled in a vessel, the Tarleton, James Murphy, master,
bound to Chester, but was put into Carlingford by a storm, in which
the vessel was like to have been lost: there he was taken, and
transmitted to this city; and, on his examination, gave a false
account of some circumstances, and which falsehoods were strongly
corroborative of his guilt. The jury, in about five minutes,
returned a verdict of "Guilty."

Being asked why judgment should not be pronounced against him, he
addressed the court with tremor, and under such strong agitation, as
frequently deprived him of speech for minutes. In his address, he
alleged, "that the conduct proved against him by M'Cabe had been
exaggerated, though in part true; that in his conversation with Mr.
Read, in Drogheda, Mr. Read gave the king's health, which he drank,
and then gave General Bonaparte; that on Mr. Read's speaking hardly
of Bonaparte, he used his best arguments to support the character of
the then Chief Consul, alleging that he had a right so to do, as
respectable persons in London had been prosecuted for speaking
against him. [Here he was stopped by agitation.] He then, after a
pause of some minutes, went on"I will, now that the halter is about
my neck, and the axe ready to sever my head from my body, confess,
that I held an official situation under the Provincial Government;
and that the great object of my heart was to promote the views of
that government[Here again he stopped]and every act which I have
done in forwarding that government, I should be" [Here his voice
utterly failed]and after a long pause Baron George, with that
benign humanity, which marks his every act, said, that if the
prisoner had anything more to say, the court would wait as long as
he desired. The prisoner said, "he would give no further trouble;"
and the baron, after the most impressive lecture on the fatal
consequences of treason that ever was given, pronounced the terrible
sentence of the law.

This unfortunate man was about twenty-five years of age, in his
person tall and athletic, and rather a handsome long countenance. He
was executed on the 6th of October, 1803, in the Coal Quay, opposite
his own door, about half past two o'clock. He was dressed very
genteelly, his hair à la crop, and a large cravat, very high about
his chin. The remains of the wound he inflicted on himself by the
pistol-shot were covered with a black plaster, very neatly. He
quitted the gaol about one, and was brought over Carlisle-bridge,
and through College-green, Dame-street, Parliament-street, &c. &c.
He behaved, during his passage, with much composure and
recollection, and seemed to take notice, rather particularly, of any
little stoppage or noise in his progress, as he would often turn his
head round to the front of the cart, in which he sat on its floor,
with his back to the horse, and would salute his acquaintance as he
passed them. He seemed to look on the different houses and public
buildings, with which he was more intimately acquainted, with a sort
of farewell expression in his countenance. On his arrival at the
place of his execution, the female part of the spectators received
him with quiet expressions, and signs of grief and pity: their eyes
and countenances alone proved their feelings; but, to do them
justice, they cursed most heartily those who had seduced their
friends to the paths of disloyalty; in short, every one pitied the
man, but execrated his principles. Very little time was necessary to
complete his business. He mounted the ladder with steadiness and
resolution, and without the smallest levity, though there was a sort
of indignant behaviour about him, which was most fully exemplified
in his answer to the clergyman who attended him when he was asked,
"Do you die in peace with all mankind?" he answered, "'Tis no
matter, I must die, whether or no." He remained on the platform for
above five minutes alone, when he gave the signal which launched him
into eternity. He fell with great force, and died without showing
symptoms of much pain; indeed, the fall was so great, he almost
never stirred. Thus died, an ignominious death, a man who had every
prospect in this world to become a useful and honourable member of
society, at least if property could influence; he having come into
above 300l. per annum about a year before.

We shall conclude our account of these insurgents with that of
THOMAS RUSSEL, (the only leader of note after Emmet,) who, under the
title of the general of the Northern District, under the Provisional
Government, issued a proclamation to that district on the 23d of
July.

This man had been long distinguished for superiority of talents,
particularly as a military character. He had served both in the East
and West Indies, and in the latter with great credit in the same
regiment with General Knox, with whom he went to Ireland, and was
very attentively treated by the Northland family, through whose
interest he was appointed a magistrate of the county of Tyrone, and
he lived for some time at Dungannon; but in consequence of a
difference with the Northland family, entirely arising from
politics, he removed to Belfast, where he resided until the year
1792, when he was arrested, with Samuel Nelson and others, and
conveyed to Newgate, Dublin: there he remained a prisoner until
1798, when he was sent, with Arthur O'Connor and others, to Fort St.
George in Scotland.

At the conclusion of the last peace he was, with the other
prisoners, liberated, and he proceeded to France. He lived in Paris
during the peace, and was observed to be intimately acquainted with
many of the members of the French Government, and with several of
the first generals in France. Immediately subsequent to the
declaration of war, he was missed from Paris, and found his way to
Ireland. His malpractices having been discovered by government, one
thousand pounds were offered by proclamation for his apprehension,
but his arrest was not produced in consequence of that offer. It was
owing to a Mr. Emerson, of the attorney's corps. He had received
information, which was obtained through the vigilance of the
Divisional Inspector of the District, that a stranger of suspicious
appearance was observed in the house of a Mr. Muley, gun-maker, in
Parliament-street. This circumstance Mr. Emerson immediately
communicated to Mr. Secretary Marsden, by whom he was referred to
Major Sirr. Mr. Emerson accordingly called upon the major, and,
accompanied by him and Lieutenant Minchin, with a detachment of
Captain Green's corps of Yeomanry, under the command of Lieutenant
Beton, proceeded to the house in question about ten o'clock that
night, where in a garret room, they discovered the person whose
conduct had excited suspicion.

On their attempting to examine him he drew forth two loaded pistols,
which he snapped at them; but both of them missed fire. Being
recognised by Sirr, as Russel, the rebel general, he was seized and
taken to the castle. He represented himself as Mr. Thomas, but Sirr
had recollected him since he was a prisoner in Newgate; and, upon
being taken to the castle, he was immediately identified by an old
acquaintance of his, the Hon. Captain Knox, son of Lord Northland,
under whose patronage Russel once was, until he had forfeited it by
his political principles. Other northern gentlemen, who were at
dinner with Mr. Wickham, also knew Russel. After he had acknowledged
his real name, he avowed his purpose in coming to the country, and
spoke in the boldest language of the "glorious cause" in which he
was engaged"It is that," said he, "for which I would meet death
with pleasure, either in the field or on the scaffold."

His trial came on October 19, 1803, before a special commission at
Downpatrick, Ireland: it occupied the attention of the court from
ten in the morning, till past eight in the evening. One very
important fact came out in the course of his trial: that, with all
the influence which he possessed at one period among the lower
orders; with all the exertions which he made, aided by the manners
of a popular leader, he was unable to raise anything like a
formidable body of insurgents. Individual adherents he met with; but
the great body of the people showed no disposition to espouse his
cause. The prisoner, having been asked if he had anything to say why
sentence of death should not be passed, upon him, addressed the
court in an eloquent and energetic, though rather a somewhat
unconnected speech, of about twenty minutes in which he took a view
of the principal transactions of his life for the last thirteen
years; and on a retrospective view of which, he said, he looked back
with triumph and satisfaction. He endeavoured to vindicate his
conduct from the criminality attached to it, by asserting that in
all he had done, he had acted from the conviction of his conscience;
and anxiously requested that the court would make him not only the
first, but the only life which should be taken on the present
occasion; mercifully sparing to their families and friends the lives
of those men whom it was asserted he had led astray.

The Hon. Baron George, after a pathetic address of some length, then
pronounced the awful sentence of the law, which the prisoner
listened to with the greatest composurebowed respectfully to the
court, and then retired in the custody of the sheriff. This
unfortunate man was executed Oct. 21st (Friday,) and suffered with a
degree of fortitude worthy of a better cause.

He was very liberally educated; and, in some pamphlets written by
him upon the state of Ireland previous to 1798, he manifested
considerable genius and information. He was about six feet high, of
a very noble mind, a remarkably well-proportioned stature, and very
marked countenance. His mind seemed strong. His conversation was
very interesting, where he was disposed to be communicative; but he
was in general reserved. His manners were highly polished. On the
whole, he appeared to be amazingly well calculated to conciliate
attachment, and ensure obedience.



FRANCIS FINLAY
Convicted at the December Sessions, at the Old
Bailey, in 1802, and Executed for Forgery

HERE shall we find verified the old proverbs, that, "Honesty is the
best policy," and that "Idleness is the root of all evil." This
unfortunate man, who possessed the most gentlemanly appearance and
address, and was connected with several families of respectability
and fortune, was a native of Boston, in Lincolnshire, where his
father, being a man of credit and easy fortune, was enabled to
gratify the strong ambition which he felt, to give his son a polite
and liberal education. Mr. Finlay passed through the rudiments of
his education with éclat, and executed the tasks assigned him by his
masters with a promptitude and accuracy, that seemed to justify the
most sanguine expectations of his delighted parents and friends. At 
a very early age he betrayed a strong attachment to a military life.
The father, though with the greatest reluctance, at last was
persuaded to indulge the ruling passion of his son; and accordingly,
at the commencement of the last war, procured him an ensign's
commission in a marching regiment. This regiment was soon after
ordered abroad, where his bravery and good conduct gained him the
esteem and affection of his companions, and caused him to be
promoted to the rank of lieutenant. When his regiment returned to
England, Mr. Finlay was ordered upon the recruiting service; and
from this period may be dated the commencement of that career of
vice which at last rendered him amenable to the laws of his country.

Idleness, that rock upon which so many have been wrecked, called
forth his latent propensities with irresistible violence. Possessing
an uncommon flow of animal spirits, he was extremely alive to the
pleasures of society; and, having contracted an intimacy with
several persons of a dissipated turn of mind, he entered into all
their excesses with eagerness. It may be easily imagined, that his
lieutenant's pay was very inadequate to support a life of excess and
libertinism. But the force of habit became unconquerable: his
commission was disposed of to recruit his finances, and to enable
him a little longer to indulge a violent propensity to gaming, which
he had contracted in the society of his fellow libertines. This
could not hold out long, and he was at last hurried to the adoption
of the most unjustifiable and desperate measures to maintain his
credit with his associates. About this period he married the
daughter of a respectable shopkeeper; but his wife's fortune was
inconsiderable, and was, therefore, soon dissipated in his favourite
pursuits. Deprived of every honest resource of supplying his ruined
finances, he was at length, in a moment of desperation, driven to
the commission of forgery; for which he was apprehended, and brought
to trial at the Old Bailey, December 3, 1802, before Lord Alvanley.

He was indicted for feloniously forging and uttering the same,
knowing it to be forged, a certain paper, purporting to be a bill of
exchange, drawn by Capt. W. Foote, of the Royal Navy, on James
Sykes, Navy Agent, of Arundel street, and accepted by him. It
appeared in evidence, that the prisoner went to a Mr. Earnshaw, a
watch-maker in High Holborn, on the 26th of September, and bespoke a
gold time piece, which was to be got ready for him in the course of
a week, and for which he agreed to pay sixty-five guineas:
accordingly, on the 16th of October, he called again, when the time
piece being ready, it was delivered to him, and he paid for it with
two bills, one of which was that laid in the indictment. Soon after
Mr. Earnshaw sent the bill to Mr. Sykes, when it was instantly
discovered to be a forgery. The next day (which was on the 17th of
October) the prisoner offered the time-piece as a pledge to a
pawnbroker, William Burkitt, who seeming to doubt its value, the
prisoner produced Earnshaw's receipt; and in consequence of Burkitt
intimating that he would advance the money, if upon enquiry he found
it to be of that value, the prisoner agreed to call again in an
hour. Burkitt sent to Earnshaw's in the meantime; consequently the
forgery was detected, and the prisoner, on his return, was taken
into custody.

The prisoner, in his defence, set up the plea of insanity, and
called one witness, the Chevalier Ruspini, who gave him a good
character. There being no evidence in support of a deranged mind,
the jury pronounced him guilty; but, on account of his excellent
character and meritorious services, recommended him to the mercy of
the sovereign: there were, however, fourteen other similar
indictments against him. Finlay's demeanour, during his trial, was
not marked with that impudent levity which distinguish the Bond-
street bucks, nor tinctured with that despondency to which weak
minds are generally subject in such a situation: it was a demeanour
of modest dignity, which bespoke a consciousness of his crime,
without any appearance of being appalled at the fate to which he was
consigned by the violated laws of his country. When his sentence was
pronounced, he listened with a degree of calm resignation, and the
air of a man who was prepared to suffer deserved punishment for a
crime of which he was conscious to himself he was guilty.

This unhappy man was only 57 years of age, and was both a husband
and a father. After his death-warrant was signed by his majesty, the
little time that intervened between that and his execution, was
employed in a manner the most exemplary, in preparing for that awful
and ignominious crisis when he should be separated from everything
that was dear to him on this side eternity. He never attempted to
palliate his crime, but displayed the deepest contrition for his
guilt, and the most penitent resignation. He was attended almost
constantly by the Rev. Mr. Crowther, rector of Christ Church,
Newgate-street, and in the absence of that gentleman, by one of his
fellow-prisoners, of the name of John Manley, who humanely
administered all the consolation his unfortunate situation admitted
of, read to him, and joined him in prayer. A gentleman, who did not
disdain to be considered as the friend of the unfortunate man,
visited him daily, and assisted him with money, and other
necessaries.

On the morning previous to his execution, he was visited by his wife
and child in prison, along with the gentleman to whom we have just
now alluded, and the prisoner Manley. The scene that passed may be
more easily imagined than described. The reader may picture to
himself the anguish of a wife and mother, who had been nurtured in
all that delicacy and tenderness that gives double acuteness to the
feelings, upon the eve of losing a beloved husband, by the hands of
the common executioner. She was then about the age of thirty-two, a
woman of the most elegant manners, and handsome form. The child was
about eight months old. The sensations of the unfortunate criminal,
were of the most agonizing sort, when he reflected upon that
infatuated course of life, which had not only brought himself to an
ignominious end, but had also left his beloved wife exposed to all
the horrors of poverty and disgrace. Upon a promise from the
gentleman beforementioned, to protect this wife and child, and
screen them from the miseries of want, and the sneers of an
unpitying world, he became more composed. She lingered with him till
four o'clock, when it became absolutely necessary to separate.
Unable to bear the emotions of agony by which she was agitated, she
fainted in her husband's arms, and was carried by two men to a
hackney coach, in a state of insensibility. Even the turnkeys,
"albeit unused to the melting mood," did not behold this scene
unmoved. Mr. Finlay, for a few minutes after his wife's departure,
seemed to be agitated, but at the same time resigned. He walked
about his cell with hurried steps, clinched his hands, turned his
eyes towards Heaven, and at last overcome by his feelings,
exclaimed, "She is gone, and I shall never see her more on earth!"
But soon recovering his composure, "I am now happy," he said, "and
prepare to die, my friends cannot look coolly upon her; alas! she
will have no friends but them."

The Rev. Mr. Crowther, as usual, passed a few hours with him in
earnest supplication to the Divine Mercy for the pardon of his sins,
and particularly the crime for which he was to suffer.

On the morning of his execution, February 9, 1803, he seemed to look
forward to his fate, not only with resignation, but satisfaction. He
dressed with the same neatness and attention to cleanliness as
usual. He eat his breakfast with the utmost composure, at five
o'clock in the morning, with his faithful friend Manley. About six
o'clock Mr. Crowther appeared, who passed an hour with him in
fervent devotion. At seven o'clock he took the sacrament, and his
irons being knocked off, the sheriff came, to whom he was delivered
by the keeper of the prison. At half past eight o'clock he mounted
the scaffold, with his hat and gloves on. He wore his hair cropped,
half-boots, grey stockings, web pantaloons, brown coat, and
waistcoat, with an outside coat of the same colour. He appeared calm
and collected, and spoke for about a minute to the clergyman. The
executioner then stepping forward, took off his hat, unloosed his
neck-handkerchief, and fastened the fatal noose. The cap being
pulled over his eyes, after he had remained about five minutes on
the scaffold, he was launched into eternity. No man ever behaved
with more resignation and manly fortitude in such a situation. He
seemed to be in agony for the space of three minutes, after he was
turned off, during which time he held a white pocket-handkerchief in
his hand, but afterwards dropped it.

The body was cut down after it had hung the usual time, and carried
to Newgate prison. At one o'clock, a hearse attended to convey it
away; but, upon being inspected by the Sheriffs, it was found to be
still warm, though it had been cut down three hours before. The
sheriffs thought it their duty to keep it for some time longer, on
account of this extraordinary circumstance, and ordered that it
should be called for at four o'clock, which was accordingly done.
Yet o'er his fall, may pity drop a tear,
Rememb'ring the wretchedness of the times;
O think on his disgrace! his dying fear!
And in his punishment forget his crimes.



LAWRENCE INNIS
A British Seaman, Executed on Pennenden-Heath,
January 21, 1803, for Murder

IN action against the enemies of his country, how courageous is the
British seaman; and when his foe has yielded to superior valour,
compassion and generosity possess his noble heart. In peace, and
deprived of the element which habit had rendered most natural to
him, he considers the shore alone fit for recreation and idleness.
His mind inactive, he oft becomes sullen and discontented; and
having no natural enemy to combat, he quarrels with, and falls upon,
his own messmate. In the present unfortunate case, both the murder
and the murdered, had been seamen in the British navy, and both were
pensioners in Greenwich Hospital.

Lawrence Innis was tried at Maidstone Lent assizes, 1803, for the
wilful murder of John Price. John Miller, a witness for the
prosecution, deposed, that he was a Greenwich pensioner, and his
berth was in the Clarence Ward: his cabin was next to that in which
the deceased slept. On Tuesday night, the 20th of January, just as
he was in bed, he heard the prisoner and the deceased come up the
gallery together; they were talking; the deceased said to the
prisoner, "Go to bed, and then there will be no more on't." The
prisoner replied, "I won't." The prisoner then went away to the
fire-place in the hall, but soon returned to the cabin-door of the
deceased, and cried out, "Price! Price! Jack! Jack1 to which the
deceased did not answer. The prisoner then went away, but shortly
after returned a second time, and called out as before. The deceased
then answered him, and said to the prisoner, "You will prepare to
appear before the captain of the month to-morrow; I have you upon
the complaint, for striking me to-day at the Tyger's Head, in
London-street." To this the prisoner replied, "Then you have done
me, have you? but d-n you, I'll do you in return." The prisoner
accompanied these words by a blow, which knocked the deceased down.
The deceased called out. "Murder!" upon which the witness jumped out
of bed, and the prisoner was secured; and the next morning he was
carried before the committee, and mulcted two months' tobacco money
for his ill-behaviour. This was the morning preceding the night of
the murder. As he came out of the committee-room, he said to the
witness, "Miller, you have borne false witness against me, but I
hope to God I shall live to seek revenge."

On the same evening he did not see the prisoner till eleven o'clock;
he then saw both Price and Innis go to their cabins. After he had
been in bed a short time, he heard the prisoner come out of his
cabin, and go to the cabin of the deceased. From that he went to the
fire-place in the hall as fast as he could go. He returned a second
time to Price's cabin. He stayed a second or two, and then again
went to the fire place, and once more returned to Price's cabin. In
a little time he heard him shut the door softly, and thought no more
of it till about a quarter of an hour afterwards, Bryan came to him,
and told him for God's sake to get up, as the boatswain, Price, was
murdered.

John Hawford, another pensioner, corroborated the above account.

James Bryan gave evidence as follows:"I lay in the same cabin with
the deceased; we were talking together not ten minutes before he was
murdered. The prisoner's cabin was nearly opposite to ours. I heard
the prisoner open our door softly, and he looked in; we appeared
both asleep. As soon as he looked in, he went away towards the hall
fire-place. He had on a great coat and two night-caps. He came back,
and when he came in our cabin, he looked at me attentively. He again
went away, and returned with the poker. He turned round, and gave me
another attentive look, and immediately after struck Price four or
six heavy blows on the head. At the first blow his head crashed, but
I don't know whether the others hit him. As soon as he had done it,
he again turned and looked at me, but I lay still as though asleep.
He then went out, and hauled the door softly after him, but did not
lock it. As soon as he was gone, I got up and gave the alarm, and
the prisoner was secured."

James Curran, another pensioner, described the state in which he
found the deceased.

 The prisoner's defence was, "that the witnesses were in a
conspiracy against him;" but the jury instantly found him guilty. He
was executed, and his body dissected in the Hospital.



STEPHEN STILWELL
Executed on the Top of the New Gaol, Southwark, March
26, 1803, for the Murder of His Wife

STEPHEN STILWELL, a publican at the Three Jolly Gardeners, at
Mortlake, was tried for the murder of his wife, September 28, 1802,
at the Surrey assizes held at Kingston, before Mr. Justice Heath,
Thursday, March 24, 1803. Mr. Nolan, who appeared as counsel for the
prosecution, stated, that the prisoner at the bar stood indicted for
a crime, which must be the offspring of a most abandoned and cruel
disposition. He had for some time lived as a gardener in the family
of a gentleman at Mortlake; and the woman, whom he had murdered,
also lived as servant in that family; he therefore had every
opportunity of being acquainted with her temper and manners previous
to his taking her for his wife. They were married from that place,
and took a public-house at Mortlake. It would not be regular for him
to detail the various instances of cruelty which he had exercised
towards his wife, except as connected with the present charge; but
he should prove that he frequently declared he would murder her.

On the 28th, he quarrelled with his wife, and turned her from the
kitchen to the bar, telling her that was her place, and added, "It
was no matter, for she had but a few days to live." On the 27th, in
the evening, they were seen together, by two lodgers in the house,
sitting in the bar, and apparently in amity; but the next morning he
perpetrated the horrid crime. It would also appear that he had
attempted another mode of death, for a loaded pistol was found lying
by her, the lock of which was down, as though the trigger had been
drawn, and it had missed fire. The learned counsel dwelt upon the
aggravated circumstances of this crime, in which the foul crime of
murder was rendered more heinous, by being against a wife whom he
had solemnly sworn at God's altar to cherish and protect.

John Ward deposed as follows: "I am a baker, and live near
Stilwell's house. On the 28th of September, 1802, about five
o'clock, I got up to work. I was disturbed with a noise, and I went
to the gate. I heard a noise in Stilwell's room. I heard his voice.
He was saying, "Come, get up, your time is expired." I stood a
little time, and heard a scream. Mrs. S. said, "My dear Stilwell,
don't murder me." When I heard that, I went to an opposite window
where I knew a soldier lay, and called him up. In about ten minutes
I saw the prisoner come out of doors at the front door; but, before
I saw him, I heard a stamping on the floor of the prisoner's room.
Soon after I saw the prisoner run out of the front door. He ran
away, and I followed him. In about a minute I came up. Knight, a man
I had called on passing by, first laid hold of him. His hands and
clothes were sprinkled with blond. We bound him with a cord, and I
left him in custody of Benjamin Knight. On cross-examination the
witness said, that when he heard the stamping, he also heard the
prisoner exclaiming, "that he had gained his liberty;" and when he
came out, he said, "D-n that house, set it on fire," (meaning his
own house.)

Benjamin Knight deposed"I was called by the last witness; I was
going by the house, and listened at the window. I heard two of three
groans, and heard the prisoner saying, that 'he had gained his
liberty.' I then went into the yard; and, as there was a table under
the window, I got upon it, in order to look in at the window; and
then I heard a person quit the room, and run downstairs. I
immediately went round, and saw Stilwell come out of the front door;
his clothes were all bloody. I and another man went upstairs, and
saw the deceased on the ground. The floor was over my shoes in
blood, near the deceased's head. I immediately ran down, and pursued
the prisoner. Mr. Ward came to my assistance, and we overtook him.
He struck me several times: when we found him, he appeared
collected. He asked me to slack the cords, and not to hurt him."

Charles Barwood said, "he was a carpenter, and lodged at the
prisoner's house. On the 28th of September, in the morning, he heard
a noise in the prisoner's room: the witness slept in a room not far
from the prisoner's room. He heard the noise of a person apparently
singing. He then heard Mrs. Stilwell screaming out, "Oh, Stilwell,
dear Stilwell!" then he heard a loud knocking, and the prisoner
singing, "You have given me such liberty." He dressed himself, came
down, and was going out at the back-door. "I saw," said he,
"Stilwell at the foot of the stairs, but I did not observe his dress
at that time. As I went round the house, I saw him come out of the
front door; his face was bloody, and he said, "dn, do you set fire
to that house." I went upstairs with Benjamin Knight. Mrs. S. was
lying on the floor, with her head all beat to pieces. A pistol was
lying near. I saw the prisoner and his wife about eight or nine
o'clock the preceding evening in the bar together, and they seemed
very comfortable."

William Bardolph lodged in Stilwell's house, and slept with the last
witness; he heard the noise on the morning of the 28th. It came from
Stilwell's room: he heard him singing, and presently after the woman
screaming out. Stilwell was singing, "I have gained my sweet
liberty." We went down, and Stilwell came down swearing after us. We
went out (said the witness) at the back door: he went out at the
front door, and said, "Set the house on fire." He accompanied the
last witness to the room, and described the state of the deceased as
the last witness had done.

John Davis, a surgeon at Mortlake, stated that he was sent for in
consequence of the murder of the deceased. He examined the body, and
found she had been killed by several violent blows which she had
received; a great portion of her brains had been forced out on the
right side of her head. He found a pistol, the handle of which was
broke, and covered with blood and brains(here the prisoner fainted
away.) It was produced in court.

Elizabeth Carter, servant of the prisoner, had lived with him three
weeks on the day of the murder: he appeared always sensible, but
frequently said he would murder her. The prisoner, in his defence,
only said, that he did not know what he did; his mind was very much
distressed by her aggravating temper.

Mr. Serjeant Best, for the defence, called one witness of the name
of Brown. He stated, that the week before the murder, he was with
Stilwell in his garden. He did not then seem to know what he was
about: he cut down his French beans, and pruned away all his rose
trees. Brown asked him to go and have a pint of porter with him; but
Stilwell said, he would not drink, and he never wished to go into
his own house again, for they all made him miserable.

Mr. Justice Heath said, the only question for the jury was, whether
they could possibly infer insanity; for that was the defence
insinuated by the last witness. It appeared to him, that the
prisoner had worked himself up to a frenzy of passion, so as not to
know what he was about; but that was not insanity. Men must restrain
the turbulence of their passions, or answer the consequences. It
seemed that the galling yoke which had wrought him to the commission
of this desperate deed, was the unhappiness of domestic
circumstances; but that was not insanity. Insanity was a bodily
disease, and did not originate in ill temper and passion. If,
therefore, they found that the fact arose from a criminal indulgence
of the passions, they must find him guilty. The jury, without any
hesitation, returned a verdict of guilty.

The greater part of the trial the prisoner was perfectly calm; but
just as the verdict was given, he became dreadfully agitated, and
could scarcely be supported. The learned judge, observing that the
prisoner was not in a condition to profit by admonition from his
agitation, immediately passed sentence.

At nine o'clock he came on the scaffold, preceded by the under-
sheriff and the gaoler. As soon as he came up, and saw the fatal
beam, he fell on his knees in a state of the utmost agony. The
executioner immediately proceeded to do his duty, in affixing the
halter round his neck. On being addressed by Mr. Winkworth, the
chaplain, he seemed to resume his fortitude, and prayed for near a
quarter of an hour. At the departure of the clergyman, the cap was
pulled over his eyes; when he fervently exclaimed, "Lord be merciful
to me, a sinner;" which he continued repeating till the fall of the
drop put an end to his existence. He had previously taken the
sacrament in the chapel, and conducted himself in the most penitent
manner possible, acknowledging the crime for which he suffered, and
hoping that his death would be a warning to others not to give way
to their passions. After hanging the usual time, his body was cut
down, and delivered to the surgeons for dissection.



JOHN THOMPSON, ALIAS KELLY
A Mean and Cowardly Robber, Executed at Newgate,
October 6. 1803, for Robbing and Ill-Treating a Poor
Defenceless Old Woman

This offender, who was a person of a most ferocious appearance, aged
forty-two, was indicted at the Old Bailey, July 6, before Mr.
Justice Lawrence, for assaulting Mary Hurst, widow, whose very
appearance was enough to excite commiseration; and robbing her of a
wicker basket, containing a set of knitting-needles, books, ballads,
cotton laces, pin-cushions, &c. by the sale of which she gained her
livelihood.

The object of this man's brutal behaviour, was a poor miserable
woman, upwards of eighty years of age, palsied in every part of her
frame, and unable to move a step without assistance. Her story, part
of which delicacy obliges us to conceal, was as follows: "On the
27th of May, at eleven o'clock at night, I was going to Hertford. I
came from Turnham-green, was short of money, and wanted to follow
the waggon for company. There was a man up against the pales, by a
bush, of a dark complexion, dressed in a jacket, who knocked me down
with his fist, and beat me as long as he could"(the prisoner now
took great liberties.) "I cried murder! he threatened to pull my
tongue out if I cried out any more. He struck me everywhereMy head
was as big as a peck, and he stamped upon my stomach. He then ran
away with my basket, and did not leave me a halfpenny worth to sell.
No creature came near me. I crawled upon my hands and knees till I
met a watchman, who guided me to an ale-house."

Richard Gibbs, the watchman, corroborated the poor old woman's
story. He declared she was in a very piteous condition: the blood
ran out of her mouth; her eyes very much swelled; her hands bloody
all over: in short, she was quite frightful for anyone to see.

Matthew Wells, the ostler, at the Chaise and Horses, at Hammersmith,
swore, that between twelve and one o'clock the prisoner was at the
Chaise and Horses; no one was with him: he staid about half an hour,
and he had the basket at that time, which stood upon the table
before him. After he was gone, about an hour and a half, the
watchman brought in the old woman; and in consequence of what they
told him, the witness, about a quarter before three o'clock in the
morning, rode with Mr. Rutter, a butcher, in Oxendon-street, in
pursuit of the man.

The witness then went back into Piccadilly, and met the prisoner
(with a basket) three doors on the other side of Air-street. It
rained very hard, and the witness having accosted him, asked if he
was not wet. He said only a little wet at his back. Witness then
remarked, he had not come far; but the prisoner confessed he had
come from Brentford. The witness then invited him to take some purl
with him; and when they had got about one hundred and twenty yards,
Wells seized him by the collar, and told him he was his prisoner.
The watchman was in his box, and they took him to Wine-street watch-
house, where the witness took the basket from him, and delivered it
to the constable of the night.

Charles Luppino, constable, said, that he asked the prisoner when
brought to the watch-house his name, and he told him it was John
Kelly, but the next morning, at the office, he said his name was
John Thompson, and that John Kelly was the man who had beat the
woman. This witness produced the basket, which was sworn to by the
prosecutrix. He also said, that the prisoner was dressed in a blue
jacket when brought to the watch house; and that the next morning,
when the old woman saw him, she exclaimed, "that is the villain."

The prisoner in his defence said, that a sailor in Piccadilly gave
him the basket to hold, while he did a little job for himself. He
denied ever being at the Chaise and Horses.

The prisoner's guilt, having been fully established, the jury,
without any hesitation, returned a verdict of guilty. His
condemnation appeared to give universal satisfaction. This hardened
wretch was ordered for execution on Wednesday, Sept. 21, 1803; but,
having been respited for fourteen days, he did not suffer till
Thursday, October the 6th. He was brought out of Newgate on the
platform in the Old Bailey, a few minutes after eight o'clock, and,
after spending a short time in fervent prayer, he was then launched
into eternity.



MARY PARNELL
Executed at Newgate, July 12, 1804, for Forgery

THE mischief attending forgery is still greater in the hands of a
female of address, than of the greatest adept of the other sex;
because in putting off the counterfeit, she is less suspected. When
we came to the case of Anne Hurle, we did not, indeed, expect so
soon to bring forward another woman guilty, even in a greater
degree, of the same mischievous offence. Ann Hurle made her attempt
upon a weak individual; but Mary Parnell took the public at large to
impose upon, to the ruin of many a poor family.

Mary Parnell was, according to her own account, an unfortunate girl,
aged twenty-three, who was indicted at the Old Bailey, July 12,
1804, for feloniously forging, on the 9th of the preceding March, a
certain Bank of England note, value 5l., with intent to defraud the
Governors and Company of the Bank of England. There were several
other indictments of a similar nature.

Charles Baddeley, a shoe maker, in the Strand, swore, that the
prisoner came to his shop, March 9, and purchased two pair of shoes:
they came to twelve shillings and six-pence: the prisoner tendered
him a 5l. note. Having looked at it, and compared it with another,
he did not think it was a good one, and asked her where she had
taken it. She said she could not tell. She took another bank-note
out of her pocket, which appeared a good one. This, however, he
returned, and said he would keep the first that she tendered, and
take it to Bow street, or the Bank, on Monday morning, desiring her
to come on the Monday morning, when she should either have the note
or the change. The prisoner never called on the appointed day. This
witness was particular in identifying the person of the prisoner: as
she held her pocket-book in her hand, he observed, that one of her
fingers was cut across: it was an old sore.

William Wilmot, foreman to Mr. Baggett, shoe-maker, Cranbourne-
alley, Leicester-fields, said, that the prisoner came to his
master's shop, March 9, about eleven o'clock in the evening, and
asked for two pair of shoes, one pair of double soles, and one pair
of single; the price was eleven shillings and six-pence. She
tendered a 5l. Bank of England note: it had no name whatever on it:
it was quite new. She drew it from a little red pocket-book: she
seemed to be confused while doing this, and appeared to have more
notes in the pocket book. The witness had not change enough in the
till, and his master was not at home; he went, therefore, to Mr.
Perkins, linen draper, next door to Mr. Baggett's, and procured
change for the note. On his return, his master came in: he gave the
change to him, and Mr. Baggett gave it to the prisoner, who took it
and the shoes. William Perkins, linen-draper, corroborated the
testimony of this last witness; and William Smith, a Bow street
patrol, said, he found a pair of shoes in the prisoner's lodgings,
and showed them to Wilmot, who thought they were the shoes he sold
to the prisoner: they were double soles, and of the same size and
description.

Ann Levermore, who keeps the Pewter Platter, St. John-street, West
Smithfield, said, that the young woman at the bar, came to her house
some day between the 19th and 24th of March, for a quart of brandy,
the price six shillings: she said she had nothing smaller than a 5l.
note, which she took out of her pocket-book. The witness went
upstairs for change, and a friend of hers, Elizabeth Walter, who was
sitting in the bar, saw her very much agitated. The witness gave her
the change, and she asked the price of the bottle, which was three
pence. She told her to take sixpence for it. The witness gave the
note to Mr. Harris, the collector of Mr. Hanbury the brewer. She
knew the note by the paleness of the Britannia, and the figures, 4
and 8, being larger than the others. Elizabeth Walter confirmed the
above. She suspected the note was a bad one, from the agitation of
the prisoner; and when she was going away with the brandy, she
desired her friend to send her little girl out, to watch where she
went to.

James Cook, an apothecary, residing in Bridge Road, Surrey, said,
that the prisoner at the bar came to his shop in the middle of
April, to purchase a bottle of Gowland's Lotion. She offered a 5l.
note, and not having change, he directed his boy to get change for
the noteShe seemed anxious for the boy's return, and wished to get
out, to see where he was gone. She was afraid, she said, the boy had
lost the note. He was only gone about five or ten minutes. On his
return, he gave her the remainder of the change. She had on a gown,
with a white ground, and a chocolate spot. Robert Godyere, the boy,
(twelve years old,) said, he went to the next door, as ordered by
his master, to get change; but the shop being shut up, he went to
Mr. Gower, who keeps the Red Lion, Globe-place, who gave it to him.
William Gower confirmed the boy's testimony, and identified the
note.

John Willats, a cutler, in the Poultry, said, the prisoner came to
him on the 3d of May, and purchased a dozen knives and forks, which
came to thirty-three shillings. She offered a 5l. note in payment,
and gave her address, Ann Brown, No 57, Wood street, which name and
address he wrote on the note. Stephen Walker, who lived two years at
No. 37, Wood street, Cheapside, said, that no person of the name of
Brown, nor the prisoner at the bar, ever resided in the house since
he lived there.

The inspector of bank-notes of the Bank of England, and the engraver
to the Bank, proved Mr. Baddeley's note, Mr Bagget's note, Mrs.
Levermore's, Mr. Cook's and Mr. Willats's forgeries:they were
signed also with names, which did not exist in the Bank as cashiers.

Edward Crocker, one of the Bow-street patrols, who searched the
prisoner's lodgings, in company with Mr. Bliss, found a gown, (which
the prisoner acknowledged to be hers,) and a bottle of lotion. Mr.
Cook said, that the bottle was like that which he sold, and the gown
like that which the woman had on that purchased it. The prisoner, in
her defence, said, she was a very remarkable person, and it was very
odd they could not give a better description of her. She had a
particular cut on her hand, as well as on her finger, and she had
but one eye, which had not been observed by any of the witnesses. As
for the Gowland's Lotion, a gentleman, she said, made her a present
of it, with a shawl. She had no witnesses in her behalf, and the
jury found her guilty. She was executed as above-mentioned.



ELIZABETH LARGHAN
Executed at Chelmsford, March 21, 1804, for the
Murder of her Female Infant Child

THIs wretched woman was tried on the 8th of March, 1804, before Mr.
Baron Hotham, at the Chelmsford As sizes; she was the wife of James
Larghan, a private in the 18th light dragoons. This was not the
usual case of the murder of a bastard child. The facts were very
few, and very conclusive; they were proved by the woman who kept the
Sawyer's-Arms public-house at Colchester, and her servants. James
Philbrick, the surgeon, stated, that he was called in on the 13th of
July last; he was shown the child, which, from appearances, he
undertook to say, had been born alive. A string was tied round the
neck, by which the vessel of the head was very turgid, and the eyes
much blood-shot. The ligature had also caused a livid mark all round
the neck. The bag was very much blooded, which would not have been
the case if the child had been dead-born. She then told him, that
her husband had often upbraided her with his being reproached by his
comrades, that she was with child before he married her, and that
the child of which she was pregnant, was none of his; and that, in
order to keep the secret of her delivery from her husband, she had
tied the string round the infant's neck to prevent its crying.

Mr. Baron Hotham addressed the jury with his usual humanity on
behalf of the accused, and observed, that this this was not the case
which usually occurred, of the death of a bastard child: but it was
one in which the indictment charged the prisoner with the murder of
her child, without those motives which sometimes leads to the
commission of that crime. He told them, that before they found a
verdict of guilty against the prisoner, they must be convinced in
their own minds that the child was born alive, and that it perished
by the wilful act of the prisoner; for if it was born dead, or came
by its death accidentally, though the prisoner was not aware of its
death, and applied the string meaning to destroy it, yet if she did
not in fact perpetrate that intention, they must acquit her. The
jury deliberated about half an hour, and then returned a verdict of
Guilty.

The learned judge, in a short but feeling address, passed the
sentence of the law upon the prisoner, that she should be hanged on
Saturday morning next (March 21st,) and afterwards her body to be
dissected and anatomized. The prisoner was a very decent looking
woman apparently about thirty years of age. During her trial she was
much agitated, and after the verdict seemed nearly insensible: at
the place of execution she behaved with penitence and great
resignation.



GEORGE KENNEDY, MARTIN MOODY, AND RICHARD BARTON
Soldiers of the Foot Guards Convicted of a Robbery,
Attended with Circumstances of Cruelty

These men, to the disgrace of the character of the soldier, were
indicted for assaulting and dangerously wounding, on the 14th of
November, 1804, on the King's highway, between Sandwich and Deal,
George John Piercy Leith, and feloniously robbing him of a quantity
of bank notes, a silver watch, and some money.

Mr. Leith deposed, that he lived at Walmer, and on the 14th of
November he had been at Sandwich-market: in the evening he was
returning home to his house, which was about six miles from
Sandwich. It was a fine evening, and the moon shone very bright.
When he came to Shouldham-Downs, where the road turns off towards
Fowlney chalk-pit, he observed three soldiers walking before him;
one was in a red jacket faced with blue, the uniform of the guards;
and the other two had foraging dresses. When he came up with them he
received a violent blow on the left cheek, which knocked out one of
his teeth, and swelled his eye so as to blind him. At the same
instant, the man who gave the blow called out to the other in red,
"Comrade, stop him." His horse started out of the road, and went a
little way over the ploughed ground, but the bridle was seized by
the man in a round frock. One of them said, "Your money;" another
said, "Yes, and soon." Whether he received another blow at this
instant he could not tell, or whether he was pulled off; but, he
fell from his horse, which ran away. They left him for a moment as
he lay upon the ground; but, seeing them approach him again, he put
his hand in his pocket, and gave them the bag containing the notes
and money. One of them, with great dexterity, put his finger into
his fob, and hooked out his watch, which he wore without a chain.
They then all ran away. The prosecutor got up, and saw the moon,
shining very bright on the turnpike-road: he soon after met a James
Wyburn, and, with his assistance, got home. He would not swear to
the persons of any of the prisoners, but he thought that Barton was
the man in red, and Kennedy the one who stood at the head of his
horse. He had that day at Sandwich received sixteen five-guinea and
sixteen one-guinea notes.

Serjeant John Rutter, of the third battalion of the first regiment
of guards, deposed, that Barton and Moody belonged to the same
company as himself, and Kennedy to the same regiment. On the
Thursday, the fifteenth of November, as the witness was visiting the
quarters of the married men who lived out of the Barracks, he saw
Moody come into a public-house in Deal. Moody asked another soldier
if he would drink, and offered to treat him with half-a-pint of gin
if he would go out with him. The serjeant said, he had seen the
hand-bills that morning, which gave an account of the robbery, and
he knew that Moody had no money the day before, because the witness
had lent him a shilling. Finding that he was apparently flush of
money, it raised his suspicion: he, however, said nothing, but went
home to the Barracks. Barton had been sent to the guard-house that
evening, for coming drunk to the parade; and, about eight o'clock,
Moody came in, and asked, "If all was well?" The witness supposed he
meant to ask, whether he was home in time, and answered, "Yes." He
then enquired why Barton was in custody, and was told, for being
drunk at parade. He next asked the witness, if he had any objection
to let a comrade sing a song, as they were undressing; the serjeant
replied, that as it was not nine he had no objection to the song. He
watched Moody as he was undressing, and observed him to take the
jacket from under the head of his bed-fellow, who was asleep, and
substitute his own, putting Austin's, the other man's, under his own
head. The witness was obliged then to leave them to attend the roll-
call of non-commissioned officers. He then concerted with Serjeant
Young, and it was agreed that the latter should come into Moody's
room, and say, that he had orders to search all men in liquor. In
consequence of this plan, Serjeant Young came in shortly after, and
searched Moody's bed: he took his jacket from under Austin's head,
and between the cloth and the lining they found the watch, and three
one-guinea notes, answering the description in the hand-bill.

Serjeant Aylesbury deposed, that Barton was committed to custody
that day for being drunk at parade. Moody came in that day about
four, and he observed that he had some private talk along with
Barton. At about a quarter before nine, the witness received orders
to search Barton, which he did, and between the lining and cloth of
his jacket-sleeves, he found several bank-notes, all of which
corresponded in number and value with those described in the hand-
bills, advertising the robbery. He delivered them all over to
Serjeant-major Colquhoun. The serjeant-major was called, who
corroborated the testimony of the last witness, and deposed, that he
delivered them over to the constable in the presence of the
magistrate.

Thomas Simmons, a victualler at Walmer, deposed, that the morning
after the three prisoners were taken into custody, he went to the
guard-room about half-past seven, to carry the serjeants on guard
some beer. Moody complained that he was uncomfortable, and begged
the serjeant to take his hand-cuffs off for a little while, that he
might tighten himself up. The serjeant said he could not do that,
but if he would sit upon the table he would button his gaiters and
jacket for him. He did so; and as he was buttoning his jacket about
the breast, he said, "Moody, you have no collar on." Moody replied,
"Never mind, we shall soon have a hempen collar that will fit us
all." Barton said, "If you have one, I shall have one too, for I
stopped his horse," Kennedy joined, and said, "But it was I who
demanded his money; and as he did not give it, I brought him down
with a topper of my bludgeon: I thought the horse had stamped upon
his head when he was down." [Note: This confession somewhat savours
of that of the three wicked fellow crafts in Masonic history,
Jubela, Jabels, and Jubelum; who murdered their grand master Hiram
Abiff, the widow's son, because he would not disclose the master
mason's sign and word before they had become entitled to the sublime
parts of that most ancient order.] They then said, that after he was
down, they robbed him of a handful of notes, his watch, a half-
guinea, and a crown-piece. Barton said to Kennedy, "I am sorry you
beat him: when we went out I ordered you to rob but not to murder."
They then described what they had severally done after the robbery.
They had all made the best of their way to the Barracks, passing.
Deal-castle, and they buried the notes that night under a large
stone between the Castle and the Beach. Moody and Barton said, that
they went home to bed. Kennedy said he went to the Canteen, where he
got a roll, a herring, and a pint of beer to refresh himself.

Serjeants Aylesbury and Young both corroborated this account of the
last witness; and said the prisoners described what they had done in
a kind of bravado manner, William Wyburn, the constable, produced
the notes and watch, which was sworn to by Mr. Leith; and he added,
that he had also lost half-a-guinea and a crown-piece, as stated by
the prisoners, although they were not stated in the indictment.

Mr. Hodgson, a partner in the Sandwich-bank, examined the notes, and
comparing them with his book, deposed, that they were all paid by
him to Mr. Leith, at Sandwich, on the day of the robbery. The jury
found all the prisoners guilty. Barton, who was a very handsome man,
pleaded much, with the judge for his life: and from it having
appeared that he was the least cruel of the three he received a
respite, and was sent to serve his country the remainder of his life
in some distant settlement, but Kennedy and Moody were executed.



SAMUEL WILD MITCHELL
Executed before Newgate, January 14, 1805, for the
Murder of his Infant Daughter

IN pity to the memory of this wretched old man, we are inclined to
hope that a sudden fit of frenzy alone hurried him to the commission
of this most unnatural, horrid, and cruel murder. Samuel Mitchel was
a weaver; and the very day before he had murdered his daughter, a
separation had taken place between him and his wife, and the child,
Sally, went that night to the lodgings which her mother had taken
for herself. On the next morning the little innocent re turned, and
was employed in quilling (i.e. putting silk on a shuttle for her
father to weave with,) when the inhuman parent took a razor, and cut
the child's throat from one ear to the other: the wound was four
inches in length, and two inches in depth. He then left the house,
confessed his guilt to an acquaintance, and then wandered about the
streets till evening, when he found his way to his son-in-law's
house, and was there apprehended. The officers went to his room,
where the razor was found open, and covered with blood, within four
or five feet of the unfortunate deceased: and, at the time the child
was found, the blood was actually warm. After this had taken place,
and the coroner had done what his duty required him to do, the
prisoner was taken before a magistrate; and, after every merciful
warning from the magistrate, he voluntarily chose to depose, and did
confess the whole of this horrid transaction.

His trial came on at the Sessions-House, in the Old Bailey, Jan. 12,
1805, before Sir Archibald Macdonald, Knight, Lord Chief Baron of
his Majesty's Court of Exchequer. The appearance of the prisoner,
when brought to the bar, was squalid and wretched in the extreme:
his hair was grey, and his head was covered with an old miserable
night-cap.

William Godby deposed, that he had been married to the daughter of
the prisoner for more than eight years; that the prisoner lived, on
the 18th of December, 1804, in Wheeler-street, almost opposite
Flower-de-luce court, Spitalfields, in the parish of Christ-church;
that the prisoner was a married man; that he lodged in the top room
of the house; his wife, and his child Sally, the deceased, had lived
with him, but he and his wife had been separated the day before this
horrid transaction. The prisoner at the bar was a weaver, and Sally,
the deceased, used to be employed in winding quills for her father.
He saw the prisoner at nine o'clock in the morning of this
transaction, and did not see him again on that day, till about ten
o'clock at night: he saw the prisoner at the house where he, the
witness, lodged, and he told him he should not come into his room.
About half-past twelve on the same day, after he had been to the
warehouse with his work, he went up to see him; and, when he came
into his room, he saw the child, Sally, lying in her blood, but did
not notice the wound, he was so alarmed: he went down to the room
under the prisoner's, and told Mrs. Nicholls, who lived in that
room; he then went away: he had some of his master's property about
him, and that he carried home: he returned a second time, and went
into the room again, and saw Mr. Kennedy, the officer, there.

Mrs. Nicholls said, that she lived in the room immediately under the
prisoner; that she was at home on the 18th of December, and said
that the prisoner's wife had been with him that morning; that she
had a light of her (to light his fire) before eleven o'clock; and
that she heard Sally, the deceased, go upstairs, on her return from
Spitalfields' charity-school, about twelve o'clock; she knew it was
the little girl by the step, and that when she got into her father's
room, she heard the quill wheel go, and she heard the prisoner's
loom make a noise, which it usually did when he was weaving; shortly
after she heard a woman go downstairs, and after that she heard a
man's foot, but did not see either of them; that the prisoner had
previously called out to her, a little before twelve, to know what
o'clock it was; and that Godby, the former witness, came to her in
about half an hour after she heard the quill wheel go, and the noise
of the prisoner's loom when he was weaving; that she went up with
him, and , saw Sally, the deceased, lying in her gore of blood; that
she saw nothing of the wound, was afraid of going into the room, and
called out to the landlord, "murder!" up on which he came up.

William Byron deposed, that he was on the 18th of December, the
landlord of the house, No. 24, Wheeler street, but had since
removed, and that the prisoner, at that time, lodged in the garret.
That on the alarm of murder, he went upstairs, and took the child by
the hand; then putting his feet across the body, he lifted her up by
the waist, when her head fell back, and the gash appeared to him; he
then gave the alarm, that her throat was cut, and desired them to go
for a surgeon, and for her father, who he supposed was at the Elder-
tree public-house, just by: he then looked round the room, to see he
could find any instrument, but could not. He observed the quill-
wheel was bloody, and the track of blood about the room; her cap was
bloody, lying in the room, and she was all over blood, and so was
he.

Edward Dellafour, a journeyman broad-silk weaver, saw the prisoner
on the 18th, between the hours of twelve and one, at his apartments,
No 26, Skinner-street, Shoreditch. He was at work, and the prisoner
knocked at his door, upon which he let him in. The prisoner asked
him to go down stairs with him, as he had something particular to
communicate. He refused to leave his work, unless he would tell him
his business; the prisoner then said, something had happened that
day, which never had happened before, and that he should go to
Newgate. Seeing him in that violent perturbation of mind, he
reluctantly left his work; the prisoner having gone down stairs;
and, anxious to know the cause of it, he followed, and found him at
the street-door; they went about 50 yards from the witness's door;
the prisoner then, with a countenance full of grief, turned round to
him and said, "Ned, I shall die!" The witness asked him what had
happened, or what was the matter with him; the prisoner said
directly to him, "I have killed my Sally." The witness asked him if
the child was dead; the prisoner said, "Yes, I have cut her head
half off." It was a very severe morning, and the prisoner was
shivering with cold; the prisoner desired the witness to go with him
into a public-house, that he might warm himself, and have something
to drink; they went into the first public-house they came to, which
was the Cock and Magpie, in Worship-street, and had a pot of beer;
the prisoner called for it, and a pipe of tobacco. There were three
men and a woman there, entire strangers to the witness. The prisoner
then said to the witness in the tap room, "Sit down, I have
something to say to you." Seeing the strangers in the room, the
witness thought it imprudent to speak before them, and desired the
prisoner not to say it there; in about a quarter of an hour they
went out. The witness asked the prisoner where he was going, and
what he meant to do with himself. He said he was going to Shadwell
to see two friends of his who were rope-makers, who would, when he
was in prison, allow him a shilling or two; he then asked when the
sessions would beginthe witness told him; he said, he would give
himself up to justice, and suffer, with this remark, "it would make
no odds to him if they cut him in a thousand pieces, for that when
he went hundreds would at the same minute." The witness told him he
should not have killed his child. The prisoner looked him in the
face, and said, "I know thatdo not you retort on me now it is
done." The witness accompanied him as far as Whitechapel church,
then shook him by the hand, and saw him no more till he saw him at
the office; the witness said, the magistrate sent for him, and he
gave the same account at that time as he now gave. When in the
public-house with him, he observed a small quantity of blood on one
of his hands.

Thomas Grice, a watchman of Bethnal-green, said that two men came to
their watch-house, and gave information that the prisoner was in
Hare-street, at his daughter's, and there the witness apprehended
him, and took him to Bethnal-green watch-house, and then went and
delivered him up to the officer of the Spitalfields watch house; as
soon as he saw the prisoner, the prisoner said, he was the man that
was guilty of the murder, and resigned himself up.

James Kennedy, an officer of Worship-street, received information of
the murder about one o'clock in the afternoon, and went with Bishop
into the prisoner's room, and there saw the deceased lying with her
head towards the door, with no cap on, and her throat cut quite
through the windpipe; she had done bleeding when the witness saw
her, but the blood lying on the floor was warm. On the block of the
quill-wheel there was a quantity of blood, and a track of blood from
the wheel to where the body lay. Near the quill-wheel there was a
low stool, and at the side of it he found a razor open. It was
covered with fresh blood at that time. [This he produced in court,
and a cap of the deceased, stained with blood, that had fallen from
her head.] He, seeing there was no prospect of restoring life, with
the assistance of Bishop, put the people out of the room. About
twelve at night they received information that he was in
Spitalfields watch-house. Armstrong and he went there, to satisfy
themselves, and saw the prisoner sitting by the watch-house fire. He
turned his head round, and saw the witness. He said, "Kennedy, I
have given you much trouble today in searching after me." Armstrong
said to him, "What do you mean by that? Is your name Mitchell?" He
said it was. Armstrong again asked him, did he know he was charged
with murdering his own daughter; and said, he had found a cap and a
razor in his room. The prisoner then answered, with that razor he
had often shaved himself, and with that razor he committed the
horrid deed.

Joseph Moser, Esq. the magistrate of Worship-street office, stated,
that the prisoner was brought before him to be examined on
Wednesday, the 19th of December: he took down the whole confession
of the prisoner in writing, telling him the consequences in every
point of view, and the use that would be made of it after he had
signed it: he repeated it over to him several times, said it was
true what he had signed, and signed it in the magistrate's presence.
The prisoner's examination, being now read in court, was as follows:

"Public-Office, Worship Street.
	"The voluntary confession of Samuel Mitchell, weaver, for the
wilful murder of his child, aged nine years, taken by Joseph Moser,
Esq. December 19, 1804.
	"I, Samuel Wild Mitchell, weaver, late of the parish of Christ-
church, Middlesex, now standing at the bar of the Public office,
Worship-street, being fully apprised of the nature of my situation by
the magistrate, and through him made perfectly sensible of the nature
of this acknowledgment, do make this free and unbiased confession,
which is taken by my own desire:That I had a daughter named Sally,
and my wife had a daughter named Elizabeth, who at one time did live
with me, but whom I afterwards took to my apartment, where I
instructed her in the art of weaving, and we lived all together; this
said daughter of my wife's caused some uneasiness, as I thought: and
I thought my wife was more indulgent to her faults, and favoured her
more than she ought, which was the reason of our separation on the
17th of December last; my wife also took with her Sarah Mitchell,
whom I loved with the most ardent affection, which vexed me a great
deal, as I saw there would be a continual dispute. I could not bear
the little girl coming to see me, as coming on a visit. I resolved
that neither my wife nor me should possess her. I seized the moment
of the mother going away: the child was sitting by the fire winding
quills. I took the razor from the drawer; my affection made me almost
lay it down again; but my resolution overcame that. I turned round,
and cut her throat. I was too resolute to make a faint attempt; the
child was dead in a moment; she neither made noise nor resistance.
When I had done the deed, the child fell. , As I went out, I saw her
blood; then I ran downstairs. After this act was done to my child,
Sarah Mitchell, I went to a man named Bell, where I had lived, and
left word for him to run and secure my master's work; then I went to
Mr. Delafour, and my friends at Wapping
	This acknowledgment is free, and made by my own desire.
	Signed SAMUEL WILD MITCHELL.
	Dec. 19, 1804. 
	JOSEPH MOSER."

The prisoner having been now called on for his defence the wretched
man addressed the court and jury in a manner above his rank or
appearance. His defence was nearly as follows:

"My Lord, and Gentlemen of the Jury,
	"I stand in this place to-day, an awful spectacle of guilt and
disgrace; but I will endeavour to be as collected in my reason as
possible, though at certain times and seasons I am particularly
under heavy pressure of mind, which my wife well knows, and was well
aware of; that I have committed the horrid deed laid to my charge I
have no wish to deny, any more than I have to avoid the dreadful
punishment that awaits my guilt; to that I am resigned; nor was it
my wish from the unfortunate moment of my crime to evade justice;
but that I committed the deed maliciously against my poor child, who
was the victim of my fatal passion, I solemnly deny. Malice I had
none. I declare in the presence of God, before whom I stand and make
this declaration, and before whose awful tribunal I must shortly
appear, instead of bearing to her malice, I loved her most tenderly.
I had kind love to the child, and wished her not to be from me, and
to that love, strange, and perverse as it may be seem, is owing
chiefly the sad cause that brings me here this day. I am married to
a second wife, by whom this child was an only daughter: we had long
known each other before our marriage, when I was in better days, and
when she and I were the wife and husband of others. I thought I
could be happy with her; but I found her temper incompatible with my
happiness or her own. I found the friends and the family with which
she was connected thought her marriage to me degrading to her.
Disputes and controversy, for ten years, frequently took place
between us; in which, unhappily, both were in fault, too much so;
those disputes were often carried to a pitch of fury (and may this
sad spectacle that I now stand be a warning to others, that if they
meet with double families to have more love to their duty); and what
tended still more to exasperate me and aggravate our dissensions
was, that those she called her friends always sided with her in
everything, whether right or wrong; and many of them, I am sorry to
say, who were strenuous professors of religious principles, were
always more ready to lend a hand to the creating of mischief, than
to the promotion of charity and peace:may the Lord forgive them and
take me to himself. Our disputes at last ended in a mutual agreement
to separate, and the child I so tenderly loved was to go with her
mother: this my unhappy temper and feeling could not bear, which led
me to the fatal resolution that neither she nor I should have the
child, by committing the horrid deed, by putting an end to her life
in the manner I have done! I pray God Almighty to forgive me, and to
direct you in your decision upon me this day; and though here I
stand an object of sin and misery, yet I hope my unhappy fate will
prove an awful example to those who form second marriages, with
children on both sides, against giving way to intemperate disputes,
that may lead them, as they have done me, to acts of desperation and
vengeance, beyond the control of reason or reflection. If my wife
was present, she could vouch and prove that it was impossible I
could ever have deliberately executed such an act. She could testify
that my disposition was not cruel; and that when I have been the
most resolute to good purposes, unfortunately, under agitations of
mind, or provocations of temper, such has been my weakness, I am not
always the same man; and, under such circumstances, I have very
frequently been led into excesses of frenzy, which, in cool moments,
have astonished me. Once in particular, urged by distress, when I
had no work, I applied for relief at my parish work-house. I had
come too late in the day, when, wound up by disappointment to
madness, I broke as many windows as cost the parish four pounds for
the repair; and yet the parish-officers, though they might have
punished me, did not, knowing that my act was the result of a mind
deranged.May the Lord forgive me, and take me to himself! I must
die a spectacle of sin and horror!"

The learned judge observed to the jury, "That the fact of a person's
being overcome by any sudden paroxysm of passion to commit a deed of
so flagitious a nature operated as no justification of the crime. If
God afflicted any man with a temporary or occasional want of reason,
that was a different question. There, from the mere occasional
suspension of the reasoning faculties, the crime might have been
committed; but such could by no means be compared to the case where
the dereliction of the reasoning faculties had been occasioned,
either by the contemplation of a circumstance, by which alone the
mind was affected, or by which, after its completion, the mind could
be supposed capable of being agitated. Here a strange mixture of
affection was discernible amidst the cruelty which had prompted the
perpetration of the deed; but he could see nothing in the case to
induce him to point out to the jury any distinction between this
case and the various other cases of a similar kind which presented
themselves."

After the Lord Chief Baron had made his remarks, the prisoner
requested permission to speak again, which was granted immediately
by the court. "There is one single point I have to say, which my
wife could attest, if she was here, as she was well acquainted with
my misery, as well as my mother's, who would frequently go into the
same way: she was a very sensible woman; she would frequently ask me
to cut her hair, for, unless her hair was kept cut in a very
particular close manner, her weakness was upon her. So it has been
with me."

The jury having found him guilty, the prisoner was asked, what he
had to say for himself, why sentence of death should not be passed
according to law. The prisoner distinctly replied, "I have nothing
to say." The awful sentence, that he was to be hanged the succeeding
Monday, and his body afterwards dissected and anatomized, was
immediately pronounced by the Recorder; which the prisoner heard
without any visible emotion. The court was crowded in every part,
and particularly with ladies; and not only the women, but even the
jury, the counsel, and nearly all present, were melted into tears.
During the whole trial the prisoner appeared calm, but not
insensible. He was very attentive to the evidence, and declined
asking any questions of the witnesses. He appeared frequently to
utter a low ejaculation.

On the morning after his trial, this unhappy man expressed a desire
to see his wife, that they might exchange mutual forgiveness. The
day following (Sunday), she came to visit him in Newgate, but so
ill, that she was obliged to be brought in a hackney-coach,
supported between two friends. As soon as the distressing interview
was over, he applied himself devoutly to prayer, in which he
continued nearly the whole of the day. On that day he was extremely
solicitous to obtain Dr. Ford's promise to publish to the world that
he died in the faith of the Church of England; and he was the more
anxious it should be done, as it had been generally understood that
he belonged to the sect denominated Methodists. At half past six
o'clock, Mitchell's cell was unlocked, and the Ordinary attended him
to the chapel to prayers; which being concluded, he returned to the
press-yard, and there walked for some time, holding two friends by
the arms; meanwhile his mind was occupied with his unhappy
situation: he begged of all around him to pray with him. He first
put up a prayer to Heaven for his own soul; next invoked a blessing
on his wife, his two daughters by a former marriage, his son and
daughter-in law, in the most pathetic manner. The unhappy man
blessed the memory of his murdered child, and trusted the sacrifice
he was about to make would, in some degree, expiate his crime in
Heaven, which he did not despair to see. Then, in language which
would have done credit to the pulpit or the bar, he besought God to
grant His Majesty health and long life; to endue his ministers with
wisdom, that it might be applied to the happiness and prosperity of
his country, which, notwithstanding the convulsions by which it was
surrounded, he prayed might endure under its present form of
government till time shall be no more. He then expressed his
gratitude to the magistrates, and to Mr. Newman, the keeper of the
prison, for his humane consideration of him. He expressed himself
most gratefully to Dr. Ford, for the consolation he had afforded him
by his admonition and counsel, and repeatedly acknowledged, that he
felt more comfort in the prospect of death, than he should in life,
were a reprieve offered him. His last petition was to the Sheriffs,
to request that, after the surgeons had practised upon his body, his
mangled remains might be given to his daughter, for burial; which
request the Sheriffs promised should be complied with.

On Monday morning, January the 14th, at a very early hour, every
avenue leading to the Old Bailey was crowded by persons of various
descriptions, all eager and anxious to witness the last moments of
this unhappy man; indeed a greater crowd was seldom seen on any
similar occasion; the houses then erecting in front of Greenharbour-
court, St. Sepulchre's church, the pump, and the various lamp-irons,
were all filled with the anxious multitude. About five minutes past
eight o'clock the wretched delinquent came out of Newgate. His
demeanour was perfectly calm, and he appeared most completely
resigned to his fate. He was attended by the ordinary, who stood
before him until the drop fell.

Mitchell seemed to attend with much earnestness and fervour to the
admonitions of the clergyman, and he was seen to clasp his hands
together the instant the rope was fixed. He was not allowed to
remain long on the scaffold, as he was tied up almost on the instant
after he came up. After the drop fell, he exhibited several times
the appearance of feeling great pain, as he swung round twice, which
was occasioned by the violence of the convulsive struggles he
sustained. His body was, after hanging the usual time, cut down, and
taken to St. Bartholomew's Hospital for dissection.



JOHN ROGER TURNER
Executed at the Old Bailey, May 5, 1805, for Forgery

This malefactor had been clerk to Messrs. Stonard and Ryland, Corn-
factors in Mark-lane, for several years, who were in the habit of
purchasing stock for their country correspondents. By this means he
knew that Mr. Waltham had 10,000l. stock in the 3 per cent. reduced.
He informed a Mr. H. Engell, that he wanted to sell out 7000l.
stock, requesting that Mr. Engell would recommend him a broker, the
one that sold for him having run away. He was accordingly
recommended to Mr. John Sherrot, a stock-broker, in Ratcliffe
Highway, whom he called on, on the 8th of January, 1805, and gave
him orders to sell out 7000l. stock. Turner was accompanied by
another person, who afterwards proved to be his father-in-law, Mr.
Price, a shoe-maker. Mr. Sherrott said he would have the business
done the next day. They accordingly went to the 3 per Cent. Reduced
Office, and the necessary proceedings for setting out were resorted
to. Turner gave Mr. Sherrott a receipt for the value of the 7000l.
stock, for which he was to receive a cheque. The receipt was in the
usual form, and a blank was left for the attestation of the clerk at
the Bank, after the transfer should be completed. Mr. Sherrott
informed Turner, that before the transfer could be completed, the
clerks must be convinced of his identity. He said, that he knew no
person near the 'Change since his late broker had fled, and he
therefore requested that Mr. Sherrott would satisfy the clerks on
this head. Mr. Sherrott, however, fortunately declined identifying
the man, whom he was a stranger to; when it was agreed that he
should meet Mr. Sherrott at the Bank, the next day, with a friend,
who would identify him. He, however, failed in the appointment; and
Sherrott did not see him till half past four that day, when he came
to his house, where he said that he had been in search of a Mr.
Thomas Rutt, who had purchased stock for him, in order to clear up
any doubts; but that he could not see him till the next day. Mr.
Sherrott expressed great displeasure at the disappointment; for the
stock had rose 2 per cent. and he was obliged to sell the stock at
the price agreed for. Being hurt at the thoughts of paying these two
pounds out of his own pocket, he was a little warm. During this
interview, a Mr. Robinson, corn-chandler, in Ratcliffe Highway, who
knew Mr. Turner, came in, and addressed him by name"How do you do,
Mr. Turner?" Turner pretended that he was mistaken in his person and
name. When Mr. Robinson said, "Pray, don't you live as clerk to
Stonard and Ryland?" Sherrott saw that he was confused; and told
him, "as you said that your name is William Waltham, and it is not,
I think it my duty to take you into custody:" and accordingly he
charged an officer with him.

On Friday, February 22, he was indicted at the Old Bailey, before
Mr. Justice Le Blanc, for forging, uttering, and publishing, as
true, a certain instrument, purporting to be a receipt for the sale
of 7000l. of reduced 3 per cent stock, the property of William
Waltham. During the trial, the above particulars were sworn to, and
the receipt read, viz.

"Reduced 3 per cent. Annuities.
	"Received this 9th day of January, 1805, of Joseph Lightfoot,
the sum of four thousand and seventy-seven pounds ten shillings,
being the consideration for seven thousand pounds stock or share in
the capital or joint stock in the 3 per cent. Reduced Annuities,
consolidated by Act of Parliament, in the 22d of George II. and 25th
of George III, and other subsequent Acts, charged to the sinking
funds, transferable at the Bank of England, by me, this day
transferred to the said Joseph Lightfoot.
	"Witness my hand,
	"W. WALTHAM."

The prisoner's counsel asserted, that, as the receipt had not been
signed by the witnessing clerk, it could not have the effect of
forgery; but this objection was over ruled by the Court, who
observed, that this indictment was for forging a receiptit had
nothing to do with a transfer.

The jury found the prisoner guilty. On Wednesday, May 8, 1805, this
unfortunate culprit suffered the sentence of the law on the
scaffold, opposite the Debtor's door, at Newgate. He was a young man
of prepossessing appearance and gentlemanly manners, fat and florid,
and about thirty-four years of age. He was dressed in a black coat
and waistcoat, white plush breeches, and boots. In place of having
his hands tied with a rope, as usual, he produced a new muslin
handkerchief, and for his girt, a silk twist, which were
substituted. When he mounted the scaffold, the rain fell, almost in
torrents, and at his own request he was instantly tied up, and
launched into eternity. He left a wife, children, and an aged
mother, to bemoan his untimely fate.



JOHN HARDING
Executed before Newgate, November 13, 1805, for
Forgery

Various as we have already described the commission of this crime,
yet we find in this man's case a new species of forgery. He was
indicted at the Old-Bailey, September 21st, for forging,
fabricating, uttering, and publishing, as true, a stamp on the ace
of spades of a pack of cards.

The attorney General opened the case on the part of the prosecution,
in a very long speech, in which he stated to the jury the outline of
the prisoner's transactions. The first witness called on was Mr.
Hockley, the printer of the legal spade ace at the Stamp-Office. He
had (in consequence of the suspicions entertained at the Stamp
office, on account of the small demand the prisoner there made for
stamps, and the extensive business which he seemed to carry on) very
frequently made purchases of packs of cards of the prisoner, as had
also his apprentice, and the stamps on the aces of spades were all
forgeries. These purchases, which were very numerous, took place in
the month of May, 1804. It appeared by the evidence adduced on the
part of the prosecution, that the prisoner kept two shops, where
these packs of cards were sold, the one in Hereford-street, Oxford
street, and the other in North-row, near Grosvenor-square. On the
27th of May, Mr. Hockley ordered five dozen packs of cards to be
sent to No. 74, Edgware-Road, which were accordingly sent, and the
person who carried them, Vincent Jackson (as he also deposed), gave
a receipt for the money (10l. 5s.) in a fictitious name (B.A.
Bates); Harding having desired him to give the receipt in any name
he pleased.

The prisoner's apprentice, Stephen Lepine, deposed, that he saw his
master making cards on one occasion, and observed him to paste
labels on them, which he gave a gloss to by putting some liquid on
them. Witness also proved, that the prisoner occupied premises
behind the house of Mr. Skelton, Green-street, Grosvenor square. A
body of evidence was adduced to prove that the prisoner had employed
a seal-engraver of the name of Leadbeater to execute aces of spades
for him. Leadbeater dined with the prisoner two years since, when he
asked him if he could engrave on copper. On being answered in the
negative, the prisoner requested he would find some trusty artist in
that branch. Leadbeater recommended a youth of the name of White,
who, the prisoner was informed, could be depended on. Four duty aces
were given to Leadbeater for White to imitate as closely as
possible: and if he was asked any questions, he was to say they were
for a foreigner at Hamburgh. White, however, was timid, and declined
the task, so that all negotiations with him were abandoned. In six
or seven months after, the prisoner pressed on Leadbeater to learn
the art of engraving on copper, adding, that he would be at the
expense of a master. Mr. Woodthorpe, a respectable engraver in
Fetter-Lane, was applied to, and the witness was placed under his
tuition. The prisoner's visits to Leadbeater were very frequent, and
one day he showed him an old plate of the spade ace, which he wished
to be touched up. Witness was unable to do the job, and an
apprentice of the name of Bunning was employed, under the impression
that the plate was for Mr. Shepherd, at the Stamp office. It was
also proved, in evidence, that the prisoner had large dealings with
Mr. Skelton for spirits, &c. for which he gave waste paper; that is,
packs of cards, which Mr. S. sold at a profit. Rivet, Miller, and
Carpmeal, searched the premises occupied by the prisoner, at the
back of Mr. Skelton's house. They found a quantity of forged stamps
of the spade ace, and also a quantity of forged plates for
fabricating the stamps, which were concealed underground. In the
counterfeit ace, in the word, "Dieu," in the motto, the letter R.
was substituted for the letter E.

Mr. Justice Heath addressed the jury, and observed, there could be
no doubt in the case. The jury found the prisoner Guilty, and he
suffered accordingly. He was a genteel man, thirty five years of
age: on the day of his trial he was dressed in black, and full
powdered.



WILLIAM HONEYMAN
The Young Swindler; Convicted of Forgery at the Lent
Assizes, 1806, for Kent, and Executed upon Pennenden
Heath

Seldom have we presented a case with a malefactor so young, and yet
so consummately artful. This young adept was born at Portsmouth, of
creditable parents, and who, after giving him a good education,
placed him as midshipman in the royal navy. However, he had not been
long on board the man of war to which he was appointed, then
stationed at Sheerness, ere he deserted, and began his career of
vice at a tavern called the Silver Oar, at Rochester, before he had
completed his sixteenth year. There he was invited by some gentlemen
to partake of their dinner, which was no sooner over than they
perceived he had no money, and appeared dejected, and upon
interrogation, he confessed his name and needy circumstances; the
company, much to their credit, agreed to supply him with money, and
he was kept there till his friends were made acquainted with his
situation; when, according to their desire, he was forwarded to
London. He returned some time after to the Silver Oar, saying he had
been to sea, ordered a dinner, and treated his former friends.

Afterwards he took a route to the West of England, following his
nefarious practices. However, on the 18th of November, 1805, under
the name of Alexander Innes, captain in the navy, he was brought to
Marlborough-street Police-office, in custody of an officer belonging
to Surrey, to answer a charge preferred against him by a Mr. Jeff, a
liveryman, in Silver-street, Golden square.

Mr. Jeff stated that the prisoner called at his stables on the ninth
day of November, representing himself as the person above described,
and residing at No 49, Howland-street, and hired a chestnut mare to
go to Richmond. The mare was never returned to her owner; and after
a week had elapsed, Mr. Jeff suspected he had been swindled. He
consequently went to the given address, and had there further cause
of suspicion; for the house was a brothel, and he was only known to
have slept there one night.

In consequence of some information Mr. Jeff had received, he went to
the house of an eminent tradesman in the Borough, where, it was
said, the prisoner was known, having drawn money by bills, &c., Mr.
Jeff was there informed of the circumstance alluded to, and that
Capt. Innes had sent thither a mare from the country, which had been
attended with unpleasant circumstances. The parties, however, said,
they knew but little of the prisoner. He was detected by calling at
the Gloucester Coffee house, Piccadilly, which house he had
frequented with a person of the name of Kennesley, who left it
without discharging his bill. The prisoner called to enquire after
his friend, and on leaving the house, two of the waiters followed
him, suspecting him to be the person advertised by Mr. Jeff. At a
convenient spot near Vauxhall, the waiters gave him in charge of an
officer.

It was stated to the magistrates, that the prisoner had been at the
Castle, at Richmond, where the waiter was refused his bill; but, by
assistance, the visitors were detained, and a watch was left as
security for the bill. Mr. Jeff had never heard of his mare, but it
was reported she was at Andover, Hants. When at Richmond, on Sunday,
at the Castle-Inn, he was informed that a mare, answering the
description of the one hired, was sold on Wednesday last, at
Croydon, to a butcher at Richmond; but he had not an opportunity of
seeing her, the butcher being from home. On the prisoner being
questioned respecting what he had done with the mare, he merely
answered, he had spoken to Mr. Jeff on that subject. He was dressed
in the first style of fashion, and his person was very well known in
the lobby at the Theatres.

The next day the concourse of people that assembled at Malborough-
street Office was immense. Several naval officers attended, for the
purpose of proving that there were only two captains in the navy of
the name of Innes; they are brothers, and gentlemen of the highest
respectability; the one Alexander, is now captain on board the Eurus
frigate, in the Cove of Cork; and the other, John, is a prisoner in
France, having been taken in the Ranger. Several persons intimated
their intentions of exhibiting charges against the prisoner on the
next examination, which took place November 21. Numerous fresh
charges were adduced against him; and it appeared by the evidence,
that an insinuating confident address, with a commanding person, had
enabled him to enter the circles of gentlemen, whom he is said to
have defrauded, as well as trades-people, inn-keepers, &c. in town
and country.

The horse he hired of Mr. Jeff had been traced to George yard,
Drury-lane. John Rich, ostler to Mr. Cartwright, Camden-place,
Piccadilly, stated, that the prisoner hired a brown gelding six
weeks since, in the absence of his master. He said he resided in St.
James's-street; that he merely wanted to ride out for two or three
hours, and on his return he would send the horse home by his
servant. He, however, never returned, nor had the horse ever been
heard of. A person in the office (Mr. Nuns) informed Mr. Cartwright,
that a horse, answering the description he had given, was left at
his Livery-stables, Vauxhall, on the 14th of October, and he
believed by the prisoner. He hired a horse and chaise of Mr. Nuns,
and left the horse in his care, until he should return, which event
never took place. The prisoner said his name was Becket, and that he
resided at Gravesend. Mr. Nuns, finding the prisoner did not return,
went to Gravesend, and Mr. Becket proved to be a banker, who
informed him, that a person answering the description of the
prisoner, had forged on his bank. Mr. Nuns had travelled three or
four hundred miles after his horse and chaise; and at length, by an
advertisement, he received a letter, stating, that the horse was at
Alton, in Hampshire, and the chaise was at Honiton, in Devonshire,
the prisoner having left the horse as he had done at other places,
and hired a fresh one.

It was proved by another witness, that the prisoner had committed
depredations in the West of England, by representing himself as a Mr
Pigeon, son of Mr. Pigeon, belonging to a distillery firm in the
Borough. By this imposition, affecting to be travelling on account
of the firm he was very successful in obtaining money, by swindling
bills, &c. In this part of the country he drove about in a post-
chaise and four, associated with the best company, joined their
hunting parties, and became the complete man of fashion. At Exeter
he drove through the city a week before the news of the victory over
the combined fleets, as a naval officer with dispatches from the
fleet. The gentlemen belonging to a subscription-house, and the
leading men of the city, desirous of hearing good news, politely
requested to be informed if the news was good. The prisoner, who
represented himself as the son of Lord Mulgrave, assured them it was
good news, and that it was from the hero, Nelson. The gentlemen were
desirous of further information; but fearing to put the question too
pointedly, they asked, if it equalled the business of the Nile? The
prisoner replied, "The Nile is a fool to it;" and he immediately
drove off, having diffused joy throughout the ancient city of
Exeter.

A number of other charges were preferred against him. A gentleman
positively proved the prisoner to be an impostor, in representing
himself as Capt. Innes. The prisoner said his name was Innes, and he
was addressed as a captain by naval characters. On being questioned
by the magistrates, if he was ever in the navy, and what rank he
held the prisoner replied, "He was a midshipman in the Magnanime, of
sixty-four guns, but he had not been in the service since the last
war. He was before that in the Active, of thirty two guns." He was
remanded again, to give country people an opportunity to attend and
on the day appointed, the office was crowded so excessively, that
many who repaired thither to take a view of the prisoner were
disappointed.

Among other circumstances, Hamilton, the officer, said, that he was
authorized by the gentlemen of the Gravesend Bank, to state a
circumstance that recently occurred there, the complainants being
unable to attend this examination; the prisoner, in the name of
Charles Young, presented to them a bill of exchange for eighty
pounds, purporting to have been drawn upon Simmons and Co. at the
Canterbury Bank, for which he received cash and notes, and it was
soon afterwards discovered to be a forgery.

There was also another serious charge against the prisoner, for a
transaction during his tour in the West of England. It had been
stated, that the prisoner diffused joy throughout the city of
Exeter, by proclaiming a victory, said to have been gained by the
departed hero Nelson, a week before that of Trafalgar. He also, it
appeared, represented himself as the bearer of the joyful tidings,
when the glorious victory was obtained. Being on the Portsmouth road
when Lord Fitzroy was traveling to the Admiralty, with the important
news, and having obtained some slight information respecting it, or
at least that his lordship was going with dispatches to town, he
immediately ordered a post-chaise and four, and was driven after the
messenger at full speed. On his entering the town of Basingstoke,
his chaise was surrounded by the multitude, who were more ready to
be imposed on, a ray of hope having spread itself that a victory had
been gained. In the habit of a naval officer, the prisoner went to
the Bank, called himself Lord Fitzroy, drew 100l. in his name, and
gave a forged draft. He apologized to the gentlemen of the Bank for
the sudden intrusion, and alleged that his cash was insufficient to
carry him to the Admiralty. This imposition was soon detected, the
prisoner was followed, and the money recovered. On his being asked,
if he had anything to say, he replied, "he had not, in his present
disagreeable situation."

The magistrate observed, that it would be necessary to remand the
prisoner again, in order to give time to the people from the country
to attend , when a gentleman from the Gravesend Bank attended, and
the prisoner was fully committed to take his trial, and soon after
removed to Maidstone (the forgery having been done in Kent), where
he was indicted March 18, 1806, for feloniously and falsely making,
forging, and counterfeiting, and feloniously uttering and
publishing, as true, at Gravesend, a certain false, forged, and
counterfeited bill of exchange, for the sum of eighty pounds,
purporting to have been drawn by one Charles Young, and to be
directed to Messrs. Simmons, Poley, and Co. at Canterbury, with
intent to defraud John Brenchly, Charles Becket, and George Rich, of
Gravesend, aforesaid. He also stood indicted upon the oaths of John
Rich, and others, with stealing one brown gelding, the property of
Edward Cartwright. He also stood indicted upon the oath of Richard
Nuns with stealing at Lambeth, in the county of Surry, one black
mare, a chaise, and harness, his property.

On the first indictment, it appeared he came to the Gravesend Bank,
and represented himself as a person under the tuition of Mr.
Stevenson (steward to the Earl of Darnley), for a knowledge of
agricultural improvement, which afterwards proved to be false. The
fraud on the Bank being substantiated by the clerk, the jury after a
little deliberation, found the prisoner guilty; and being found
guilty upon the first charge, the judge would not try him on the
others. From the time of the judge's passing sentence on him, and
informing him he could not expect any mercy, the crime being so
great an offence, he became much dejected, and behaved himself in a
very becoming manner.

On the 28th of March, the unfortunate prisoner wrote a letter from
the cell to the Gravesend Bank, acknowledging the crime laid to his
charge, thanking the prosecutors for their humanity in recommending
him to the Judge for mercy, and requesting they would sign a
petition to the King; which had been done before, but which the
prisoner was not aware of. He stated in his letter, that he was
deranged at the time of committing the fact. He also said, it had
ever been his father's wish to train him in the world to friendly
society.

He made the following speech at the place of execution, from a
written paper, which he gave to a friend, upon his request:-

"For my own part, I confess, with the greatest contrition, the crime
which has brought me to this horrid place, and admit the justice of
my sentence, while I am sinking under its severity; and I earnestly
exhort you all, my fellow prisoners, and young men at liberty, to
acknowledge the offences you have been guilty of, and to bequeath to
your country that confidence in public justice, without which there
can be neither peace nor safety in this world.

"As few of you suffer for the first offences, it is necessary to
enquire how far confession ought to be extended. Whatever good
remains in our power we must diligently perform. We must prevent, to
the utmost of our power, all the evil consequences of our crimes. We
must forgive all who injure us. We must, by fervency of prayer, and
always praying to God, in constancy and meditation, endeavour to
repress all worldly passions; and generate in our minds that love of
goodness, and hatred of sin, which may fit us for the society of
heavenly minds; and finally, we must commend and entrust our soul to
Him that died for the sins of men, with earnest wishes and humble
hopes that he will admit us with the labourers who entered the
vineyard at the last hour, and associate us with the thief whom he
pardoned on the Cross.

"Thus, we humbly trust, our sorrowful prayers and tears will be
acceptable in his sight. Thus shall we be qualified, through Christ,
to exchange this dismal body and these uneasy fetters, for the
glorious liberty of the sons of God, and then our legal doom upon
earth be changed into a comfortable declaration of mercy in the
highest heaven, and all through the most precious and all sufficient
merits of the blessed Saviour of mankind.

"I wish you all the happiness that this land affords, and the
enjoyment of life in all its branches. You, my brothers and sisters,
will, I hope, take caution of so young a man as I am, whose years are
only eighteen, and to think that I should suffer this ignominious and
awful death before so many of you. Our happiness or misery only
begins when we die.

"It is but your sins that can make you afraid of dying. It concerns
us more than our lives is worth, to know what will become of us when
we die."

This speech, which was spoken in a manly and distinct tone, made a
deep impression on an unusual number of spectators (many of whom
were soldiers). Shortly after he seemed to reflect on the jury, and
the severity of the laws of this country, by saying "So young a man
as he was, might have been useful by being sent abroad;" because the
petition had been presented, and interest made, in vain, to his
Majesty, to save his life. He behaved, however, with the greatest
decorum at the place of execution, praying in the most penitent
manner, till the platform fell from under him.

"Be thy pursuits, then giddy youth
"The paths of industry and truth;
"For those who follow wicked ways,
"With shame must terminate their days.

Along with the unfortunate Honeyman, the following unhappy men also
underwent, the final sentence of the law:-
James Danes, convicted of burglariously breaking and entering the
dwelling-house of the Rev. Joseph Andrews, at Marden, in the county
of Kent, and stealing therefrom twenty shirts, 20l. in money, and
other articles, to the amount of 150l. Samuel Clarke, alias Hagger,
convicted of breaking into the shop of John Elliott, watchmaker, at
Ashford on the 25th of January, and stealing therein divers watches,
chains, seals, &c., and of having the same in his possession. John
Staines, who was found guilty of stealing two Welsh heifers, the
property of Edward Back, of Mershaun. Danes had been a smuggler,
well known in the county of Kent, having lived at Trottescliffe,
where he left a wife and four children. Clarke, whose friends lived
at Rochester, had been master's mate on board a man of war; his
character was notorious, having, it is said, returned from
transportation he declared himself, however, innocent of the charge
for which he was condemned. Staines likewise made the same
declaration.

These four malefactors died sincere penitents.



ANDREW AKOW
A Chinese Sailor, Executed at Execution-Dock, July
18, 1806, for Murdering his Countryman

The trial of this foreigner came on at the Admiralty Sessions, July
11, 1806 before Sir John Scott and Judge Le Blanc.

James Robert Oliver, second mate of the Travers East-Indiaman,
stated, that on the 24th of May the vessel was in the East India
docks; he had charge of the watch at twelve o'clock, that night; the
prisoner, who was taken on board at Bengal, was in his watch. The
murdered man was named Anguin, a Chinese, who entered on board the
vessel with the prisoner, and he officiated as cook. About two
o'clock on the morning of the 25th, witness heard a crying noise
forward, which seemed to come from the forecastle, but on going
thither he found it proceeded from the fore-hatchway. Witness sent
down two officers to see what was doing, when one of them shortly
after called out, "Murder has been committed." Witness called up the
surgeon, and on going below himself, he observed the prisoner in
custody of the officers he had sent below. He was covered with
blood, and on seeing the witness, he exclaimed, "Me kill Anguin;
Anguin tell me lie, to-morrow you hang me Chinese fashion;" and he
gave himself up to witness with the utmost composure. After having
secured the prisoner, the witness proceeded to the fore-hatchway,
where he observed the deceased lying, with his head nearly severed
from his body, near to his hammock. He had also many dreadful wounds
in different parts of his body; and he expired immediately. Witness
had not missed the prisoner more than five minutes before he heard
the cries of the deceased. The deceased was of an entertaining
disposition, and greatly beloved by the whole ship's company.
	This testimony was corroborated by a number of witnesses, and
the jury found the prisoner "Guilty." He was sentenced to be
executed the Monday following, but was respited till Friday, July
18, by Sir William Scott, in order that the opinion of the Privy
Council, might be taken on his case. It having been the opinion of
the Privy Council, that this malefactor should suffer according to
the sentence of the English law, on Friday, the day appointed for
the execution as above mentioned, he was accordingly conveyed in a
cart from Newgate, for execution, at Execution Dock, pursuant to
sentence. The wretched criminal was scarcely able to support his
fate, and looked as if life had forsaken him previous to his arrival
at the place of punishment. He was dressed in a seaman's jacket and
trowsers, and red cap. One of his countrymen supported him in the
cart, and apparently imparted every consolation his dreadful
situation demanded. After hanging the usual time, the body was
brought back to Newgate, and delivered to his friends; the remainder
of the sentence, that his body be dissected, &c. having been
remitted.



PHILIP MATSELL
Executed August 22, 1806, at Birmingham, for Firing
at and Wounding T. Twyford, a Watchman of that Town

This notorious culprit was convicted of maliciously firing at and
wounding T. Twyford, a watchman, in the Snow hill end of Great-
Charles-street, Birmingham; and for which offence he was hanged on a
scaffold erected near the spot where he committed the offence.

The awful scene drew an immense concourse of spectators; but, by the
active exertions of the police, assisted by a detachment of the
king's own dragoons, the utmost regularity and good order were
preserved. With regard to the unhappy criminal, we are sorry to
state, that his conduct, from the time of his being apprehended up
to the fatal moment of his punishment, exhibited no signs of
repentance. When passing through the town to the place of execution,
his countenance manifested the utmost indifference, and frequently
was marked with a sneering smile. When arrived at the gallows, he
resisted every endeavour to draw from him a confession of his guilt,
declaring that he was not the man, but that he knew who was. He
refused for a long time, to join in prayer with the clergyman who
attended him; but at length selected a prayer from the communion
service. Addressing himself to the wife of his brother, who was
extremely distressed on the occasion, he asked her, abruptly, "What
she cried for?" and when the executioner (who had also been
condemned, but reprieved, and who was much more agitated than
Matsell) was fixing the rope, Matsell desired him to be cautious how
he placed it, as one side of his neck was rather sore. The time of
preparation being expired, he gave the signal by throwing up his
handkerchief, when the waggon on which the platform was erected,
drew from under him, and he was launched into eternity.



EDWARD M'ELROY
Indicted for Setting Fire to a Car-house

This case presents one of the most extraordinary instances of cross
swearing ever witnessed, and so positive was it on each side that
the jury were unable to determine which party was entitled to
credit, and actually separated without giving any verdict.

Edward M'Elroy, a coarse country lad, about twenty years of age, was
capitally indicted, on the 12th of March, 1823, for setting fire to
a car-house, belonging to David Woods, of Carduffkelly, near
Carickmacross, in the county of Monaghan, in the preceding month of
February. David Woods deposed to the circumstances attending the
burning of his car-house, which took place about 12 o'clock at
night, when the family were all in bed. Being awoke, he heard a
noise outside his house, as of some persons stumbling, in
consequence of which he was induced to rise out of bed; and on going
down stairs and opening the hall-door, which he did quietly, he
beheld his car-house on fire, and distinctly saw the prisoner
(M'Elroy) urging the flames towards the dwelling-house. Thomas
Woods, son to the prosecutor, stated, that, on hearing his father
call out that the car-house was on fire, he ran out naked, and saw
the figure of a man at a distance, running from the flames. He could
not say who that person was.

This was the case for the prosecution. In defence, Charlotte Woods,
aged 18, the daughter of the prosecutor, appeared. She denied that
any attachment subsisted between her and the prisoner, and then gave
the following account of the transaction, in coming forward to
declare which, she said, she was actuated solely by a regard for
truth, and a desire to save an innocent life. On the evening in
question, all the family, excepting herself and a servant girl, whom
she called Ellen, went to bed between 9 and 10 o'clock. She usually
slept in a small bed-room on the ground floor, off the kitchen; the
servant girl, who slept in the same room, having some articles of
wearing apparel to mend, sat up for that purpose, unknown to her
master and family, and she (the witness) remained in the kitchen
assisting her, until about half-past 11 o'clock, when, hearing her
father cough and make a noise as if rising, she and the servant
hurried into their bed-room, extinguished the candle, and began to
undress; for she was afraid of her father knowing that they had been
sitting up, as he had expressly prohibited any of the family from
doing so. She and the girl had just knelt down to their prayers,
when she heard a stool fall, and her face being turned towards the
kitchen, into which a small window looked, she observed her father
approaching the fire, from which he took a lighted turf; she then
beckoned the servant to watch her father, and the two followed him
to the door, where they remained concealed, and actually saw him
with his own hand set fire to the car-house, he having first
carefully loosened the calf and pig, and set them at liberty. On
witnessing such extraordinary conduct on the part of her father, she
and the servant hastily returned to the room, and crept into bed.
She then heard him close the kitchen door and go upstairs, where he
remained about a quarter of an hour, and then came down and gave the
alarm of fire.

In addition, she related the particulars of a conversation between
her two elder brothers, which she overheard a night or two after the
burning. One of them remarked to the other"It (speaking of the
burning) was a good plan to put M'Elroy out of the way:" on which he
replied, "Yes, but I doubt my father will go too farhe must perjure
himself." She also said, that, some days previous to the burning,
her father accused her of being intimate with M'Elroy, and told her
that he would not suffer any person of such condition to come near
his house, or have any acquaintance with his daughter. Being cross-
examined on this point, she declared that she had no particular
regard for the prisoner; that there had been no intimacy between
them, nor had he ever taken improper liberties with her; that she
always addressed him as a servant, and looked on him only as her
father's servant. She admitted that she now lived under the
protection of the prisoner's relations, having left her father's
house about a fortnight previously, at which time she and the maid-
servant, who accompanied her, gave information of the foregoing
facts to a neighbouring magistrate.

The servant-girl corroborated, in every particular, the statement
given by Miss Woods.

A tailor was examined to prove an alibi for the prisoner. He swore,
that, on the night on which the burning was said to have taken
place, the prisoner came to his house to get a pair of small-clothes
mended; and that the prisoner remained in his house from sun-set to
sun-rise.

After the examination of these witnesses, the counsel for the
prosecution called George Woods, son to the prosecutor, who said, he
had heard what was stated by his sister, relative to a conversation
between him and his brother Thomas; he swore positively that no such
conversation, nor any such words, ever passed between them. Witness
stated, that an intimacy had subsisted between his sister and the
prisoner, whom he discovered together one day, in a back room of a
house in Carrickmacross, in such a situation as left no doubt on his
mind of their improper intimacy.

Thomas Woods was then examined, relative to a conversation sworn by
his sister to have taken place between him and his brother George.
He swore positively that no such conversation had ever taken place.

A girl, named Collins, also in the service of the prosecutor, was
examined. She stated, that she was in the kitchen on the night in
question, in company with Miss Woods and the servant Ellen, and
swore positively, that they did not remain there more than half an
hour after the family went to bed; that they merely washed their
feet, and did not sew or mend any part of their clothes. She said,
that Miss Woods, Ellen, and herself, then went into the bed-room off
the kitchen; that they had all three undressed, and were in the act
of praying, when the alarm of fire was given by her master. She
denied all that the two others had sworn respecting the conduct of
her master; nothing of the kind took place that she saw, nor could
it have taken place without her seeing it. Charlotte Woods and the
girl Ellen were confronted with the last witness, and both adhered
firmly to what they had previously sworn. The judge proceeded to sum
up the evidence.

The jury remained closeted during the night, and until the afternoon
of Thursday, when, not having agreed on any verdict, they were
conveyed to the verge of the county, and there discharged in the
usual way.



EDWARD WILLIAM ROBERTS, DAVID MAITLAND, AND SAMUEL
COLE
Convicted at the Lent Assizes for Hertford, 1809, and
Pilloried for a Conspiracy

IN our account above, our readers will find the leader of this gang
of swindlers upon the pillory at Charing-cross, along with one
Brown, another of his disciples. Edward William Roberts, the adept
above named, David Cole, the brother of Dorothy Cole, who cohabited
with Roberts and passed as his wife, and David Maitland, acting as
servant to Roberts, were indicted for a conspiracy to defraud
Frederic Norris upholsterer of Cheshunt.

Frederic Norris deposed, that in the month of July, Cole and Roberts
came to his house at Broxbourne, and desired that he would come over
the next morning, which was on Saturday, to take measure for the
carpets, curtains, &c. He accordingly went the next day, and sent in
about 20l. worth of furniture. He then thought it prudent to ask for
a reference. Mr. Cole mentioned the names of several Lords and
Earls, but said you may as well go to my solicitor, Mr. Crawford,
No. 1, Charles-square, Hoxton; he has six or 7,000l. of mine in his
hands, and will give you satisfaction. He accordingly went there,
and Mr. Crawford confirmed this statement, observing that Mr. Cole
was a man of large landed property. Cole afterwards gave the witness
a draft for 50l. on his attorney, Crawford, which was dishonoured;
and in fact, the goods were all moved off in the night, and Roberts
was apprehended the next day in the London Road.

By the testimony of Mary Little, and other witnesses, it appeared
that the goods were carried to a court near Nelson-street, in the
neighbourhood of Shoreditch; some were pawned by Maitland, and
others sold to a person of the name of Clarke, by the directions of
Cole, in the name of Lidyard. Trott, the police officer, stated,
that being upon the watch in Baltic-street, where he knew Cole
lodged, he met Roberts going to his lodgings.

The case of the prosecutor being finished, the prisoner Roberts
addressed the jury in a very long, and certainly a very able speech,
in which he urged with great ingenuity all the topics that he could
make in his favour. He concluded by stating that he most poignantly
felt his degraded situation; that he had been born to the
expectation of independency; that he had been liberally educated,
and was a member of an honourable profession; but that finding his
talents not adequate to his profession, he had turned his attention
to the quiet pursuits of literature, in which he had produced
several works that had met the approbation of eminent men;
particularly "Considerations on the Laws of Debtor and Creditor,"
which had been quoted by Lord Moira with approbation. His wife too
was a woman of an accomplished mind, and had produced literary works
which had been very favourably noticed by ladies of the most exalted
rank, who had not only afforded her their protection, but received
her at their houses, and themselves repaid her visits. He could
mention two in particular, "Delmer" and "The Mysterious Mothers."
[Note: By "His wife" meaning the said Dorothy Cole, who received her
education in the bar of the Magpie Inn, on Hounslow Heath, formerly
kept by her father. Roberts had long abandoned his wife and several
children. Of these alleged "literary works" the first only was
published. It was the wild effusions of his own brain, to which he
tacked the name of Dorothy Roberts. It should have had the alias,
Cole; who hawked it from door to door, through the squares and best
streets of the west end of London, teasing the rich into
subscriptions, under various pretences and pleas of distress. As to
the "Mysterious Mother," the same game was played over again.
Numerous subscriptions were again paid to her; but Roberts, as it
must be seen, was otherwise engaged than to enter upon a development
of his announced volumes of mysteries. Roberts received a very
liberal education, was bred to the bar, and actually admitted a
counsellor at law.  "O tempora! O mores!"]

Of late, however, his fate had been sadly reversed; the hands of
oppression had fallen heavily upon him. In June last his wife died;
and himself, from the enjoyment even of the luxuries of life, had
been dragged to the damps of a cold and solitary dungeon in the
Coldbath fields prison. This had produced disease, and the loss of
the use of his limbs. From that period he had languished a miserable
existence in the sick ward of Newgate, where he had experienced all
the grinding oppression to which the unhappy inmates of a prison are
necessarily subject. But the only cheering hope which ever entered
those walls was now realized, namely, the day that he could face a
jury of his fellow-countrymen; that day was now arrived, and he
trusted the justice of their verdict would relieve him for further
sorrow.

The jury found a verdict of Guilty, and he was ordered twelve
months' imprisonment, and to stand in the pillory. On the pillory at
Hertford, though this cheat was nearly on a par with that which we
have already told, he was handled somewhat less roughly by a country
mob; but the populace vented their indignation more through hissing
and hooting than by rotten eggs, decayed vegetables, and the
kennels' filth.

It must have been noted that a professional name was implicated in
the foul transactions which came out on this trial. The gentleman so
named, a few days after the conviction we now record, published the
following vindication of his conduct, in the form of a letter
addressed to the editor of the London Morning Advertiser:

"It appeared in your paper of last Monday, on the trial of Roberts
and Maitland, for a conspiracy with one Cole, that he referred a Mr.
Norris to me, saying, "that I had 7000l. in my hands, and that upon
his applying to me, I confirmed that statement." I absolutely deny
ever having authorized Cole to make any such assertion; and I also
deny ever having confirmed any such statement. When Mr. Norris
applied to me with a draft drawn by Cole, I informed him, that I had
not a farthing of Cole's money, nor ever had; that Cole had applied
to me to attend him to the Commons to examine his father's will; that
by it, it did appear considerable property had come to him in
consequence of his mother's recent death, who, it appeared, had been
entitled to the rents of the estate for her life. Having known Cole,
as a carpenter, who had five or six men working under him about six
years ago, and he having frequently informed me, that whenever his
mother should die, he would, under his father's will, be entitled to
an estate of three or four thousand pounds' value, and he having
always said, that, whenever that event happened he would employ no
other professional man than myself, I certainly did feel satisfied,
that what he informed me of were truths: accordingly, when applied to
by Mr. Norris, I told him, that I was authorized to sell or mortgage
the estate in order to pay his debt, as well as any other debt which
Cole might contract, and that I had no doubt but Mr. Norris would be
paid the amount of the bill which he had against Cole.

Maitland I never saw or heard of until after he was taken into
custody, and that was by the public prints. Roberts I never saw or
heard of, in any way whatever, until introduced to him by Cole, who
informed me Roberts had lately married his sister. Roberts said he
was a gentleman, who lived at Streatham, and was very desirous of
assisting his brother-in-law, Cole.That it was very inconvenient for
him then to do it; but that about a fortnight after last Michaelmas-
day, the rents of his estate would be coming in, between 3 and 400l.
half yearly; and that if I would, in the meantime, assist Cole with
50 or 100l. it would be of great service to him. From this
representation, and with the sole view of doing what I thought an act
which one man frequently does for another, I accepted a bill, and
afterward others for Cole.

Almost every time I saw him, I plagued him for the title deeds. The
answer was, "They are in the hands of a gentleman at Windsor, who
lent my father 200l. upon the estate. I'll procure an abstract of the
title.'I told him Mr. Norris had applied to me for the money, and
another tradesman, and that an abstract, at least, should be had,
otherwise I should be in a most awkward situation. The next time he
called at my house, he showed me a letter purporting to have been
sent to him from Sir J. Hippesley, stating that he, Sir John, had
considered the offer of Cole, respecting the sale of that part of his
estate which lay contiguous to Sir John's; and that, if Cole would
instantly employ a proper land surveyor on his part, he, Sir John,
would do the like, and the money, whatever might be the amount, would
be immediately paid. A few days after this letter was shown me,
Roberts was taken into custody by Mr. Norris, and proved to be a
common swindler. Afterwards he was released on bail.

Warrants having been issued against him for other offences, I
endeavoured to find him, did so, and took him into custody. I went to
the place at which the estate lay, a few miles beyond Hounslow, found
that Cole's father had died possessed of considerable property, that
his mother was dead, and that Cole had sold the estate. To the truth
of the above narrative I am ready to swear. I most solemnly declare
in whatever I have said to others, or done myself for Cole, it was
neither from motives of profit nor interest. I mean that right where
right was due would have followed; neither directly nor indirectly
have I received a farthing, for Cole owes me at this day 17l. upon an
old balance; I trust, therefore, after this explanation, the public,
and particularly , that part of it which compose individuals to whom
I may be personally known, will not think that knowingly I have acted
so improperly as to have my name in public prints joined with such
names as Cole and Roberts; but will look to the quo animo it was
done.

I am, sir, your humble servant,
	CRAWFORD.

West-Place,
	City Road,

March 16, 1809."

Note: Swindling has of late years become so common a practice in the
metropolis, that writers for diurnal papers frequently amuse
themselves in relating adroit performances of this nature, in
burlesque, pun, and hyperbole. One of these scribbling wits thus
makes merry with a silly tradesman, on being fiddled out of his
money.

"SWINDLING SET TO MUSIC.A country-looking man lately called at a
haberdasher's shop, with a fiddle under his arm; and after
purchasing and paying for some trifling articles, which he pretended
to want, asked to be allowed to leave his purchase and his fiddle,
till he did some other business through the town. He had scarcely
gone out, when in comes an accomplice, (as it turned out) who
observing the fiddle, takes it up and tries it, and is quite charmed
with it. "This is the most charming fiddle I have ever met with; is
it for sale?I'd give fifty guineas for that fiddle." He was told it
was not for sale, but belonged to a countryman, who had just left it
there till he should make some other calls."When he comes back for
it, try and buy it from himmake the best bargain with him you can
for yourself; but whatever you buy it at, I promise to give you
fifty guineas for it, and I will call again by-and-by." By-and-by
back comes the countryman for his fiddle. "Will you part with that
fiddle," says the haberdasher, "I have taken a fancy for it?" The
man answered, he had no intention of parting with his fiddle, for he
knew it to be a very good one, and did not know if he could get such
another. "I'll give you fifty shillings for it," said the
haberdasher. "No, no," "Five guineas for it," said the haberdasher.
"I'll not take twenty," said the countryman.In short, after a great
deal of chapmanship, the haberdasher got the fiddle at forty
guineas; and a happy man was he, as thinking he had made ten guineas
by the bargain. But he has been allowed to keep the fiddle, to
solace himself for the loss of his money. The fifty-guinea merchant
never returned."

"On the 13th of October 1809, a most infamous act of swindling was
practised on eight poor infirm widows in the alm-houses, near the
New Grove Road, Mile End Road, by a well-dressed man, about 5 feet 2
inches high, stoutish made, hair tied, and light green coat. He went
to one of the poor pensioners' houses, and thus addressed them, "You
are all widowsa lady has left you eight pounds;" he then took their
names down, and inquired who would go with him, saying, the minister
and gentlemen were waiting for them, that they must bring 23
shillings in silver to give change, or they could not be paid. One
of the poor women borrowed the money, at a neighbouring public-
house, and a young woman went with him to Stepney Church; he told
her to wait at the porch, while he went and spoke to the clerk,
which she saw him do, and supposed all was right; but he told the
clerk he wanted to put up the banns of marriage, and the clerk
desired him to come when the service was over. He came out, told the
girl all was right, and she must go with him; he then asked the
unsuspecting girl for the 23 shillings, and decamped with the money.
The girl went back to the clerk, where she soon was informed of her
mistake, to the no small grief of the poor disappointed pensioners."



RIOTS OF THE MANCHESTER WEAVERS
The King against Hanson, Lancaster Lent Assizes, 1809

This important trial came on before Sir S. Le Blanc and a special
jury. The defendant, Joseph Hanson, Esq. was indicted for having
unlawfully encouraged a number of persons to riot.

Serjeant Cockell addressed the jury on the part of the crown. It
appeared that the weavers assembled in great numbers on the 24th of
May, near Manchester; that the next morning they again assembled,
much increased in numbers; that Mr. Starkie, the Borough-reeve,
strove to persuade them to disperse, but in vain. In the afternoon,
they were increased to about ten thousand; and the magistrates,
preceded by a party of the 4th dragoons, came to the ground, and the
riot act was read. About this time the defendant arrived on
horseback, attended by his groom; he went up to Capt. Trafford, who
commanded the dragoons, and asked, if he might speak to the people?
Capt. Trafford said, Not unless he could persuade them to depart
peaceably; but he thought his (the defendant's) presence would
irritate them; and he told him, he would oblige him if he would
leave the field. This he did not immediately; but as he rode along,
the people huzza'd, and he pulled off his hat, and spoke to them.
The witnesses for the prosecution swore that they heard him use
expressions to the following effect: "My lads, your cause is goodbe
firm, and you will succeed. I will support you as far as three
thousand pounds will go; and if that will not do, I will go further.
Nadin and his faction shall not drive you from the field this day. I
am sorry your hill is lostMy father was a weaver, I am a weaver,
and have got my money by your industryand I am the weaver's
friend." He afterwards left the field, and rode towards his own
house. To prove this, a sergeant, and two corporals, of the 11th
dragoons, and two constables, were called.

Mr. Raine made a most eloquent speech for the defendant; and said,
he should call many respectable witnesses to prove that he, on that
day, was constantly advising the people to be peaceable, and retire
to their homes. The groom, who attended the defendant the whole of
the time, said he never heard his master make use of the expressions
sworn to by the other witnesses: that when the dragoons drew their
swords, his master's horse becoming restive, he slipped off, walked
a little way, and then mounted the groom's horse and rode off.

Mr. Stennett, Mr. Norris, Mr. C. Sattarthwaite, Mr. Brierley, and a
number of others, deposed to the defendant's exhorting the people to
refrain from mischief. None of these witnesses had heard him make
use of any of the other expressions ascribed to him. Serjeant
Cockell, in a warm and animated speech of an hour and ten minutes,
observed upon the evidence for the defendant; and insisted, that,
with the exception of the groom's, it corroborated that given by the
witness for the crown: as they deposed as to the defendant's conduct
and speeches after he had been heard and seen by the witnesses for
the prosecution. He said, he had no doubt of what his intentions
were; if they were as peaceable as they had been represented, why
did he not join and assist the magistrates ?instead of which he
addressed the people (although requested not by Capt. Trafford) who
became more unruly, huzzaing when he spoke, and he returning the
compliment. . The jury, after a few minutes' consideration, returned
a verdict of Guilty; which subjected the defendant to fine and
imprisonment.



ANNE LEAK
A Horse Thief, Eleven years old

The following case, extracted from the reports of criminal cases in
London (1811) is a most extraordinary instance of juvenile
depravity. "Ann Leak, a girl of about eleven years of age, underwent
a second examination before the magistrates at the public office,
Worship-street, being charged on suspicion of having stolen a horse,
saddle, and bridle, the property of some person unknown. She was
taken into custody in the neighbourhood of Bethnal-green, where she
was leading the horse. On her being questioned by a tradesman who
the horse belonged to? she answered, that it was the property of her
father; which the tradesman doubting, she was taken to the above
office; where being questioned by the magistrates, she still
continued in the same story, when she was searched by one of the
officers, who found a brass collar with a padlock round her neck,
with the name and place of abode of her father, who, it appears, is
an honest industrious man, living in the neighbourhood of Grosvenor-
square. The mother of the girl attended, who stated the reason of
her having the collar round her neck, she having frequently
absconded from home, and was for the purpose of her being brought
back. No person appearing against the prisoner, nor any person
claiming the property, she was discharged, upon her mother promising
to take proper care of her, so that she should not commit any
farther depredation."

Another printed report of criminal charges before the Lord Mayor of
London, a very short time after her discharge from Worship-street
office, says, "Ann Leak, the little girl, about eleven years of age,
who has been already taken up twice for horse-stealing, being caught
in the act of riding away horses, the property of strangers, was
brought up to the Mansion house, last Friday, upon a charge of
driving cattle in the city on Thursday night. She appeared, as she
has been already described, with a brass collar fastened round her
neck with a padlock, with the following words and figures engraved
upon it:"Ann Leak, No. 92, Green-street, Grosvenor-square.Flog me
home." The Lord Mayor sent for her parents, and her mother and
brother attended. They stated that they could not keep her from
running away; that she had made her escape from a woman to whose
care they had intrusted her, and that they wished much to get her
into the Institution of the Philanthropic Society. They did not, in
fact, know what to do with her, and related several instances of
untoward and extraordinary behaviour, when at a boarding school. The
Lord Mayor advised the mother to remove the collar from her neck,
and take the best care of her their circumstances would admit. In
the course of the examination the mother said the child had been
examined by a doctor, who gave it as his opinion she was not
deranged."



THOMAS LUCAS and SARAH WELLS
Christians Prosecuted by Jews

Though these cases are not marked with the deepest dye of
wickedness, yet they contain that which induces us to give them a
place in our catalogue of crimes. They may, at least, serve to
dissipate the melancholy which the preceding facts must have created
in the mind of every reader. 	At the first sessions in the year
1809, for Westminster, THOMAS LUCAS was indicted for assaulting Hart
Levy, a Jew clothesman. From the evidence of the prosecutor it
appeared, that he was pursuing his business, and dealing with some
of his customers, near a stand of hackney coaches, in Charles-
street, Covent-garden; when the defendant, who is himself a
gentleman of the whip, but not a member of the Whip Club, assailed
the prosecutor, and, in language not most decorous, but the most
flippant, charged him with being a common cheat and notorious
swindler, at the same time cautioning the customers not to deal with
him. Whereupon the Hebrew threatened him with an action of damages
for slandering his fair fame and reputation. This not being much
relished by Jarvis, he vowed he should have some reason to take him
to Westminster-hall; and, leaving his coach and horses, retired to a
public-house for a few minutes, on his return from whence he served
the poor Jew with a dexterous facer under the wheels of his coach,
and, mounting his box, drove off. This was proved by another
witness.

The defendant endeavoured to justify the assault, by stating that
the prosecutor had spit in his face; to prove which another hackney
coachman was called; but as Moses recognized in him an old customer
whom he was recently obliged to summon to the Court of Conscience
for the value of an old coat he had sold him some time ago, his
testimony got very little credence, and the defendant was found
guilty. The court sentenced him to a short imprisonment.

SARAH WELLS was indicted for stealing a shift, the property of Isaac
Hart. The prosecutor, a Jew clothesman, gave his testimony nearly as
follows:"I wash going down Charing-cross about my business, and
turned in a little court (Angel court), ven I heard somebody call 
'cloash!' I looked up, ven I saw a voman, who I thought called, and
she beckoned me to come up; I went upstairs, and she axed me if I
had e'er a goot petticoat to shell. I had a very goot von, so help
me Got, vorth four shillin. I showed it to her, but she would not
come up to my price; I could not afford to give it less, so I wash
going down stairs, going away, ven four or five, or many more vomen
(so help me Got, I never saw so many), got about me; (they had been
eating their dinner or breakfast, or someting, for the cups and
saucers were on the table) ven, as Got would have it, and to my
misfortin, there was a leetle hole in the bottom of my ba-ag, and
two very nice new shifts hung out of it, ven the vomen began to pull
me about, and did drag them out, and ran avay vid my shifts. The
prisoner took von of them, for I did see her take it. I then vent
and fetched a constable, and took this von wid my nice new shift,
the oter girls, they all ran avay, and I never since could get my
oter shift."

The prisoner, in her defence, said that the prosecutor had agreed to
go to bed to her, and she was to have the shift for her trouble.

Prosecutor"It's a lie, so help me Got, it's a lie. I never did no
such a ting!" The jury returned a verdict of guilty, and the court
sentenced her to one month's imprisonment.



JACOB LITTLEBOY, WILLIAM GLADMAN, AND WILLIAM PENN
Convicted at the April Sessions for Middlesex 1809,
of Stealing a Dead Body out of the Grave

THERE is, perhaps, no crime, though not punished capitally, at which
our nature revolts more than at the idea of the dead being pursued
by the thief into the peaceful grave. Such sacrilegious,
unconscionable villains, however, cannot be too often held up to
public detestation.

The two former were grave-diggers, which greatly increases their
crime, and the third a porter in St. Thomas's Hospital. They were
indicted for a conspiracy to take away dead bodies from the church-
yard of St. Mary's, Islington; and in another court they were
charged with taking away the dead body of a man named Jacob Hart, on
the 6th of February last. It appeared, that on the 4th of February
last, the deceased was found drowned in the New River, and from
thence carried to the vault of St. Mary's church, Islington, for
interment. The coroner's inquest having sat upon his body, he was
consigned to Littleboy, the grave digger, and generally supposed to
have been interred, the coffin having been put into the ground, and
the funeral service performed by the minister. On the 6th of
February, in the evening, however, one of the Bow-street patrol met
the prisoner Penn on the Islington-road, wheeling a barrow, laden
with a basket apparently full of clothes. He felt the outside of the
load, and discovered the shape of a man's head; upon which he
ordered the defendant to go with him immediately to Bow street,
where the basket was examined, and found to contain the body of the
deceased; and upon searching the grave where the deceased was
supposed to have been buried, the coffin was opened and found to
contain nothing but earth and rubbish.

Suspicion immediately fell upon the defendants, Littleboy and
Gladman, and they were taken into custody. The jury found the
defendants Guilty of taking away the body in question, but not of
the conspiracy. The court sentenced Penn to pay a fine of 5l. and
the other defendants to a fine of 3s. 4d. each.



HANNAH, ALIAS DIANA CONOLLY, CATHERINE HANDLEY, AND
ELIZABETH COX
Convicted (Separately) for concealing the Delivery of
a Child, and Sentenced to Imprisonment

HANNAH, ALIAS DIANA CONOLLY, was indicted for the wilful murder of
her male infant, by drowning it in a tub of water. This case, though
short, leaves vast scope for conjecture as to the guilt of this
woman on the capital part of the bill of indictment found against
her. It also comprises a curious surgical case.

It appeared that the unhappy woman lodged at a house in Brick-lane,
Old-street, and was met by Mrs. Horn, her fellow-lodger, upon the
staircase leading to her apartment, apparently very much indisposed.
The prisoner asked Mrs. H. to get her something to drink, and Mrs.
H. left her for that purpose. On her return she found the prisoner
in bed, and from the observations she made, concluded the prisoner
had delivered herself of an infant child. She interrogated the
prisoner as to the fact, but she denied it. Her suspicion, however,
being increased, Mrs. H. searched the bed, and beneath the pillows
found a male child, but newly born, and lifeless. She also perceived
a tub in the room, the water in which was discoloured. Mr. Evans, a
surgeon, was called in, who ascertained that the child's lungs were
inflated; but in his evidence he would not take upon himself to
swear that the child had been born alive. The inflation of the
lungs, he said, was not decisive of the fact of the child's being
born alive. Dr. Hunter has doubted whether the same symptoms might
not appear, though the child had died before it came into the world;
and consequently it would be very presumptuous in him to speak with
certainty. The judge submitted to the jury, whether it would not be
better to acquit the prisoner of the murder, and by their verdict
say whether the prisoner had not endeavoured to conceal her delivery
from the world. This the jury found, which by a recent Act subjected
the party to twelve months' imprisonment, and she was sentenced
accordingly.

CATHARINE HANDLEY was also indicted by the overseers of the parish
of St. Giles in the Fields, for exposing and deserting her newly
born illegitimate child, in Bowl-yard, in that parish. It appeared
in evidence that the prisoner had been delivered of the child on the
29th day of July, about the hour of five in the afternoon; and
between eleven and twelve at night of the same day the child was
discovered tied up in a dirty cloth with its legs confined under it,
laid in the carriage-way of Bowl-yard, which is a narrow place,
there being little more than sufficient room for a carriage to pass
through. She was found by the vigilance of the midwife, who attended
her at her delivery, in a house in Church-lane, St. Giles's, a
considerable distance from the place where she was de livered. The
jury, without hesitation, found her Guilty, and the court sentenced
her to twelve months' imprisonment.

ELIZABETH COX was convicted of a similar offence to the two last
mentioned, about the same time, and sentenced to the same punishment
at the Summer Assizes for Essex. This unnatural mother was indicted
for the wilful murder of her bastard child.

James Cockle, a surgeon, deposed, that the prisoner lived servant
with a Mrs. Martha Salmon, in the neighbourhood of Colchester. In
the month of May last he was sent for to the house, as it was
suspected that the prisoner had been delivered of a child. In her
bed-room he discovered circumstances that induced him to look
further; and, on searching the prisoner's box, he found the dead
body of a child, tied up in an apron. The string was twisted five
times round the neck, and tied with a hard knot. The child appeared
full grown and perfect. He opened the head, when the vessels
appeared tinged as they would have been if the child died of
strangulation. The lungs floated in water; but this, he said, was a
fallacious experiment. His belief was, that the child was born
alive, though he would not undertake to swear that it was.

Martha Salmon, the mistress, next deposed, that she had suspected
the girl was with child, and had taxed her with it; but she denied
it for some time. She observed her very ill one day, and advised her
to leave off work. The girl seemed very unwilling, and asked, if she
went away for a few days, whether she should be allowed to return to
her place: The witness said her bed-room was near the prisoner's,
and if any child had cried she must have heard it. She corroborated
the surgeon as to the finding the body of the child. Mary Cutting
and Martha Finch said they had suspected that the prisoner was with
child; but as she was a short thick girl, they thought it might be
her make: they were present when the body of the child was found in
the prisoner's box.

Lord Ellenborough, in summing up, told the jury, that however
painful their duty might be, yet they must do it firmly; and if they
were of opinion the child was born alive, and had been strangled by
the prisoner's tying the apron strings round its neck, they must
pronounce her guilty of the murder. The jury found her Not Guilty.
The learned judge then directed them to say whether they were of
opinion that the child was born a bastard, and whether she had
endeavoured to conceal its birth. They found her Guilty of the
concealment, and she was sentenced to one year's imprisonment.



JOSEPH SMITH AND CHARLES MEYRICK
Convicted of a Burglary in Breaking into Bagnigge
Wells, The Noted Tea Gardens near London

THESE men were indicted at the Old Bailey for breaking and entering
the dwelling-house of T. Davis, and stealing a dial, a blunderbuss,
several bottles of wine, and other articles. The prosecutor keeps
the house and gardens known by the name of "Bagnigge Wells."

One night the cellar under the long-room was locked up. In the room
called "Nell Gwynn's room," the fire-arms were deposited, and the
wine in the cellar beneath. About eight the next morning, the cellar
door was discovered to have been forced, and the wine missed; and
two quart and two pint bottles of wine were found in the garden; and
a variety of bottles were found broken, and the liquor lying about
the cellar. The prisoners were first seen by a watchman, named
Parker, at two in the morning, in School-house-yard, when they were
concealing behind a board a blunderbuss and a musket. He instantly
gave notice to the other watchmen; and by the direction of Simpson,
the constable of the night, they were ordered to leave their watch
boxes, and conceal themselves in different stations. Just as the day
light appeared, the two prisoners, and another man (escaped) came to
the spot from Aylesbury-street. They looked round with great
circumspection; and, conceiving the coast to be clear, were about to 
stoop, in order to gather up the fire-arms, when they were assailed
by the watchmen. Two of them ran off towards School-house-yard; and
the third along Aylesbury-street, and was seen no more. Smith was
secured in the passage leading from Clerkenwell-green to St. John's-
square; Simpson, brandishing his hanger, told him he would cut his
head off if he did not surrender, when he walked very quietly to the
watch house. Meyrick was brought to the same place, but not until
after an obstinate resistance. When the prisoners were secured, the
watchmen repaired to the place where the fire-arms were seen; but
they had been removed. They, however, found a bottle corked; it was
opened in court, and proved to be full of port wine; and the neck of
another bottle, thrown away by Meyrick in the pursuit, was produced;
the neck was also corked.

Simpson confirmed these facts. The prosecutor said, that, to the
best of his belief, a dozen bottles of wine had been stolen from his
cellar, six of port, and six of Madeira; he also identified the
fire-arms. Smith, in his defence, denied any knowledge of the
robbery. He was going to the west end of the town, to borrow a horse
to carry one of his friends to Fairlop Fair, when he was
unexpectedly seized, and threatened by Simpson with his naked
hanger. He, therefore, had yielded quietly, conscious of his
innocence.

Meyrick justified the resistance he had made, as he had been charged
with a crime of which he had no idea whatever. He asked the man who
took him what distance he (the prisoner) was from him when he saw
him throw away a bottle of wine. The answer was, five or six yards,
and he was confident the prisoner was the man.

The lodgings of both parties were searched, and on their wives the
officers found skeleton keys for opening locks of drawers. The
Common Sergeant summed up, and the jury found both the prisoners
GuiltyDeath.



MICHAEL CONNOR, JAMES KELLY, AND JOHN CARR
The Two Former Convicted of Highway Robbery, February
1809, and Sentenced to Death

These men were capitally indicted for assaulting Mr. Samudie, on the
highway, and forcibly taking from his person his watch and money. It
appeared that Mr. Samudie was returning to Clapton on Thursday
evening last, in a single-horse chaise, when he was stopped by five
footpads, of whom he believed the prisoners to be three. They bade
him deliver his money, which he immediately did, to the amount of
3l. and upwards. This not satisfying them, they demanded his watch,
which he also surrendered. They were armed with pistols, and
threatened his life unless he immediately surrendered his property.
Mr. Samudie gave information of the robbery a short time afterwards,
and some officers went in search of the footpads.

On coming to Newington-green, they fell in with three individuals
who answered the description Mr. Samudie had given of the footpads,
and they endeavoured to take them into custody. They succeeded,
however, in securing only Connor and Kelly:the third person, whom
the officers believed to be Carr, made his escape across the fields,
having first fired a pistol at the officers. Upon searching Connor
they found a parcel containing grocers' currants, which he said he
had picked up in the road: the highways, however, were at that time
extremely muddy, and not the smallest dirt appeared on the parcel.

Mr. Samudie, on being showed that parcel, said it was in his chaise
at the time he was robbed, and that he had brought the currants with
him from a grocer's in town. He was sure the parcel had not fallen
out of his chaise, and he had no doubt of the identity of Connor and
Kelly. The other prisoner, however, proved, that at the time of the
robbery, he was drinking tea with some of his friends, at such a
distance from the spot, that, if the alibi was a true statement, it
was sufficient to exonerate him from the charge. There was, however,
much suspicion about his case; but the jury acquitted him, and found
the other two Guilty.



JOHN SPEED, ESQ.
A Lieutenant-Colonel in the British Army, Convicted
at the Lent Surrey Assizes, 1809, of Bigamy

This officer was indicted for marrying Ann Thorn, his former wife
being still living. Mr. Bolland, as counsel for the prosecution,
stated, that the prisoner at the bar, in the year 1785, was an
ensign in the marines, and then became acquainted with a Miss
Nelson, whose father was then an Alderman, and had been a mayor of
London. After some interval of courtship he married that lady on the
14th of September, 1785, at the parish of Furneux Pelham, in the
county of Hertford. He continued with his wife for some years, and
had children by her; but, in consequence of impropriety of conduct
on his part, she was compelled to seek refuge with her father, and
in the year 1792 articles of separation were signed between them.

The prisoner was abroad for some time, and in the year 1799 he was
recommended to lodge in the house of a Mr. Thorn, a respectable
market-gardener, near Putney. He soon found means to insinuate
himself into the favour of his second daughter, and she was
persuaded to marry him. He represented himself as lieut.-colonel in
the army, and as one having the best expectations. They had not, 
however, been married but a very short time when he went to Germany,
and from thence Miss Thorn received a letter from him, saying she
must not look to him for protection, as he was already married, and
his wife was still living. In short, having lived with her but a
very little time, he wholly abandoned her.

The register of his first marriage was put in, and his identity
proved. By this it appeared that he was married to his first, Miss
Nelson, on the 14th of September, 1785, at Ferneux Pelham, in
Hertfordshire, and a witness proved that his wife was still living.

Miss Thorn deposed, that the prisoner came to lodge at her father's
on the 6th of October, 1799, and she married him in the November
following. After he had lived with her about five months he went to
Halifax, and left her pregnant. He never contributed to the support
of the child. The prisoner being called upon for his defence, said,
he should merit the severest punishment of the laws if he had
wilfully offended; but he hoped the court would believe, after they
had heard his case, that he had erred through ignorance. It was true
he had married Miss Nelson, as was stated, and he had lived with her
until they had six children. His means were then unequal to the
support of so large a family. Three of the children died; his mother
took the eldest, and his wife at that time had an employment which
produced her two guineas a week. She agreed to provide for two
children, and after some time a deed was brought to him to sign,
which he understood was to secure to her own separate use those two
guineas a week. No sooner had he signed it than his wife refused any
longer to take care of the children, and he understood he had been
deceived into signing a deed of absolute separation from his wife.
After this he instituted a suit in the Ecclesiastical Court, either
to compel his wife to return to him, or to get an absolute
separation; and, in a motion which was made in the King's Bench for
a prohibition, Lord Kenyon had said from the bench, that after that
deed he was as free as air.

Thinking himself thus free from restraint, he did marry Miss Thorn,
and continued with her until his military duties called him abroad.
On her discovering his former marriage she refused any longer to
live with him; and when he solicited her to it, her reply was
angrily, that she could hang him if she liked it. He stated that he
had suffered great hardships in prison; he had been shut up in a
damp and solitary dungeon, which had brought on him a rheumatic
fever; and, by an order of the Commander-in-Chief, that no officer
in custody of the law should receive his pay, he had lost all his
pay during his confinement. He protested that he never meant to
offend the laws, which he had fought to protect, in all ranks, from
an ensign to that of lieutenant-colonel, and in what he had done he
had been misled by error of judgment.

The Lord Chief Baron told the jury the fact was proved
unquestionably, and he expressed some indignation at the language
represented to have come from Lord Kenyon, the absurdity of which
every attorney's clerk could have told him. The jury found him
GuiltyTransportation.



PHILIP FACEY
A Singular Case of Bigamy, of which he was Convicted
at the Summer Assizes for Surrey, 1809, Fined and
Imprisoned

IN this case the prisoner got into his awkward situation rather
curiously. His first wife had also married again; and her last
husband finding she had been married before, and wishing to get rid
of her, discovered the prisoner, and took him to Union Hall, as a
witness against his former wife; when the whole secret coming out,
the tables were turned, and he was himself committed for the bigamy.

Philip Facey was indicted for bigamy in feloniously marrying a
second time, his former wife being still living. Mr. Curwood, as
counsel for the prosecution, observed, that the crime of which the
prisoner stood charged was one which in its consequences was the
most injurious to civil society, as it went to destroy the
sacredness of the marriage contract, out of which all the other
relations of society grew. The facts of the case must necessarily be
short. The prisoner married a young woman, of the name of Griggs, at
Bury St. Edmunds, in Suffolk, in the year 1783. He left her a short
time afterwards, and in the year 1795 he again was married to a
widow, who kept a small shop in the Borough. He left her to go with
his regiment to Ireland, he being a sergeant in the army; and lately
he was discovered residing in the Park as one of the keepers with a
third family. The registers of the two marriages were then put in
and proved, and that the former wife was still living.

For the prisoner, an officer in the West Suffolk militia proved that
the prisoner had always borne a most exemplary character, that he
was promoted to be a quarter master in the regiment, and Lord
Euston, in consideration of his uniform good behaviour, had
appointed him a Park-keeper; that his wife had been drummed out of
the regiment, and had not been heard of for many years.

The prisoner declared, that he believed his first wife to be dead,
not hearing from her many years, and knowing she was in the habit of
excessive drinking. The learned judge observed, that the extent of
his offence was that he had acted with too little caution in not
making more accurate inquiries after his first wife. He should
therefore sentence him but to a mild punishment, which was that he
should pay a fine of one shilling, and be imprisoned for one month.



RICHARD COSTELLO, JOHN SAYLOR, and JAMES MACLALLEY
Soldiers in the British Army, Convicted at
Chelmsford, in March Assizes, 1809, of the Murder of
a Fellow Soldier

Soldiers, engaged in the same great cause, the defence of their
country, one would suppose, would rather act a brotherly part than
fight with each other; and more especially at a time when every arm
was wanted to repel the tyrant of Europe. In the present instance,
(and we trust no more of the kind will come before us,) we find a
party of the 4th regiment of foot disgracing those fine battalions,
in fastening a quarrel upon another corps, which ended in murder.
Richard Costello, John Saylor, and James MacLalley, three soldiers
of the 4th regiment of foot, were indicted for the wilful murder of
W. Wrach, a soldier in the North Lincoln militia.

It appeared by the evidence of several soldiers in the North Lincoln
militia, that they were at the Woolpack public-house, in Colchester,
on Christmas-eve last, drinking and amusing themselves; they had not
long been there, when a party of the 4th regiment of foot came in,
and demanded a place at the fire, which was granted them. Not
content with this, they afterwards proceeded to abuse the Lincoln
men, as militia men and feather-bed soldiers. This abuse the militia
men bore a long time, and at last attempted to retire, but the men
of the 4th regiment being more violent, they proceeded to assault
the others, and Costello was noticed to be particularly forward in
the affray, having seized the poker, and dealt blows about him. He
was particularly stated to be the person who knocked the deceased
down with a blow, which appeared to have fractured his skull, and of
which he died.

On the contrary, on behalf of the prisoners, several witnesses from
the 4th regiment were called, who stated that the provocation came
from the Lincoln men, and that there was a general row amongst the
whole party; that they got to fighting in the house, and all came
fighting into the street. The jury, after considerable deliberation,
found the prisoners guilty of murder.Death.



THE SCALE OF ROGUERY EXEMPLIFIED
From the Earliest Stage of Human Depravity

"He who at his early years
Has sown in Vice, shall reap in Tears."

From the meanest petty larceny to the swindler in his phaeton, who
assumes the name of Colonel, Lord, or Duke, there is a gradation of
pride which supports each class, with a certain quantum of contempt
for its inferiorand sometimes with an honest ambition to reach a
higher rank, and instead of being huddled among the trials not worth
recording, be stared at by a crowded Old Bailey, and honoured by a
portrait in the print shops. The filcher of door-mats and scrapers
looks up to the superior adroitness of the pickpockets, and the
pickpocket longs for the day when, associating with the servants of
some indulgent master, he may break into the house and the bureau,
and supply the melting shops with bullion. The housebreaker,
emboldened by success, would display his courage on the highway; and
the highwayman, tired of a contest in which it is possible he may be
either shot or hanged, devotes his leisure moments to the study of
commerce, forms connexions at Liverpool, Bristol, and London, and
issues his paper in hopes that when he obtains the discount he may
hear no more of it; and, to prevent his name from being injured,
very judiciously supplies himself with a commodity of various names
and firms. At length, tired of borrowing money, he undertakes to
lend it, and becomes a peculator upon a large and extensive scale.

Accuse any one of these, and you will find he screens himself by an
appeal to his brethren. Defendit numerus. He asks, would you be so
mad as to inquire into these petty matters? You will overturn the
whole system; no man will be safe, for all do the like. Then, as a
palliative to their own honour, the swindler tells you he is no
highwayman nor footpad; the footpad pleads that he disturbs no man's
sleep by breaking into his house at night; the housebreaker is happy
to think he never picked a pocket, and the pickpocket thanks God he
never descended so low as to steal pint-pots and door scrapers.
These examples are taken from the very lowest on this scale. Let us
proceed higher, and inquire whether peculation is to be estimated by
quantity or quality, or at what precise sum honesty ends, and
t'other thing begins.

To exemplify these melancholy observations, and to bring sufficient
instances into one point of view, we found occasion to trace the
progress of iniquity for a few months only of the time whereof we
write. To begin then, at that early stage when we should be found,
with satchel on our backs, "Creeping like snail, unwillingly to
school."

We find on the records at the Old Bailey, that BENJAMIN EDWARDS was
put to the bar, being charged with stealing one gallon of rum, and
8l. in Bank of England notes, and some silver, the property of John
Towston. The prisoner contrived to get himself into the employ of
the prosecutor, who is a wine and brandy merchant; but he had not
been many hours engaged, when, taking advantage of the short absence
of Mr. Towston, who went out about business, told him when he
returned that an order came for a gallon of rum, and to bring change
for a 10l. note. The prosecutor, not suspecting any wrong, gave him
the rum to take to the supposed customer, together with the
difference between the value of the rum and a 10l. note, but he
never returned. Being apprehended some few days afterwards for
another offence, he was recognised by the prosecutor, who instantly
identified him, as did his clerk. He at first denied all knowledge
of him, but finding that would not do, he said that he himself was
imposed on by a gentleman's servant, and afraid to go back to his
master. He was convicted as for larceny; but it was intimated to
him, that he was not to expect to remain any longer at large in this
countryfor it turned out not only that he was a most notorious
offender, but that he had actually been tried about three sessions
ago for nearly a similar offence in this court.Sentenced to the
house of correction for one year.

JOHN HAWLEY, alias HAMPTON, and BENJAMIN RATTEY, neither of whom had
completed their twelfth year, were indicted for stealing various
articles, the property of George Chalmers, nurseryman, at Newington.
The facts were clearly proved, and the boys were both found Guilty.
The court, and indeed every one present, were interested in their
behalf, particularly Rattey, whose face was the picture of apparent
innocence. The chairman asked Mr. Ives if he knew them, when he
shook his head and said Rattey was well known to him, and he wished
something could be done for him. An explanation took place, and we
understand that he had been five times charged in that prison, that
he had been tried for a capital offence; and that his brother, who
was tried with him, had been transported, that he had been sent to
the Marine Society, from whom he had run away, and had become a
professed thief. The other boy was unknown, and he kept a determined
silence as to what friends he had, or who were his parents. Not a
creature came forward in their behalf, though they were decently
dressed, and the court in consequence ordered their sentence to
stand over till next sessions. The mother, however, of Rattey, a
decent looking woman, was in court, and appeared to be much
afflicted. They were sent to the house of correction. From the
circumstance of Hawley's having been proved to have used two names,
there is reason to suppose that he was vicious, perhaps, equal to
his companion.

The next juvenile depredators who were put to the same bar, answered
to the respective names of OGLE, HAMILTON, and DOYLE. They were
charged with having burglariously broken and entered the house of
Thomas Adlington, at Tottenham, in the county of Middlesex, and
thereout taking six shawls, and a variety of wearing apparel, the
property of Thomas Adlington.

O'Mara (an accomplice) stated, that he and the three prisoners,
together with two others not yet taken, met on the evening before
the robbery at a public house, when they agreed the next morning to
assemble at the Swan in Salisbury-street, Fleet-street, where they
breakfasted; that they did so assemble, whence they proceeded into
the country with the intention of going as far as Cambridge, and rob
all the way there and back; that they first stopped at Tottenham,
where he and Hamilton sat down nearly opposite the prosecutor's
shop, whilst Ogle and Doyle went in and robbed it; that they also
committed another robbery, the booty whereof they likewise shared.

On his cross-examination by Mr. Barry, who was counsel for the
prisoner Doyle, he said that he was an apprentice to a printer, had
served but three years of his apprenticeship, and left his master;
he could give no account how he got his bread, said he met the other
boys at a public-house near St. Clement's Church-yard on the 23d,
the night before the robbery, when he told them that he had just
seen a gentleman's pocket picked by man that he knew was a sheriff's
officer, and thereupon they agreed to go the next day out a-
thieving. It was the first time that he ever took the other boys, or
the prisoners, out with him. He himself had been in custody before;
he had been once put into custody by his master, and again by an
officer of the police, and lastly he was in custody upon this
charge, and had the greatest and best part of the booty in his
possession when he was apprehended. The rest of his cross-
examination was a tissue of the former, and displayed all the
hardened villain, a perfect adept in slang and wickedness, though
not quite 18 years of age.

After a very able charge from Mr. Justice Heath, who observed, that
Mrs. Adlington's testimony did not bring home the burglary to the
prisoners, as she could not say whether the door of the shop had
been shut or not, they were all acquitted of the capital part, and
found guilty of the larceny only.

Doyle had numerous friends, who knew him from his birth (he was not
quite 15 years old), and they gave him an excellent character, this
being the first time that they ever heard anything dishonest imputed
to him. Ogle and Hamilton had also friends who spoke to their
characters. They were tried upon another charge of privately
stealing three handkerchiefs from the shop of Mr. Wright, and found
Guilty of stealing, but not privately; the capital part of the
charge was therefore removed, and sentence transportation. The
eldest of the three prisoners, viz. Ogle, was but just turned 16
years old.

JOHN WHEELER, another boy, was next put to the bar, charged on two
indictments, the first with stealing some beef, and four carcases of
lamb, the property of Thomas Powell, and the second with stealing a
horse and cart, the property of Marlborough Powell. He was found
Guilty upon both indictments. On retiring from the bar, he seized a
large leaden inkstand that lay near him in the dock, and was raising
his arm to strike one of the witnesses against him, who was passing
close by the dock, when his arm being seized he was prevented, and
the inkstand wrested out of his hand. This being done in the face of
the open court, the judges instantly directed that the keeper of the
prison should restrict so dangerous a person even from communication
with the other prisoners, and he was ordered to be kept in solitary
confinement.

MARGARET NORTON was capitally indicted for stealing in the dwelling-
house of George Bagshaw, a quantity of plate and other articles, the
property of Mr. Scott. It appeared that the prisoner was hired by
Mrs. Scott as a servant, from one of the offices in the
neighbourhood of Covent-garden; and on the third day after she was
hired she absconded. Mrs. Scott, alarmed at her absence, began to
look after her property, and presently discovered that all her
husband's plate, and divers other articles of value had been stolen.
Information was immediately given at the police office, and the next
morning the prisoner was discovered sitting upon the floor, at her
lodgings in St. Giles's, sorting the plate. The jury, having no
doubt but the prisoner committed the robbery, found her Guilty.
Death.

WILLIAM RAWLINS, a deaf and dumb lad, apprenticed from the Deaf and
Dumb Asylum, was indicted for stealing some wearing apparel in the
house where he lived. The peculiarity of this trial was the manner
in which the proceedings were brought to the cognizance of the
prisoner. An instructor from the Deaf and Dumb Asylum attended, and
by signs either of his fingers, or by his lips, conveyed to the
prisoner the depositions of the prosecutor and witnesses. The
prisoner had been taught to write, and in his written answers evaded
the charge with uncommon dexterity. For the most part, however, the
instructor interpreted his answers from signs he made, and a sort of
hissing articulation from his lips. The larceny, however, was
apparent, and the jury found him Guilty.

WILLIAM BERRY, CHARLES GLOVER, and MARY TOOLEY, were indicted for
breaking and entering the dwelling-house of Frances Clarke, widow,
in the day time, and stealing therein a pair of stockings, value
14s. The two boys, Berry and Glover, cut the shop window of Mrs.
Clarke, haberdasher and milliner, in Great Russel-street,
Bloomsbury, between 11 and 12 o'clock in the day, and stole a pair
of black silk stockings, which they afterwards handed to Mary
Tooley, who went to pawn them. They were watched during the whole
transaction by a person of the name of Gerrard, and almost
immediately taken into custody. They were all found Guilty, and were
sentencedDeathwhich, on account of their ages was commuted to
transportation; Berry being only 13, Glover 14, and the girl 16.



JOHN PALMER 
Executed 23rd November 1808, for Cutting and Maiming
in the Course of a Burglary

This man was an old offender, though only about twenty-three years
of age, and was known to the police officers to be as bad a
character as ever was brought to justice. He was indicted at the Old
Bailey, before the Recorder, in the September sessions, 1808, for
having, on the 8th, feloniously assaulted William Waller; and for
having, with a certain sharp instrument, which he held in his right
hand, stabbed and cut him, in and upon his head, with intent in so
doing to kill and murder him.

William Waller stated, that he was a porter employed by Mr. Kimpton,
an auctioneer, to take care of the house and furniture, No. 20,
Manchester-square. He was consequently in charge of that house on
the 8th of September, 1808. About four o'clock in the afternoon, he
shut up the door and the windows, and made them safe. He stayed in
the house till about seven o'clock; he went out then, having left
the house secured; he returned between the hours of eleven and
twelve o'clock the same night. He found it the same as he left it;
he opened the door and went in, and locked the door; he put the
chain on it; he went upstairs straight forward up in the room as
usual. His room was on the right-hand garret. He went straight
forward in the room, and pulled the sash down: he returned back to
the bed-side, he pulled his coat and waistcoat off, and his
handkerchief and shoes; he saw the blankets and the mattress
disturbed to what he left it in the morning; he said to himself he
did not leave these things in this manner; he turned round and
touched the latch of the other garret; he had the latch in his hand,
the prisoner at the bar caught hold of his collar. He was between
the doors of the two garrets. He immediately laid hold of his
collar; witness said, "Lord have mercy upon me." The prisoner said,
"Do not speak a word, sir; lie down on the bed; that is all you have
got to do: then he shoved witness on his breast to the bed,
sideways, and threw him on the bed. He stood over witness, and the
other man was behind him, whom he called Joseph. He said, Joseph, d
n him, fetch the pistol, and we will blow his brains out, he will
not lay still; with that witness gave him a shove, and darted to the
window; then he received a blow on his head immediately, from the
same man who had hold of him and pushed him. Witness fell towards
the window, and as he fell he lifted up the sash; he put his head
out of the window, and hallooed out murder, as loud as he could; the
people below hallooed out, Come down and open the door; he hallooed
out, He would as quick as he could. He did; he unbolted the top
bolt, and unchained it, and the people outside shoving the door so
violently to get in, they shoved witness down; they knocked him
backwards; he got up and went to the door; and while he stood there,
the prisoner was standing there; the watchman had got him; he was
outside of the door. Witness saw the prisoner in custody; he knew
him directly. He said to him, "You rascal, you are the man that hit
me on the head." He never spoke to witness. The blow he received was
very heavy, but he could not then tell what it was done with; the
constable found it was done with an iron crow; witness bled much,
and was very faint. He was attended by a surgeon ever since. He was
not yet recovered. He had no doubt but that the prisoner at the bar
was the person that struck him; the other person made his escape;
witness could not have recollected his person; he only took notice
of the prisoner. It was a moonlight night, and he was standing over
him when he laid on the edge of the bed; his face was about a foot,
or a foot and a half, from him. His voice was particular. He knew
him afterwards by his person and his voice.

Henry Dance, a solicitor, living at No. 17, Manchester square, said,
that on the 8th of September, about half past eleven, or near twelve
o'clock at night, he heard a cry of murder several times repeated.
On going into the street, he perceived it appeared at the front
garret of No. 20: several persons called out to the man who was
crying, "Can you let us into the house?" he said he was bleeding to
death, and could not come down, for they would murder him. Four or
five of the strongest people began to kick against the door, in
order to break it open; while they were doing this, a man appeared
behind the area, within the rails; he got over them, and jumped down
in the street; immediately witness supposed him to be one of the
persons belonging to the house. Witness laid his hands upon him, and
said, "What have they been doing to you?" He said, "They wanted to
murder the man that is in the house." Witness then said, "Who the
devil are you?" He made no answer to that as he heard, and he was
therefore seized by a number of people, among whom witness was one,
and James Coburn another, and the watchman of their street another;
this was close to the threshold of the door; by this time it
appeared that the people had burst open the door, and amongst them
was William Waller in his shirt, bleeding very much indeed. Witness
asked Waller if any person belonged to the house but himself: he
said, No. Witness said, Then this man must be secured. Another
watchman of the name of Scofield came up; witness gave him to the
watchmen, and examined the prisoner very attentively, in order that
he might know him again.

James Cobourn, belonging to the barrack office, and who lives in
Shepherd-street, Manchester-square, corroborated this statement. He
was one of the persons who burst open the door, in doing which he
knocked down the prosecutor. He saw him bleeding, and lying in the
passage. He heard Waller say, that the prisoner was the man who
struck him. The prisoner was then secured, and delivered to the
watchmen.

George Ducas and William Scofield (the two watchmen) swore the
prisoner was the man who had been given in charge to them. Ducas
challenged him while the gentlemen were kicking open the door. He
saw him in the area. Prisoner pretended that he belonged to the
house, and that he slept below stairs. Henry Howard, a constable of
the parish, said, that the next morning, while the surgeon was
dressing Waller's wounds, he searched No. 20, Manchester-square; and
on the two pair of stairs window he found an iron crow, which was
produced. Witness was desired to look at a red mark on it, which he
thought was rust; but the jury were of opinion that it was blood.

Benjamin Baker, another constable, said, he searched the Prisoner,
and found on him a bottle of phosphorus, matches, &c. also a paper
with the following writing, "No. 13, Edward-street, and a house in
Harley-street; No. 30, Oxford-street, and No. 20, Manchester-
square,done:" a pair of snuffers and some picklock keys were also
found on him. Waller swore the snuffers was part of Kimpton's goods
which he had to take care of.

James Lomon surgeon, said, that the wound on Waller's head was about
an inch and a half in length, and about the eighth part of an inch
in depth; there was also a small wound upon his left arm. The blow
fell slanting upon the head, and came on the arm.

The prisoner in his defence, said, he was going by at the time of
the noise. He found the snuffers and the keys. On his coming up
again he was seized by some people, and taken to the watch-house. He
was quite unprepared for his trial, or he could have produced
witnesses who knew him for years, particularly Captain Rolles of the
Lion, and Captain Ogle, of another ship, in which he went to the
Mediterranean. He declared he had only been seven months ashore. The
jury, however, found him Guilty, and he was ordered for execution,
on Wednesday, November 23, 1808.

A few weeks before his execution he gave evident proofs of his
wicked disposition: he conceived a plan of escape, which would have
involved him in the additional guilt of murder, but which he,
notwithstanding, determined to pursue. As it was necessary to have
assistance, he communicated his intentions to a fellow prisoner in a
similar situation with himself, who gave his consent to participate
in his danger, in the hope of sharing in his success. It was
arranged between them, to attempt their plan on the following
Sunday, when the prisoners and the principal turnkeys were attending
divine service, (from which Palmer and his associate were to excuse
themselves on account of illness.) Their scheme was to assassinate
the keeper in the press-yard, in the first instance: and as there
was only another turnkey, whose station was on the inside of the
outer gate, he was the only person who would interpose between them
and their liberty; him they hoped to subdue by threats, and to be
able to lock him up in a place of safety; but, in case of
resistance, it would be necessary to dispose of him in the same
manner as his comrade. In the event of the farther keeper being by
accident on the outside of the gate, they were provided with rope
ladders to scale the walls, and also with saws to release them from
their irons. When they reached the outside, they expected to be
received by their friends, with proper means to transport them
quickly from their pursuers. The confidant and companion of Palmer
not being so hardened in iniquity as himself, communicated in due
time to Mr. Newman the scheme in contemplation, when a search was
made, and a rope ladder, with several instruments, were found about
the bed of Palmer, and proper means taken for his better security.

Finding himself foiled in the object which he had entertained
sanguine hopes of accomplishing, his mind was for a time so agitated
and disturbed, that he could not apply himself seriously and
attentively to prayer. As the period now approached for his
execution, he seemed desirous to have the term extended for one
week, to the end, he stated, that he might have the more time to
make his peace with God, an object he had hitherto neglected for
schemes of villainy and wickedness, which had ended in grief and
disappointment. Mr. Sheriff Hunter preferred his request to
government, but it was refused; he, therefore made the best use he
could of the few remaining hours left him. He demeaned himself
properly to all about him, confessed the justice of his sentence,
and professed to die in charity with all men. In order to atone for
the crimes he had committed, he made a full confession of every
robbery and burglary he had been concerned in, which threw light
upon various transactions that might otherwise have remained for
ever unknown.

On passing through the press-yard on Wednesday morning, on his way
to the scaffold, he invoked a blessing on all his fellow-prisoners,
and requested of Dr. Ford, the ordinary of Newgate, that the cap
might not be drawn over his face until the moment it was absolutely
necessary. A silk handkerchief which he had in his pocket for the
purpose, was, at his earnest request tied over his eyes. He
attempted to address the mob from the platform, but his speech
failed him. He contented himself with bowing to the populace. His
conduct to the last moment on the platform was becoming and proper,
and such as fully accorded with the promise he had lately made, that
he would die a true penitent.



RICHARD THOMAS DUDMAN AND EDWARD WOOD
Convicted of a Conspiracy, of the Foulest Nature, at
the Middlesex Sessions, and Sentenced to Imprisonment
and the Pillory

Convictions and punishments of this disgusting description we have
hitherto excluded from our pages; nor should these monsters be
named, were it not to introduce a witness of a novel description,
who appeared in behalf of one of the prisoners. It may almost,
indeed, be called a phenomenon in a court of criminal judicature.

A Quaker appeared as a witness on behalf of the defendant Dudman,
who submitted to be sworn on the Holy Evangelists, contrary to all
the known rules of that religious body of men. The object of his
testimony was to invalidate the evidence of the youth who
prosecuted. The Quaker, whose name is Abraham Braithwaite, swore
that he had a conversation with the prosecutor, in which he
declared, that so far from the prisoner Dudman having deserved to be
charged with so foul an offence, he always conducted himself towards
him kindly and well, and he (the prosecutor) added, that he
respected him exceedingly.

On his cross-examination he was compelled (for he yielded with great
reluctance to the pressing interrogatories of Mr. Alley, counsel for
the prosecutor) to name the day when this conversation passed
between him and the youth, and he said, some time between the 28th
of October, and the 2nd of November; and being still further pressed
to say why he fixed so accurately upon that precise period, he
assigned, in the most solemn manner, as a reason, because on the 1st
of November he had a letter, the subject of which enabled him to
know that the conversation he alluded to with the prosecutor had
taken place the day before, of course that it must have happened on
the 31st of October. He was then desired to state to the court how,
and from whom, he learned that there was any such charge made
against the prisoner Dudman, and he replied, that he had heard it
from a Mr. Ellis, where Dudman lodged.

When he had finished his evidence, Mr. Ellis was called, at the
instance of the Rev. H. B. Dudley, one of the magistrates, to
ascertain whether he could confirm the account given by the Quaker;
but, so far from that, he declared that he himself did not know of
any such charge being made against Dudman; nor, in point of fact,
was any charge made against him till the arrival in town of the
prosecutor's brother, and that not till the 7th of November: of
course the thing could not be known to the Quaker on the 31st of
October. The jury, after some observations from the chair, found the
defendants, to the satisfaction of a crowded court, guilty on both
indictments; giving no kind of credit to the tale of the Quaker.

The chairman, after expatiating on the foul and vile enormity of
their crimes, sentenced them to two years' imprisonment, and, within
the first month of that time, to stand one hour in the pillory;
where the mob testified their execrations, by severely pelting them
with the offal brought by butchers from Newgate and Fleet Markets.



THE PARSON'S HORSE AND THE WINDMILL.
A Singular Case

An indictment was sometime since (1809) tried at Huntingdon which
excited no small degree of pleasantry as well as interest in the
county: but the issue, perhaps, was the most singular that ever took
place:It was an indictment against a miller for a nuisance for
working his mill so near the common highway as to endanger the lives
of his Majesty's subjects, by frightening the horses travelling on
the road.

The prosecutor was a clergyman residing in the neighbourhood of
Huntingdon, a man of considerable property and consequence in the
county. The mill in question was an old erection, and stood some
time back far out of the high road upon a common; but by a recent
act of parliament the common had been enclosed, and the only road
left, unfortunately for the miller, passed close under the fly of
his mill. The prosecutor, it appeared, was compelled to go this
road, and the mill being at work as he passed, his horse took fright
and threw him. This happened with almost every horse that passed the
mill.

Mr. Justice Grose addressed the jury, and observed, that as the mill
now stood, it was unquestionably a nuisance, and the miller must be
found guilty. It was, however, no fault of his, he could not move
his mill; but the commissioners under the Enclosure Bill, who
directed the road to be set out, were most to blame, and he
regretted they had not been made parties to the indictment. Neither
was the prosecutor to blame, in preferring the indictment. He could
go no other way since the enclosure, and his life, as well as those
of his fellow-subjects travelling by the mill, was endangered, while
the mill remained in its present situation. Under such circumstances
he felt himself wholly at a loss how to act: the miller ought not to
be punished for that he was innocent of, and yet the prosecutor's
convenience and the public safety must be consulted. He thought,
however, that the best way of deciding would be to direct the
prosecutor to pay the miller 40l. and the miller to abate the
nuisance, with leave to erect his mill on some convenient spot
adjoining. This was accordingly made the judgment of the court. This
decision caused much surprise in the county, being the first
instance wherein the prosecutor has been made to pay a fine for
obtaining justice.



MUTINY AT MALTA, APRIL 1807
A Caution to Soldiers

ON Saturday, the 4th of April, 1807, at three o'clock in the
afternoon, Valette was alarmed by a most daring mutiny in the
regiment of Froberg, consisting of foreigners of every description,
quartered in the fortress on the opposite side of the harbour of
Valette, called the Ricasoli in the Island of Malta. The adjutant
Swartz, on being apprised of the intended mutiny, sallied out with
other officers, determined to quell it in its infancy, but did not
succeed; himself and Captain Whitfield fell victims in the attempt
the major and others were wounded.

In the fortress, on duty, was a party of the Royal British
Artillery, commanded by Capt. Fade, who were immediately disarmed,
and remained under the control of the mutineers, and compelled by
them to load the cannon and mortars, and point them towards the city
of La Valette, or wherever otherwise they thought proper to order
them. The soldiers of the regiment, who were not of the number of
the mutineers, embraced the opportunity that offered to effect their
escape, and a great number accomplished it, though many of them were
shot at by the mutineers in making the attempt; several of these
unfortunate men were wounded, and others shot dead.

The ring-leaders on the third day, possibly with a view to get
supplies of provision, opened the great gates of the fort, placing
sentinels in the usual order, of which opportunity on the 5th day,
about 300 availed themselves, taking with them the major of the
regiment wounded, in a litter, and all the officers, together with
Captain Fade, and the artillery men, and all the English women with
their children. The two sentinels attempted to oppose this party,
who were immediately shot dead by them.

In this fortress was a large powder magazine, containing about 500
barrels of gunpowder, at which an artillery man was placed sentinel,
from whom the mutineers demanded entrance into the magazine, which
he boldly refused at the expense of his life, as they instantly put
him to death. The numbers of the mutineers in the fort, in
consequence of continual desertion, was reduced to a very few, and
on Friday the 10th of April, at six o'clock in the afternoon, fired
two bombs on this city, which happily did no injury. It was resolved
to storm the place at daybreak the next morning, and take them by
surprise, ere they could have time to put in execution their
threatened purpose of blowing up the powder magazine. The walls were
scaled, but a dog giving the alarm, frustrated the plan. Six of the
eight remaining retired to the magazine; the other two were cut off
from the magazine. They, however, fired two bombs towards the city,
which providentially did no injury. On Sunday evening, at ten
o'clock, the six resolved to blow up the magazine, in order to make
their escape, which they effected. In the magazine were from 4 to
500 barrels of gunpowder, which made a most tremendous explosion;
fortunately, the plan was suspected, and only a small number of
troops were therefore placed in the fort to watch their motions and
prevent their escape, and to surprise them if any opportunity
offered: happily, therefore, only three soldiers became the victims,
and two or three wounded. The shock of the explosion did infinite
damage to the windows.

The mutineers fled into the interior of the island, and were
afterwards taken. The last of them taken was a black disguised in
women's clothes, on whom fell the lot to blow up the magazine. A
court-martial was held at the Town-house, on twenty-five of the
mutineers, supposed to be ring-leaders; one of whom at the gallows
was respited, the others executed; ten hanged, and fourteen shot.



JOHN TROY
Executed before Newgate, for Forgery, 3rd July 1805

THE untimely fate of this young man greatly adds to the too numerous
lists of unfortunate youths who have suffered for the crime of
forgery, and whose case (though destitute of anything remarkable or
novel) shows the necessity of bearing a good character; for had this
culprit (who was about twenty-six years of age) been able to have
called two or three respectable witnesses to attest his integrity,
his defence, which was certainly plausible, would doubtless have had
some effect upon the Jury.

He was indicted for uttering a counterfeit 5l. bank of England note,
knowing the same to be forged. It appeared that the prisoner had
offered the note in question to a Mr. Rhodes, a hosier, in Holborn,
in order to pay for a pair of stockings, which he had agreed to
purchase at the rate of twelve shillings. Mr. Rhodes suspected the
note to be a bad one; and, pretending to go out to get change,
consulted a gentleman in his neighbourhood, who confirmed his
suspicion. He then procured a constable; and, returning to the shop,
the prisoner was taken into custody. The note was proved to be a
counterfeit; and it was also proved that the prisoner had passed two
other forged notes of the same fabrication. To one of these persons,
Thomas Thompson, linen-draper and hosier, in New-street, Covent-
garden, he gave the name of John May, Blackbird, Low-Layton.

Elizabeth Shepherd, who keeps the Blackbird, at Low Layton,
declared, that she did not know, or ever saw, the prisoner. The
other person on whom he imposed, was Ann Pudephat, who keeps a
milliner's shop, in Tichbourne-street: she said, that Mary Young,
whom she also knew by the name of Mary Thompson, agreed to give her 
a guinea for a small bonnet, which she promised to send for. The
prisoner came for this bonnet, and paid her with a forged 5l. note;
she gave him four pounds, and he gave her a shilling. Mary Young
said, she had been acquainted with the prisoner almost a
twelvemonth; and she did commission him to call for the bonnet, but
that she gave him cash (gold and silver) to pay for it: at the same
time, requesting him to get it if he could for a pound. She did not
know that he then had a 5l. note in his possession; and she
remembered asking him, at that time, to try and pass a bad dollar
which she had, when his answer was, "Do you want me to be hanged!"
The prisoner in his defence acknowledged that he had uttered these
notes, but declared that he did not know that they were forged. He
found them, he said, and confessed his dishonesty in not advertising
the book in which they were: they did not belong to him; but through
his partner's distressing him to the last shilling, he parted with
them. "Can it be supposed," added he, "that I, knowing these 5l. to
notes be forged, would have continued in Mr. Rhodes's shop, when he
was away a full quarter of an hour! I was left on the other side of
the counter, and the door open." Being asked, if he had any witness
to call in his behalf, he said, he had not; and accordingly the jury
pronounced himGuilty.



GEORGE RICHARD WALKER AND CHRISTOPHER DODDS
Executed before Newgate, for Forgery, 11th June, 1806

These men, together with Thomas Rochester, and Richard Walker, were
tried at the Old Bailey, April 19, 1806, for conspiring together and
forging a will, with intent to defraud the next of kin to Major
Richard Hawkins, of the Royal Engineer corps. The gentleman, on
whose property this wicked attempt had been made, died at Trinidad;
the persons who were to receive the property did not exist; yet a
suit was commenced at Doctor's Commons, for the recovery of the
same, by the prisoner, G. R. Walker, who was the executor, although
he, on the face of the will, was not to receive the smallest
benefit. Allegations were filed in support of the will, by the other
three prisoners, as collateral witnesses to the will.

The first witness called upon this singular trial was Major Rowley,
an officer of the corps of Engineers, who was very intimately
acquainted with the late Major Richard Hawkins, of the same corps.
He was captain in the Engineers, but he held the rank of Major in
the army. The Major quitted England for Trinidad on the 5th of
April, 1803, and witness heard officially of his death on the 10th
of July in the same year. Witness went with Lieutenant Hawkins,
nephew of the deceased, in October, to the house of Mrs. Bethel,
Paradise-row, Lambeth, where he, the Major, had resided, to search
for a will, or testimony paper; but they did not find such a paper.
Witness received a letter in August, 1804, from the prisoner, George
Richard Walker, whom he had formerly seen in the Island of Jersey.
This was the first time witness had ever heard of a will of the late
Major being in existence. Witness became acquainted with Major
Hawkins in 1787, and he had since been very intimately acquainted
with him; they had been staff officers together in the corps of
Engineers. He had a brother and two nephews, the one an officer in
the army, whom he was remarkably fond of, and the other a lieutenant
in the navy. He was always on particularly good and affectionate
terms with them, and in particular with the lieutenant in the army.
Witness had often seen the late Major write, and he was particularly
an accurate writer: he never employed an amanuensis with his own
official papers. The will was here produced, and proved to be a
forgery by the witness, who said there was a resemblance of the
Major's hand writing. The will represented the testator as Major of
the Engineer corps, when in fact there was no such commission held
in the corps. Witness never knew that the late Major had any
acquaintance with Elizabeth Hind or a Mr. and Mrs. Browning. Witness
never knew of any acquaintance between the prisoner, G. R. Walker,
and Major Hawkins; but he had been stationed at Guernsey from 1793
to 1798, where the prisoner lived.

General Moss knew Major Hawkins for the last twenty-five years,
having been that time under his command in the Engineer corps, and
whose reports, in his own handwriting, he always received. On
looking at the will, witness was positive the signature was not the
hand-writing of the late Major Hawkins. The designation of himself
and his rank, in the will, was very incorrect, and the Major was
always a very correct writer.

General Twist had known the late Major forty-four years, and he
corroborated the statement of his brother officers, that the will
was a forgery. He also knew him to have always been on very
affectionate terms with his relatives, one of whom he caused to be
educated at Portsmouth.

Sir W. Green, another officer, who knew Major Hawkins very well,
also proved the will to be a forgery. William Test, Esq. also
corroborated.

Mr. Richard Hawkins, nephew to the deceased Major, and a lieutenant
in the army, stated that his family connections were a father, the
late Major's brother, an own brother, and two sisters, all of whom
were on the most affectionate terms. Witness heard of the death of
his uncle at Trinidad in the middle of October, 1804. The will was
produced, and the witness swore the signature, &c. was not the hand-
writing of his uncle. He never knew the name of Elizabeth Hind, but
he had heard his uncle mention Walker's name.

Robert Heddington was called, and he proved the signature of the
will, and the affidavits thereto belonging, to have been written by
G.Walker, Rochester, and Dodds. He would not swear to the signature
of Richard Walker. The will was here read by the clerk of the
arraigns, which was signed with the name of G. R. Walker, Esq.
Guernsey, executor. The affidavit of Walker annexed to the will as 
executor went to state that he knew of no other will or codicil of
the late Major Hawkins. The allegations relating to the will made by
the prisoners were read in Court, and the hand-writings were
severally sworn to by several witnesses.

Elizabeth Sadler, who resided in Dartmouth-street, Westminster,
stated, that the prisoner, George Walker, and his wife, occupied
apartments in her house in July 1803, and they went by the name of
Browning. Mrs. Mary Woodford also proved that George Walker occupied
apartments in her house 1803, in Brook Street, New-road, Mary-le-
bone, in his own name, and also a woman of the name of Browning.
Witness knew a man of the name of Heddington, and Walker was deaf.
Mr. Hines lodged in the same house, and corroborated this statement.

The next witness, Heddington, who had been privy to all the
transactions of the prisoner, and who was a most material witness in
this case, had known the prisoner, George Walker, many years. He was
employed by government at Guernsey to supply the different garrisons
with coals, &c. and witness was his servant. In July 1804, he
received a letter (the prisoner Rochester being then out of Walker's
employ) to call on him (Rochester) in Wellclose-square, at his
house. Witness did so; he was not at home; but a letter was left for
him, with one inclosed for G. Walker for him to convey to his older
master, in which he was not to fail. Witness delivered the letter to
the woman who lived with Walker as his wife, who called herself Mrs.
Browning. He was informed by Rochester, on his return to his house
in Wellclose-square, that an old intimate friend of Walker's had
died at Trinidad; and there was only one subscribing witness to the
will, a Mrs. Browning, who had left the country in consequence of an
altercation respecting family matters. Two more witnesses were
necessary, and Mr. Walker had known him long, and he of course could
have no objection to become a subscribing witness. The will was a
good one, G. Walker was executor, and no evil could arise from his
signature. An appointment was made for a meeting between G. Walker
and witness, at the Circus Coffee-house, St. George's-Fields, where
witness found Walker and a man of the name of Godson in waiting, who
was one of Walker's clerks. Walker was deaf, and they communicated
to each other on slips of paper, which were burned. Walker assured
witness there was no danger in signing, and they agreed to meet and
dine the next day at the house of the prisoner Rochester. They met
at three o'clock, and dined together, agreeable to the appointment;
the company consisted of Mrs. R. Walker and witness. After dinner,
Rochester beckoned witness upstairs, and placed a paper in his hand,
which was the will in question. Witness smiled, and observed, the
ink was not yet dry. Rochester advised him to sign under the name of
Brown, stating that he had been promised three hundred pounds to do
so, on his part, and Walker would give him, the witness, one hundred
pounds and five guineas to do the same. Witness positively refused
to sign the will, and left the house. He saw Rochester again the
next day, who informed him the will he had seen was only a copy of
the original. Witness saw Dodds, who was an attorney's clerk, the
following day, and he acquainted him with what had happened. Dodds
begged to be introduced to the parties; for he had seen many good
wills, and he was a competent judge of them. It was difficult to
prove a will at Doctor's Commons for want of witnesses.

Witness apprised Rochester of what had passed, and an interview was
the consequence between him and the prisoner Dodds. Richard Walker,
the other prisoner, was heard of, and introduced to the parties by
Dodds, at the Saracen's-Head, Snowhill. Dodds was hired to get
another subscribing witness to the will, by Rochester. Rochester
accused witness with having strange ideas respecting the will, and
danger of signing it, which he again observed was only a copy. Mrs. 
Browning contended that she was the widow of a captain. The will was
again produced in the presence of witness, and Dodds took it to the
window, and looked at the water mark: he said that a man should not
have to do with such things without having had experience. The water
mark appeared to him to be plausible. Richard Walker said, he would
not sign until Dodds had done so, for he was a man of the law.
Witness then saw the whole of them sign, as he was standing by them.

The other part of the witness's statement went clearly to involve
the whole of the prisoners in guilt. Several other witnesses were
examined, and Lord Ellenborough summed up in a very humane and
perspicuous manner: he occupied three hours in his charge to the
jury, who withdrew for about twenty minutes, and found George
Richard Walker and Christopher Dodds guilty, but acquitted the other
two. The trial lasted fourteen hours, and did not conclude till
eleven o'clock. The Court was excessively crowded, and many
distinguished personages were on the bench with the judges. These
two offenders suffered the sentence of the law, opposite the
debtor's door, Newgate.



RICHARD NEWELL
Whipped for Cruelty to his Apprentices

Richard Newell, hinge-maker, was indicted at Stafford by the
directors of the House of Industry, and the Parish officers of
Rowley Regis, for ill-treatment towards two parish apprentices he
had from Shrewsbury, and was sentenced to six months' imprisonment;
at the expiration of which time, to be publicly whipped by the
common hangman through Rowley Regis, the town in which he lived. His
imprisonment would have been longer; but, in consideration of his
large family, the Court was inclined to set him at liberty at the
end of six months, that he might contribute to their support.

Newell's extreme cruelty, in beating the boys in the most horrid
manner, (frequently with thick wire rods,) called forth the
execrations of every person who heard the trial; and the whole Court
expressed their satisfaction at the conduct of the parties who
brought forward the prosecution, and strongly recommended the
example to be followed by all the parish officers and directors of
Poor-houses, in similar cases.



ANN THOMPSON
A Prostitute, Indicted for the Murder of her Keeper,
and Found Guilty of Manslaughter

Another Warning to Females not to Depart from the Paths of Virtue.


KEPT women and acknowledged courtesans were formerly, and very
justly so, denominated infamous; but now they rear their heads in
every assembly, and, with unblushing effrontery, stare virtue out of
countenance, and mock the ear of modesty. The attention paid to them
is a disgrace to polished society, and destructive of polite morals.
Their gallants make them the depository of the hear-say scandal
attached to the families of rank and distinction; and as every
woman, lost to virtue from a congeniality of soul, has in private a
confidential friend, lost to honour, the scandal is circulated, and
the libeller, thus envenomed, shoots his poisoned arrows abroad, and
defames and vilifies the first characters in the land. Of late years
these wretches have greatly increased, both in numbers and
notoriety; and, under that demi-royal duchess Mrs. Clarke, they have
acquired a new title. We now no longer hear of "Kept women;"the
Cyprian Corps are to be henceforth styled, "Under protection." The
luxury of a shilling ride in a Hack to half price in the upper boxes
of a Theatre, gives place to a dashing chariotmalgre the nation's
povertyattended by fellows in laced liveries, who drive and attend
the protected harlots to the masquerade, the opera, and the
fashionable concert; and, when ruin stares their protector in the
face, like the cherished serpent, they turn upon him, and sting him
to the worst of deaths.

Ann Thompson was indicted for the wilful murder of Joseph Walker, by
giving him a stab in the side with a knife, of which wound he
languished a short time and died. A multitude of witnesses were
examined in the course of the trial, but our limits will only allow
of giving the substance of their evidence.

The prisoner is a woman of dissolute life, and lived in Denmark
street, East Smithfield. The deceased was a man with whom she
cohabited; who were frequently quarrelling and fighting. On the
evening of the 26th of December, 1809, they were both drinking
together at a public-house, in the neighbourhood of Denmark-street.
The deceased wished to go home with the prisoner, which she refused,
telling him she had kept him long enough, and would keep him no
longer. The prisoner went to her lodgings, and the deceased followed
her.

Some time after, Anthony, a black, who lodged in the same house with
the prisoner, heard a violent noise in her room, and a scuffle, as
if two persons were fighting. He went to the door of the prisoner's
apartment, and looking through the key-hole saw the prisoner
standing up with a knife in her hand, and, the deceased lying upon
the ground, groaning and complaining. The prisoner was mocking him,
and said he only feigned to be hurt. He then fetched a watchman, and
on the door being opened the deceased was still lying upon the
ground. He then removed the deceased's clothes from the side he said
he was wounded on, and discovered an aperture, from whence part of
his bowels seemed to have exuded. The prisoner appeared extremely
agitated, and exclaimed, "This is the knife that did it; I wish my
hand had been off before I had taken it up." She then fell upon the
deceased, kissed him, and asked him if it was possible he could
forgive her? The deceased replied, "Nancy, I forgive you from my
heart." A surgeon was then sent for, who advised that the deceased
should be immediately taken to the hospital. The prisoner sent for a
coach, and assisted the deceased into it. She also stayed with him
in the hospital, and conducted herself as a woman of tenderness
should do. The deceased died in her arms, and her affliction was
extreme.

The evidence in defence proved that the prisoner was determined the
deceased should not live with her any longer, in consequence of his
having so frequently ill-treated her. On the night of the affray he
had beat her, and wounded her kneeher face and eyes were
discoloured with blows, and her clothes were torn. She succeeded,
however, in getting him out of the house; but he returned by a back
way; and, having previously exclaimed, in the hearing of the
neighbours, that he would mark her for having shut him out, he
rushed with great fury into her apartment. The door was fastened,
and the fatal blow was given. The prisoner was also described as a
quiet and decent woman, considering her way of life.

Baron Macdonald, in his summing up, observed, that to constitute the
crime of murder, there must be either malice propense, express, or
implied, from the facts in the case. But if one person struck
another, the law would justify a blow in retaliation; and if that
blow should occasion death, the law, allowing for the infirmity of
human nature, moderated the crime of killing to manslaughter. The
jury would therefore look to the evidence in the case before them,
and say, whether the deceased had met his death from the pre-
determined malice of the prisoner, or whether it was the result of a
scuffle, in which the prisoner was defending herself against the
violence of the deceased, and unguardedly used the knife in her own
preservation.

The jury were of the latter opinion, and found the prisoner guilty
of manslaughter; thus escaping with paying a small fine, and
suffering a short imprisonment. She was greatly agitated during her
trial, from the fear of being found guilty upon the capital part of
the indictment; from which she certainly saved herself by her sorrow
and contrition for the foul deed.



JOHN LEONARD WHITE
Executed before Newgate, for Cutting and Maiming, 15th
February 1806

This was a notorious offender, and one of the gang who enticed
George Webb from the paths of virtue. He was connected with villains
that had long infested the neighbourhood of Blackheath, who had been
tried at the summer assizes in Maidstone 1805, with Webb and Russel,
but acquitted for want of sufficient evidence. According to his own
account, he was the son of a man of property who had left him 5000l.
but such was his iniquitous disposition, that he did not long
outlive his above mentioned companions, although he then publicly
boasted, that the police-officers (whom he well knew) should never
capitally convict him, as he would take care that no instrument of
house-breaking, or fire-arms, should ever be found in his
possession.

It is said, that he and some others, determined to rob a gentleman's
house, had got to the back-garden wall, when a conversation took
place who should get over the wall first, as there were several
servants about the house; when one of the thieves said, "If they
come I have poppers" (pistols). Then said White, "You may go and rob
yourselves, for I will have nothing to do with it," and he left
them. They succeeded, and robbed; and White, it is said, having
found out the amount taken, insisted on a share of the produce; for
he used to say, he always thought it bad enough to rob without using
people ill; yet he forfeited his life on that account; for on his
return to London, where he still pursued his former thieving habits
(which he had followed for many years), he in company with John
Richardson, endeavouring, upon one of those occasions, to escape,
cut and maimed a watchman who was about to apprehend him, for which
John L. White and John Richardson were brought to trial, at the
commencement of the Old Bailey sessions, December 4th, 1808, before
the lord mayor, Mr. Justice Grose, Mr. Baron Graham, the Recorder,
&c.

Eliza Russel, a servant, at No. 36, Lamb's Conduit street, said,
that she heard the prisoners in the area, between the 23d and 24th
of September, endeavouring to make a burglarious entry into her
master's house. She therefore called in the assistance of three
watchmen to apprehend them. William Randall, a watchman, and the
prosecutor, went with the other watchmen into the area of the house
where the prisoners were standing, with the intention to take them
into custody; on which White struck him a blow on the head with an
iron crow, which laid his skull open; the other also aided in the
assault; but they were finally overpowered and secured.

The facts of the case were clearly proved, and the prisoners were
found guilty. On Friday, December 6th, the prisoners were put to the
bar, and Mr. Alley, on their behalf, moved an arrest of judgment. He
grounded this motion on two points, first, that the indictment ought
to have averred, that the prosecutor intended to apprehend them:
secondly, that Richardson, not being present when the blow was
given, the evidence ought not to have implicated him. Mr. Justice
Grose and Mr. Baron Graham both concurred in opinion, in thinking,
that it was entirely a matter for the jury, and that they, by their
verdict, had found the facts in the affirmative. Motion refused.
John Richardson was, however, respited; but John Leonard White was
executed, pursuant to his sentence, at the Old Bailey. He appeared
truly penitent.



ANDREW SCHOSTOCK
A German Soldier Serving in the King's German Legion,
Executed in Kent, for the Horrid Murder of a Woman,
in the Isle Of Thanet, 27th March, 1807

This merciless man was tried at Maidstone assizes, on an indictment
charging him with the wilful murder of Thomazin Ward, at St.
Peter's, in the Isle of Thanet.

Mr. Gurney opened the prosecution, and he was followed on the same
side by Mr. Garrow, who stated the facts attending the case to the
jury. The counsel observed, that the prisoner was a private soldier
in the King's German Legion, and the unfortunate woman who was
murdered was at the time a shopkeeper of respectability, residing in
St. Peter's, in the Isle of Thanet. She had taken a walk to
Broadstairs, about a mile distant from her place of residence, and
not having arrived back again at the time appointed, her husband
became alarmed for her safety; and, on search being made, the body 
was found in a field, about sixty yards from the road. It was
evident, the learned counsel observed, that the unfortunate woman
had experienced much violence; her body was exposed, and her person
had been injured. The prisoner, it would be proved, was seen walking
a few yards distant from the deceased a short time before the murder
was committed, and it would be proved in evidence that he was absent
from his guard without leave from seven to ten o'clock; his shoes
were extremely dirty with field-dirt; and it would be proved that he
was found in possession of three handkerchiefs, the property of the
deceased, which had been taken from her, On being questioned where
he was at nine o'clock, the prisoner said he was at the Neptune's
Hall public-house, which would be contradicted in evidence; and he
said that the handkerchiefs found in his possession had been given
him by a stranger. In another conversation the prisoner had said he
saw a man knock a woman down, and it was the same man who gave him
the handkerchiefs. A ribband was found tied very tight round the
neck of the deceased, and it would be proved by her husband that she
never wore an appendage of the kind. It would be stated by a
surgeon, that by this ribband the deceased was strangled. Under the
strong circumstances attending the case, the jury would have no
doubt of the guilt of the prisoner.

Henry Blackburn, a carpenter, residing at Broadstairs, stated, that
he met a soldier in the regimentals worn by the German Legion, as he
was returning home from the village of St. Peter's, about nine
o'clock in the evening, and he immediately after met the deceased,
with whom he conversed. She was in good health, and was going home.
Witness could not swear to the prisoner as being the man whom he
met.

Stephen May found the body of the deceased at twelve o'clock at
night, in a field about 60 yards from the road, where the preceding
witness saw the deceased. She was lying on her back, and her apparel
was in a very disordered state, it being mostly torn from her. Her
mouth was open, and witness found a handkerchief lying by her side,
which was wet, and from appearances it had been stuffed into the
mouth of the deceased. A ribbon was also fastened as tight as
possible round her neck. Her person had sustained a good deal of
injury. There were tracks of two persons having had a scuffle from
the road to the field.

Mr. Frome, a surgeon, at Broadstairs, examined the body of the
deceased; but there were no external marks sufficient to cause
death. There might be a concussion of the brain by a fall, or by
other violence, so as not to leave appearances behind. Witness had
seen the ribband which was tied twice round the neck; and which he
believed was the cause of death by suffocation.

Serjeant Frederick Riford, a serjeant belonging to the German
Legion, proved that, on the evening of the murder, the prisoner
absented himself from the guard without leave, from seven till ten
o'clock. In consequence of information given at the guard-room by a
Mr. Barfield of the murder, a privy was searched, and two
handkerchiefs found therein, which were proved to have belonged to
the deceased. Another handkerchief, which had also been taken from
the deceased, was found in the crown of the prisoner's foraging cap.
The prisoner had informed witness, that the handkerchiefs were given
him by a stranger whom he had seen knock a woman down, after
dragging her into a field.

Robert Barfield, sub-deputy of St. Peter's, gave information of the
murder at the guard-house, in the presence of the prisoner, who
appeared a good deal agitated. This gentleman corroborated what was
stated by the preceding witness respecting the finding of the
handkerchief; and he also stated, that the shoes of the prisoner
were covered with field dirt.

The testimony of other witnesses strengthened the case, so as to
leave no doubt of the guilt of the prisoner; and one of them proved
that he had left the Neptune's Hall at half-past eight o'clock.
Another witness proved, that the prisoner pointed out the spot where
the murder was committed.

William Ward, the husband of the deceased, who appeared deeply
affected, said that his wife had gone to Broadstairs on the evening
of the murder to see her daughter, and he proved that she never wore
a ribband round her neck.

 Judge Heath summed up the evidence, and the jury without hesitation
found the prisoner guilty. He was sentenced to be executed, and his
body to be dissected.

The prisoner had an interpreter; and after sentence was passed on
him, he said, "There is one God, and one heaven," and he had one
prayer to make, the judge having informed him he need not expect
mercy in this world.



BENJAMIN PLUMBER, JOHN SPITTLE, CHARLES SIFLEET, AND
JOHN SAVAGE
Convicted of Burglary at Maidstone Assizes, 27th March
1807

These men were indicted for a burglary in the house of Margaret
Baldwin, at Wrotham, in the county of Kent.

Mrs. Baldwin, an old lady, aged 60, said that on the night stated in
the indictment five men rushed into her, house, after someone had
previously knocked at the door. They immediately secured the
servants, and put a guard over them. They were all bound together in
a chair. They then dragged her about the house, and made her
discover her money and plate. While they were doing this her gown
sleeve caught fire from the candle, and her female servant
exclaiming "she would be burnt," one of the men cried out, "D-n the
old bitch, let her burn." Three of them were like soldiers, and they
were all disguised, so that she could not speak to the persons of
any of them. While they remained in the house they ran backward and
forward, so as to lead them to suppose that there were many more
outside. They rifled the house, and took away, besides 100l. in
money, a great quantity of plate.

The principal evidence to convict the prisoners was that of George
Hill, an accomplice; and he stated that the above parties having
agreed upon the robbery, they met in a wood near Mereworth, and
there disguised themselves, and proceeded to Mrs. Baldwin's house,
which they entered in the manner she described, and bound four
persons they found in the house in a chair; they then compelled Mrs.
Baldwin to disclose where her money was, which they carried off and
all the plate. Spittle and Sifleet had blue jackets, and the witness
had an old soldier's jacket; their faces were all disguised either
by blacking or with crape. He stated that Plummer was the planner of
the robbery; and it was also proved that Plummer had offered some of
the articles of the plate to sell at Gravesend.

The jury found them all-GuiltyDeath.



PATRICK PRENDERGAST
Executed before Newgate, the 25th of March 1807, for
Burglary

THIS unfortunate man was convicted of a burglary in the house of a
Mr. G. Bell, at Edgware at Middlesex. Though the robbery of Mr. Bell
was daring, yet his behaviour at the place of execution indicated
the greatest contrition. The son and daughter of the malefactor
were, most unadvisedly, present at the melancholy end of their
depraved parent; and, on his being launched into eternity, became
almost frantic, and were conveyed from the agonizing scene in a
state of insensibility. We can readily suppose the effect produced
by such a shock upon the nervous system as beholding a parent in the
throes of death, under the hands of the executioner; for hard must
be that heart that can, unmoved, witness such a sight inflicted upon
a stranger.

A shocking instance of this happened to Mr. William Boddington, high
constable of the Finsbury Division, a few years ago. Mr. Boddington
attended, in his official capacity, at the execution of Francis
Hubbard, who suffered in Hatton-garden for the murder of Jordan
Hosty, near that place; and a minute or two after that malefactor
had been turned off, he fainted; and being taken home in a coach,
was put to bed, from which he rose no more.

A few years ago, information being made of a disorderly meeting at
an ale-house in Turnmill-street, under the name of the Cock-and-Hen-
Club, Mr. Boddington was directed by the justices to disperse them:
accordingly, attended by other constables, he went to the house;
and, upon entering the club-room, the officers were assailed with
cutlasses and other weapons, and were all severely wounded. Hubbard
was the man who attacked Mr. Boddington, and wounded him so terribly
on the head, breast, and shoulders, with a cutlass, that his
recovery was for several months despaired of. The injury Mr.
Boddington received on the above occasion greatly impaired his
constitution, and, it is supposed, contributed towards his premature
death, by rendering him susceptible of the most poignant feelings on
beholding the dying agonies of a man who had attempted to murder
him, and absolutely embittered some of the latter years of his life.



ALEXANDER DAVISON
Convicted of a Fraud to a Large Amount upon
Government

THE following case of enormity will again show, that as well as the
crimes of petty thieves whom death awaits for stealing forty
shillings, the greatest peculations, in their turn, become subject
matter for our pages.

Joseph Hunt, a member of Parliament, fled his injured country with
thousandsnay tens of thousandsof its money in his pocket.
Williers, and some others, whom hereafter we may more particularly
note, became defaulters in immense sums, and followed a somewhat
similar course; and should they be brought to the bar of justice,
they are, perhaps, fined; and pay their ransom with the nation's
money! meantime honest John Bull, hearing all these things, will
often exclaim "How are we ruined."

In the case of Mr. Davison, lest we bring down upon us the ire of a
great man, we shall confine ourselves to reprinting a regular report
of his trial; and merely observe, that we take it from "The News,"
of the 7th of December 1808.

COURT OF KING'S BENCH,
Before Lord Ellenborough and a Special Jury.
THE KING v. ALEXANDER DAVISON, Esq.

This long expected case came on to be tried before Lord Ellenborough
and a special jury, when the following gentlemen were sworn:

R. Glasson, Esq.
Roughead, Esq.
Jas. Salt, Esq.
Jo. Jackson, Esq.
Rich. Grace, Esq.
Jo. Peales, Esq.
Jos. Scollier, Esq.
Jo. Sloper
Wm. Horton, Esq.
Jo. Kirk.
Jos. Wilson, Esq.
Jas. Swaine.

Mr. Richardson opened the case on the part of the prosecution.

The Attorney General followed on the same side. The defendant, in
the year 1795, became agent for the Barrack Stores, and an agreement
was entered into with General Delancy, the Barrack-master-general.
His duty was to purchase all the articles which might be required
for that department, for which he himself, in his letter of the 10th
of January, to the Barrack-master-general, thought that 2½ per cent
was fully sufficient as a commission for devoting his whole
attention to the business. He continued in this situation,
performing the duties of his station; and certainly no fault could
be alleged against him, till the year 1798, when he began to
manufacture the articles in demand, in large quantities, and charge
them to government in the name of George Watson, who, it will
appear, was his apprentice, and a young man about twenty years in
his own employ; on these goods which he so sold, he directed
Bowring, his principal clerk, to manufacture false vouchers, with a
view to defraud the Barrack department; he also influenced John
Allen, another clerk in his employ, to give receipts for large sums
of money, pretended to be paid to Watson, so as to give the whole
the appearance of a fair and bona fide transaction. This practice he
continued till the change of the administration, in 1801 or 1802,
when it was likely an investigation would take place, and it struck
him that it would be advisable to change the mode of rendering his
accounts, and soon after that he sent them in without charging the
commission of 2½ per cent. on the goods he himself manufactured and
sold.

The jury would observe, however, that the charge of commission now
alluded to was made in nine different half-yearly accounts, in each
of which the defendant takes credit for commission on the of the
purchase made by him. The same charge was also made in his general
accounts, which contained the whole sums specified in all his
particular accounts; in all of which, of course, this full
commission was charged; and it was not till the year 1800, when the
defendant had been questioned on these transactions, and when he
found these fraudulent practices pressing hard on him, that he
thought of restoring these sums of commission.

He (the Attorney-General) should not have thought of judging so
harshly of the defendant if he had not what he conceived a picture
of the defendant's own thoughts in his conduct, and in written
evidence under his own hand. The defendant, when he underwent an
examination before the Commissioners of Military Inquiry, in
December 1805, stated, that he had furnished some goods to
government himself, but that for these he had charged no commission.
This declaration, however, could not apply to the goods here alluded
to. Subsequently to the year 1802, the defendant furnished goods to
government professedly from his Bedford-street warehouse, and
charged no commission on them, because the goods were known to have
been furnished by him, were so furnished publicly, and the receipts
of Mungo Sheddon, his managing clerk, were given for the price. But
should it be said to-day, that he meant this to apply to goods
furnished in the name of another person, who, though his own
servant, had rendered invoices and receipts in another name? And,
after charging commission on these purchases, now say that it was
his intention again to credit government with the sums of commission
so charged. He should be sorry to hear such a defence set up this
day, because it must call from him some observations which he could
wish might be spared. But it was said, the defendant intended to
debit himself with these sums in another account.

The Attorney-General had stated, that the defendant was examined by
the commissioners of Military Inquiry, and was questioned, whether
he had not made some overcharges against government, and had also
omitted to give items which he had received. On this occasion,
finding that these accounts were to be strictly gone into, the
defendant had himself made a strict investigation into the state of
his accounts, with the object of correcting any mistakes or
omissions which might have crept into them, and accordingly on the
15th of May, 1806, gave in a supplemental account, as between
himself and General De Lancey, which begins with stating, on the
credit side of the account, a former balance due to the defendant of
upwards of nine thousand pounds, and then, by giving, on the other
side, a variety of sums with which he should formerly have debited
himself, but which should have been omitted, besides wiping away the
balance formerly standing in the defendant's favour, of upwards of
nine thousand pounds, produces a balance against him of upwards of
six thousand pounds, thereby creating a difference in favour of
government of upwards of fifteen thousand pounds. Here was a sum
produced to government by the defendant, in consequence of his
looking into his accounts with a scrutinizing eye, thinking that he
could do so with a better grace himself than by suffering it to be
examined by the Commissioners. If any person thought, however, that
he (the Attorney-General) stated this with a view to create a
prejudice against the defendant, he erred. He only stated it for the
purpose of showing, that if the defendant had entertained any idea
of restoring the sums of commission alluded to, a fairer opportunity
than that he had now mentioned could hardly have occurred; and
therefore, that to say it was the intention of the defendant to
return these sums of commission, which had been unjustly detained,
was an afterthought. He was satisfied the defendant had no such
intention till after the discovery, in consequence of which the
present action was brought, had been made. And why? because he
thought the fraud could not be detected, and that he was fortified
by the bill of parcels and receipts which he had produced.Did the
Court and jury require any further evidence that the defendant did
not intend to restore this commission? If they did, he should give
it them. If he had intended to do so, he would have done it
immediately. The Commissioners of Barrack Accounts had asked of the
defendant to produce his cash account, which referred to these
matters. He refused to do so; but, at the same time, he thought it
necessary to state an excuse for this refusal, and what was his
reason? Because his accounts had all been tendered, settled, and the
balance paid. If he had wished to return the sums in question, here
was an opportunity. But such was not in his contemplation. On the
contrary, when asked to produce his cash account, he says, "You have
no right to look into my accounts. They are all tendered, examined,
and the balance paid!" Yet he was to be told to-day, that it was in
the mind of the defendant to give credit to government in another
account.

Mr. Thomas Bonnar, secretary of the Commissioners of Military
Enquiry, produced the agreement, and the subsequent nine half-yearly
accounts, with other vouchers rendered to the Barrack Board, wherein
he charged large quantities of stores, bought from George Watson,
and the different receipts, as proof of payment for the same, signed
by John Allen.

William James, clerk to Mr. Lodge, (the packer employed) proved the
various returns made by his employer, of the stores forwarded; and
that a great part of them came from the defendant's warehouse in
Bedford-street, in the name of Mungo Sheddon, who had been manager
of Mr. Davison's army clothing concerns. He knew Watson, who was a
clerk in that warehouse; and did not think he was, at the time, in
any condition to buy or sell goods. He always considered, that they
were manufactured at the Bedford-street warehouse, and belonged to
the defendant, though the half yearly returns were made in the name
of Mungo Sheddon, the manager; and after wards in that of George
Watson.

John Allen stated, that he came to Mr. Davison's employ in 1800, as
a clerk, and the receipts produced to him, dated in 1798 and 1800,
he declared he signed by desire of Mr. Bowring, as receiving large
sums of money in the name of George Watson. He never knew Watson
till he saw him after he engaged with Davison. He was not in any way
of business, nor had any means of doing any; he was merely an
apprentice. On cross-examination he said the bedding and towels were
the only articles furnished, but there was no secrecy observed
throughout the whole transaction; they were all manufactured in the
warehouse in Bedford-street. Here the case on the part of the
prosecution closed.

Mr. Dallas, for the defendant, made a speech of more than two hours,
wherein he appealed to the jury, in very forcible language, on the
great propriety of discarding from their minds the abuse which they
had been accutomed to read for some months past in the newspapers
against the defendant, as his future honour and happiness depended
on the impartiality of their verdict. He then took a view of the
manner in which the Barrack Department had been conducted previous
to the year 1805, when a great variety of frauds had been committed,
to the injury of the public; but when General De Lance had been
appointed, that evil became the object of his attention. "With a 
view to remedy the inconvenience, he appointed Mr. Davison sole
agent, to buy all the stores, and to transact the whole business,
for which he was to have 2½ per cent. commission. In the year 1798
the demand for barrack stores became so great, that the articles
could not be procured in the market; and by a new agreement entered
into with the Barrack-Master-General, Mr. Davison was ordered to
supply them himself. Being an army clothier, he possessed every
facility and advantage, and for which he was allowed to charge the
commission originally agreed on. These important facts would be
proved by General De Lancey, whom he would call, and whose testimony
would place his client in a very different light, with respect to
his transactions with the public: independent of which he had other
witnesses to call, who would also prove that the articles supplied
were charged 3 per cent. under the prices charged by others, so that
the public gained, instead of losing by the transaction. The
defendant employed one thousand workmen, and he acted under a new,
positive, and particular agreement; and his reason for making out
his accounts in the way that he did, was by the suggestion of his
clerk, as conformable to the original agreement, and the Barrack
regulation. Lord Ellenborough. "What do you say to the answer to a
question of the Military Commissioners, in which Mr. Davison denies
the existence of any other agreement than that first concluded; it
will be material for you to observe upon that before you sit down,
as you will have no opportunity of doing it afterwards." Mr. Dallas
said, that he would not overlook that. The General would tell them
that there was a second agreement. Supposing the existence of this,
the next question would be, whether Mr. Davison was not entitled to
commission on what he furnished from his own stores, as well as what
he purchased from others. The charge was for frauds and the
defendant must be acquitted, if he either was entitled to
commission, or had reasonable ground to suppose that he was so
entitled.

General De Lancey proved that he appointed the defendant as agent to
Barrack Stores in the year 1795; he at the time had no knowledge of
him, but meeting him at public offices, where he was considered as a
very active punctual man in all his transactions. He acted as agent
till 1798, when the demand for barrack stores was so great, that he
allowed him to supply the articles from his own stores in Bedford-
street. The patterns and the prices were submitted to the witness,
and approved of. The whole was, except this deviation, conducted on
the principle of the old agreement as to the commission. He had no
suspicion of his acting fraudulently; on the contrary, he had the 
greatest confidence in his skill and activity, and he still thought
so.

Cross-examined by the Attorney-General.Patterns and prices were in
most cases sent in and approved of; but he made no enquiries in
order to ascertain the prices of the day. He did not make any
enquiries among those who had been stated by Davison to have
supplied him, about their prices. If the supplies were furnished at
a reasonable rate, he did not think it material from whom they came.
Being asked, whether he thought it immaterial that the checks should
be lost? he answered, that if Mr. Davison furnished the stores at
the market prices there could be no harm done to the public. Being
asked, whether he relied on Mr. Davison's judgment when it became
his interest to raise the prices as high as possible he: he replied,
that he never considered it as a certain conclusion that Mr. Davison
would raise the prices.

Attorney-General.But it was his interest to raise the prices.
	Witness.I saw no objection to the business, if Mr. Davison
did not exceed the prices which others had tendered. 	Attorney-
General.Mr. Davison checked as an agent; how did you agree that he
should charge commission, on his own supplies, as well as on what he
purchased?
	Witness.That depends upon the construction that may be put
upon the agreement.
	Attorney-General.That won't do, Sir.
	Lord Ellenborough.You must answer the question directly,
whether or not you authorised him to charge commission upon the
stores furnished by himself.
	Witness.I did not authorise him.

General De Lancey, in continuation said, that he never knowingly
passed an account where commission was charged on Mr. Davison's own
stores; nor would he ever knowingly, pass such an account. He
certainly understood that the second agreement gave Mr. Davison no
permission to make such a charge; but at the same time Mr. Davison
might have made out a case which would require consideration. If
such a case had been submitted to him he would have considered it,
or referred it to those under whom he acted. But the case never
occurred.

Re-examined by Mr. Wilson.Nothing was said in the second agreement
about commission, as far as he recollected; but he understood that
it was not to be charged on Mr. Davison's own stores.

By the Attorney-General.He knew that Davison must have furnished
stores of his own; but he relied on the accuracy of the accountants,
and signed the accounts without examining whether double commission
had been charged.

Examined by the Court.He did not authorise Mr. Davison to charge
double commission, and if Mr. Davison, had done so, he would have
considered it as a breach of the agreement. He never knew of the
fictitious merchants, Allan, Watson, &c. nor ever knew that false
names, were given in. He would have considered it a breach of public
duty if he had knowingly passed accounts under such circumstances.

John Bowring was then called.He was book-keeper to Mr. Davison at
the office in St. James's square. Mr. Davison had various other
concerns to a great extent. Mr. Davison began to supply the Barracks
in 1795, two or three weeks before he came to him, and from his own
stores in 1798.

Lord Ellenborough told the witness that he was not bound to answer
any question that might criminate himself.

Mr. Davison directed him to make out the account in the name of
Watson. He had said nothing about the matter till the witness had
suggested the difficulty. What Mr. Davison supplied was from 2½ to
3½ per cent on the average, below the price at which the same
articles were procured from other persons. All that Mr. Davison
supplied on his own account was made up at the Bedford-street
warehouse, where he had carried on business as an army clothier. In
the first half year of 1808 the accounts were drawn up different
from that in which they had been made up in 1798 to 1802. The reason
was, that in the interval of 1802, when no supplies were delivered,
he spoke to Mr. Davison about altering the accounts. He had some
doubts, whether the commission would be allowed on the supplies from
their own warehouse, and suggested the consideration, whether the
charge ought not to be withdrawn. At the outset he thought the
charge perfectly regular. But he had some doubts afterwards, and
mentioned the subject to Mr. Davison. Upon that Mr. Davison advised
him to get the accounts back again, and to make the proper
alteration; remarking at the same time, that if he erred, he had 
rather err on the right side. He applied twice to Mr. Starbank at
the Barrack-office, but could not get the accounts back again; but
Mr. Starbank said, that the credit might be given in some future
account. Mr. Davison desired him to keep it in mind, and credit it
in the account current with the Barrack-Master-General. No
commission was charged in the subsequent accounts for supplies from
the Bedford-street warehouse. A supplemental account was given in,
but the credit was not: given, owing to a neglect of his.

Cross-examined by Mr. Garrow.No memorial was sent in to the
Barrack-Master-General, desiring that the accounts might be
corrected. Mr. Davison merely desired it to be kept in mind and
credited. They had always an open account with the Barrack Master-
General. Mr. Davison desired him to get the accounts made out in the
names of Watson and Allan, as a matter of form. The first receipts
of Allan and Watson had been taken for several half years after the
accounts had been delivered in. These receipts were upon stamps, as
if they had been regular transactions. When he ceased to charge
commission he made Davison debtor to his own house.

Lord Ellenborough.Is there any reason why the name of Watson should
have been used rather than have the account drawn up in the regular
way, except for the purpose of getting the commission?

WitnessI do not know any except what I have stated.

Mr. Starbank was next called, who proved that Bowring had called at
the office for the accounts, which he had refused to deliver,
conceiving it his duty not to part with them. There was a
supplemental account given in, in which many errors were rectified.

Mr. DallasYour Lordship recollects that the inquiry did not take
place till 1805, whereas the application for accounts was in 1803.

Lord Ellenborough"Yes; but in that very year 1803, other enquiries
were going on, which might occasion the dread of detection."

The witness proceeded to state, that he did not recollect that
anything had been said by Bowring about improper vouchers. The
supplemental account was stated in 1806, and referred back to 1804,
the time when General De Lancey left the office.

Lord Moira was called to character. He had known Mr. Davison for a
great many years, but was not particularly acquainted with him till
he applied to him to accompany the army which he commanded in the
last war, as Commissary-General. He had requested this of him as a
favour, and his conduct was punctual and delicate, for he often
sacrificed emoluments to which he was fairly entitled. He had no
suspicion that he could be guilty of any fraud; for if he had, he
would not have applied to him to accept of the office of Treasurer
of the Ordnance, which was no object to him, for by accepting this
he lost his half pay as Commissary, and the difference between the
full pay of the Treasurer of the Ordnance, and the half pay as
Commissary, was only 70l.

Sir Evan Nepean, Sir Andrew Snape Hammond, Sir William Rule, the
Hon. Wellesley Pole, Mr. John Martin Leake, Mr. Hunter, Mr. John
Cowley, Mr. William Smart, Mr. James Davidson, Mr. Black, Mr.
Gilpin, Mr. Long, and Mr. Huskisson, also gave the defendant an
excellent character, and declared that they would have thought it
very unlikely that he should be guilty of a fraud. The Attorney-
General in reply regretted as much as the counsel for the defendant,
that there had been any calumnies which had gone abroad in prejudice
of the defendant's case; but of this he was certain, that no one
would impute to the crown the design of assisting in them; for his
own part he had not read them, and he was sure the jury would
dismiss them from their minds. He concurred also with his learned
friend in desiring, that if the jury could have a doubt upon the
case, they should incline the balance in favour of the defendant. As
to the character which had been just given to the defendant, it
could not in such a case have any weight, except in bringing to
one's mind the melancholy reflection, that many men, who have
maintained the best character through a great part of their lives,
do not put a sufficient value upon the preservation of it, and do
omit to take the advantage, and often commit offences, especially
against government, with the hope of secrecy and impunity, for the
sake of some paltry advantage of private gain. Every man finds
friends to give him a character till the very moment when he ceases
to deserve it; and that moment has now unhappily arrived for the
defendant. With respect to the grounds upon which the defendant's
counsel had rested his case, he was not inclined to be dissatisfied
with them, although they did not appear to be sufficiently
comprehensive. In Lodge (the packer's) account, the names of the
merchants occur truly, and there stands the article as goods
furnished by Sheddan; Watson's name was introduced afterwards in the
Barrack-office return; and it is important that in the first account
rendered, this name was written upon an erasure, for most probably
Sheddan's name was originally inserted there, and the putting in the
name of Watson was an after-thought. What reason has been given for
this by the defendant's counsel, except that it was for the purpose
of enabling him to charge the commission. For this purpose Bowring
is brought forward to volunteer a satisfactory account how the
mistake arose, and it will be proper to take him through his whole
account, reserving that part in which he is flatly contradicted for
the last observation. The reason why he substituted this name, is
said to be, that he observed how strange it will be for you to
appear to sell goods for yourself; and therefore for mere form sake
they fabricate receipts, and for mere form put Davison to the
expense of stamps, to make it all appear regular. This fabrication
happened after the accounts were delivered, and in 1802 there took
place a strong investigation into the public accounts, and from that
time he renders his accounts Alexander Davison, debtor to the
Bedford street warehouse, and the receipt is by Sheddan for the
Bedford-street warehouse. As to the reason for this change, and the
application to Starbank at the Barrack office, it is obvious that
Bowring has built a false story upon that which is perhaps a true
transaction; for it is not true that he stated to Starbank that he
wanted to deduct the overcharge of commission. There were other
gross errors in the accounts to the amount of upwards of fifteen
thousand pounds which were ripe for detection; and upon Starbank's
refusing to give up the accounts, he did by a supplemental account
give credit to government for various items to the amount of
15,479l. and one may judge of the correctness of what he states
without contradiction, by the falsehood of that in which he is met
by another witness. His evidence is nothing, without he can show,
that he stated to Starbank what he wanted the accounts back for, and
he says, he told him it was to correct the commission account; but
Starbank says, most certainly he did not so state it. Starbank
recommending him to make allowance for errors in some future
account, he says, he told Davison; and he said, bear it in your mind
and send it in some future account, instead of which he never sent
that in, although from the transaction since he had opportunities of
correcting it. He, Davison, is then called before the commissioners
his accounts are questioned, and he swears in express terms that he
executed his commission on the terms of his agreement made in 1794,
and that there was no new agreement, or anything in nature of an
agreement, between him and General De Lancey. Now notwithstanding
what De Lancey might have thought of the effect of the supposed
subsequent agreement, as to charging commission, if Davison felt
that a new agreement for commission upon his own supplies was to be
inferred from it, how could he have sworn to this? In truth he never
looked forward to his present situation. He thought then, and justly
too, that it was not discovered that Watson and Allan were
fictitious merchants, and supposed that the fraud never would be
detected; and therefore never thought of talking of a new agreement
then. If this was a mistake, he had opportunities of rectifying it.
To-day I put the case upon the fact, that from 1797 to 1802, he did
render goods of his own to government, and charged a commission. I
thought it might be said to be a mistake, and prepared myself to
meet that case. But it is answered for me by the defendant; for
instead of showing that it escaped his attention, he has proved by
Bowring that it occurred to him as doubtful whether he could charge
it or not; that he bethought himself of the error, and intended to
settle it. If that was true, how could Davison himself swear, as he
did, in the answer to the 36th question of the commissioners in
1805, that he never did render goods from his own warehouse and
charge commission upon them. Does he not rather stand in the
situation of a man who had done wrong, and thought himself so armed
with false vouchers as to be able to escape detection? A second time
he has an oppportunity of correcting the error, when on the 23d of
November, 1806, he retires behind the trenches of his settled
accounts, and makes a balance against himself of 6047l. 17s. 11d.
which he pays in about May 1806; and when he is afterwards required
to render a cash account, he says, they have no right to call upon
him for any inquiry into that account, and holds the commissioners
at arm's length, telling them that the account has been settled a
long while, and the balance paid. There are, therefore, three
occasions on which he had an opportunity of setting the account
right, all of which he passes by. What was it that induced him to do
this? It must have its true nameit was a gross fraud. It is true,
he obtained permission to make "some sort of a change in the
agreement" from General De Lancey, which did change his character.
By his change of character he took a profit six or seven times
greater than his commission. And the additional charge of commission
could not be allowed, without De Lancey was imposed upon by false
vouchers, which was easily effected. For a general account only is
sent into General De Lancey, and there the commission is charged,
but it does not directly meet the eye. In the abstract sent to the
office, six hundred pounds, supposing that to be the amount of the
goods supplied, is charged, and underneath is added fifty pounds for
commission; but in the general account it stands as one sum of six
hundred and fifty pounds. De Lancey could therefore know nothing of
the charge of commission, and Starbank thought all was regular,
because he did not know that Watson was not truly a merchant, whose
name he saw as the supplier of goods, and not Davison'sThis is
necessary to be explained, because otherwise De Lancey may be under
the imputation, that, notwithstanding he was of opinion, that it
would be wrong to charge commission, he must have seen commission
charged upon the whole account, and also have known that Davison
supplied part at least of the goods. One may be well satisfied, said
the Attorney General, that this cause did not call for so long an
answer, but it is for a cause of very great importance for the
public, and it is not a light case as to the effect which it will
have in giving security to the public against frauds in public
accounts. It may not be easy to trace those effects immediately; but
if frauds are permitted to go unpunished, impunity in one instance
leads to the commission of many others, and the example of
punishment can alone check the evil. In the words of the indictment,
it is now clear, that, with intent to procure to himself an undue
commission, this defendant did render to the public-office these
false receipts and vouchers.

Lord Ellenborough summed up the case very carefully, without
attempting to recapitulate all his observations upon the evidence,
which would lead us back through the greatest part of the foregoing
statement. He dwelt with much impartiality and discrimination upon
the principal features of the case, and said it was admitted that
the vouchers were false, and that the charge for commission could
not be allowed. How false vouchers could be used with an honest
intention, could not be perceived. Honest ends seldom, if ever,
require dishonest means. As to professed intentions of rendering
back the money in some subsequent account, if the fraud was once
committed by the production of false vouchers, that would not be a
defence; but, still, if there was an honest intention of repairing
the error, that would strongly beat an appeal to the hearts of all
men. This, however, did not appear; for when the defendant had a
locus paenitentiae, and might have corrected the error which his
recollection brought back to the subject, he did not correct the
account. His corrections applied only to 15,479l. for other errors.
As to the defence upon the right to charge commission under a new
agreement, he said he waited for the evidence with great anxiety,
because it was not consistent with his own oath, in the answer to
the 6th question; and if such an agreement had been proved, it would
have been open to great suspicion of a collusion with General De
Lancey. The evidence of that gentleman had, however, disproved that
part of the case. After his Lordship had gone through the evidence,
the counsel for the defendant took an objection to the information,
that it stated that Mr. Davison was entitled only to commission upon
the sum charged for the goods, instead of which he was to have a
commission on all charges of insurance, freight, and other sums
advanced. But his Lordship thought this immaterial, as it was only
necessary to state what was material to the fact charged, and as it
was charged that he supplied goods to a certain amount, and received
328l. as commission upon the price of those goods, which was true,
it was immaterial whether in fact he made other charges and had
other commissions. He said he recollected a case of the name of Yate
v.(Yate v. Willan we believe, in East's Report) in which that
point was settled. The jury, between seven and eight o'clock,
pronounced a verdict of Guilty.

This trial lasted from nine in the morning until eight at night. He
was sentenced to two years' imprisonment.



SAMUEL DAVIS, JOHN MARRYATT, JOHN LAWRENCE BARRON,
GEORGE WINDLE, AND SARAH GROVER
Pilloried and Imprisoned, for a Conspiracy

This was an indictment against the above persons for conspiring
together to prevent one John Hathaway from obtaining a certificate
under a commission of bankruptcy. Hathaway was a clerk in the bank,
to which he added the avocation of a coal-merchant wherein he became
bankrupt. Davis was a discounter of bills, and a money lender; the
other defendants appeared to have been his agents in the conspiracy.

The substance of the evidence on the part of the prosecution was,
that in the year 1800 Hathaway had become embarrassed, that he had
got several bills discounted by the defendant, for which he gave him
one pound in ten for six weeks or two months; that some time
afterwards the plaintiff became a bankrupt, at which time a balance
was due to the defendant which he attempted to prove before the
commissioners; but Mr. H. having stated the nature of the
transaction between them, they refused to allow the claim. Upon
this, Davis swore he would be revenged of the plaintiff, and entered
into a conspiracy with four other persons who presented a petition
to the Lord Chancellor, containing affidavits that Mr. H. had lost
ten guineas at a game of put, in the house of Winkle (one of the
conspirators), on the twelfth of April preceding his bankruptcy, in
order to prevent him from gaining his certificate. It being enacted
by the bankrupt laws, that no person should have the benefit of his
certificate who had lost by gaming ten guineas at one sitting,
within one twelvemonth before his bankruptcy; in the course of the
trial, it was proved that on the day the defendant swore he lost the
money, he was out of town with two friends. The jury immediately
found the defendants guilty; sentence reserved for a future day.

When brought up to receive judgment Mr. Mainwaring the chairman
stated, that upon a full consideration of the circumstances, and as
an example to others, the sentence of the court was, that all the
defendants, except Sarah Grover, should be imprisoned in the house
of correction for the space of two years, and that within the first
month they shall stand in the pillory in Finsbury-square; and the
said Sarah Grover be imprisoned for six months, and then discharged.



ROBERT WILSON, ALIAS JAMES WOOD
A Soldier, and a most hardened Villain, Executed in
the Island of Guernsey for Murder

This cruel infidel murderer was a private in the Royal York Rangers.
He entered the house of Michael Perrin, in the Vale parish, on a
Sunday, with an intention to plunder. Meeting a defenceless woman of
75 years of age, piously engaged in devotions suitable to the
Sabbath, he, in the most deliberate manner, cut her throat with a
razor, and nearly severed her head from her body. Immediately after
his apprehension, he requested the assistance of a clergyman; and
intended, by his apparent contrition, to relax the vigilance of his
keepers; but the evening previous to his execution, having lost all
hope of effecting his escape, he became outrageous, and would have
destroyed even the minister who came to instruct and console him.
Venting his fury in terms too shocking to relate, he went to the
scaffold despising every religious admonition, and laughing at his
awful situation. Fearless and undismayed, he launched into eternity,
bidding defiance to human laws, and contemning that Divine Tribunal
before which he was about to appear, with the accumulated guilt of a
life spent in the perpetration of every species of wickedness.

He had been sentenced to death in England; but, having obtained his
Majesty's pardon, he was removed from the hulks into the Royal York
Rangers. He was concerned with the notorious Avershaw, whom he
called his father, and repeatedly expressed his determination to die
game, as resolutely as his other associates in villainy and murder.



THOMAS JEWETT
Executed at York for a Rape on his Master's Daughter

"Let ignominy brand thy hated name;
Let modest matrons at thy mention start;
And blushing virgins, when they read out annals,
Skip o'er the guilty page that holds thy legend
And blots the noble work."
SHAKESPEARE.

THOMAS JEWETT, of Old Malton, in the North Riding, aged 24 years,
was charged with violating the chastity of Elizabeth Stabler, his
master's daughter, a child under the age of ten.

The counsel for the prosecution stated, that the prisoner was
servant to William Stabler, blacksmith, at Old Malton, and lived in
the family as an inmate. On Sunday the 27th of July 1807, Mr.
Stabler and his wife went to Castle-Howard, leaving the care of his
family to the prisoner. The family consisted of five children, the
eldest of which was the child on whom the injury was committed, and
who was at that time under the age of nine years. The two eldest
boys went to a Sunday school, leaving only this girl, the prisoner,
an apprentice-boy, and two young children, under four years of age,
in the house. The apprentice-boy was sent out of the way to fetch
some water; and in his absence the prisoner committed the unmanly
crime for which he now stood at the bar.

We shall briefly state the substance of the evidence in this case,
without entering into any details of the testimony of the respective
witnesses. As soon as the prisoner had got the apprentice out of the
way, he proposed to Elizabeth Stabler to go with him into his
lodging-room, and he would give her a glass of gin. The girl acceded
to this proposal; and the prisoner gave her a glass of the liquor he
had promised her, which she drank; he offered her more, which she
refused. The prisoner then placed the child upon his bed, and ruin
ensued. The child did not complain of his outrage until the
following Wednesday, when upon being interrogated by her mother, she
related the whole transaction, and whose evidence as to the
situation of her daughter, materially corroborated the child's
testimony. On the following day a surgeon was sent for, who examined
the child, and whose evidence we cannot further notice than by
stating that it placed beyond a doubt the truth of the previous
testimony of the girl, and proved the actual perpetration of the
crime. The prisoner, when charged by Mr. Stabler with the injury
done to his child, at first denied it; but afterwards confessed it,
so far as to beg forgiveness; but in a few days thought proper again
to deny the charge, which so irritated his master, that he had him
apprehended.

Many witnesses were examined on the part of the prisoner, who gave
him an exceeding good character, but whose evidence no farther
affected the charge against him than by proving that the girl had
not been so much injured as to prevent her attending school the
following week.

The judge in stating the law to the jury, said, "That the statute
which took the benefit of clergy from persons convicted of rapes,
had made it a capital offence for any man to have what the law calls
carnal knowledge of a female child under the age of ten years; and
that without any reference to consent or non-consent of the child.
His Lordship then recapitulated the whole of the evidence. The jury,
after consulting for a few moments, found the prisoner guilty, but
recommended him to mercy on account of his general good character.
His Lordship with the most impressive solemnity said, "Gentlemen, I
always listen with pleasure to your recommendation, whenever I can
do it consistently with my public duty; but I am afraid I should
hand over the young and innocent part of the female sex to the lusts
of the depraved part of the other sex, if I should in this instance
yield to your suggestion; and it will be my painful duty to leave
the prisoner to the unmitigated severity of the law." In passing
sentence of death, he observed, "that it would be in vain that the
law protected female youth and innocence, with the heaviest penalty
against those who outraged them, if the ministers of the law had not
courage fully to execute it."

The jury who tried him, though by their recommendation they evinced
the quality of mercy, which the immortal bard says; "It is not
strained, but droppeth like the gentle dew from heaven," yet they
did not exercise the necessity of discrimination in the degree of
crimes. Of twelve men, who are always empanelled in matters of life
and death, several must have been fathers, and all related to some
female of tender years;how then could such men talk of mercy in
this world for him who could first betray his trust, and then
carnally assault his master's infant daughter. To such a man, we
think, death was a mercy.



GABRIEL KABLINSKI
Executed in France for Murder, Friday 19th April, 1811

A crime of a horrible nature, and under circumstances most barbarous
and cruelly unnatural, happened about the same time in France. It
was thus related, in the French journals of the day:

GABRIEL KABLINSKI, aged 23 years, born in Russian Poland, convicted
of having stabbed Louisa Tolimay, who kept a ready-made linen shop,
on the 2d of February 1811, was executed on Friday, at the Greve in
Paris. The following are the particulars of this horrible affair,
the effects of jealousy it would seem.

On the 3d of February he apprised Louisa Tolimay that he expected
her company to dinner, as he was to set out on his return to Russia
on the following day. She returned for answer, that she had two
persons to dine with her, and that she could not meet him until the
evening. Kablinski appeared very dissatisfied with this answer, and
desired the person who brought it to tell her, "That he expected her
at seven in the evening without fail." After dinner, it appears that
Louisa Tolimay went out, and at eight o'clock she alighted from a
job coach, with Kablinski, at Hardivillier's, a restaurateur, on the
boulevard of the Temple. They were accommodated with a room on the
first floor. Kablinski ordered dinner, of which it appears he ate
but little, and Louisa Tolimay did not taste a morsel. He then
called for coffee, and a half-bowl of rum-punch. Soon after he asked
for a half-bowl of wine-punch. This last did not please him, and he
had another half-bowl of rum-punch. He pressed Louisa Tolimay to
drink, but she refused. About nine o'clock, he asked for pen, ink,
and paper, which were brought him. The waiter having gone up soon
after found Louisa Tolimay writing.

At a quarter after ten some dreadful shrieks were heard, from the
room in which Kablinski and Louisa Tolimay were. The waiter and
Hardivillier's two sons ran upstairs. They were obliged to force
open the door, a sofa having been placed against it on the inside.
On entering they discovered Louisa Tolimay stretched on the floor,
shrieking, and the blood flowing profusely from her bosom. She spoke
a few wordsthe only ones that were distinctly heard were "Oh, the
monster! the wretch!" She made signs to one of Hardivillier's sons
to cut the lace of her gown, which he did, and with the assistance
of a soldier he placed her on a sofa. She could only utter the
following words, "My dear;" she kissed his hands in testimony of her
gratitude, and expired a few minutes after.

Kablinski was in the same room, stretched on his face, and
endeavouring to stab himself with a knife which he held under him.
He inflicted two wounds upon himself, one of which only pierced the
integuments. The other was only thirty millimetres deep, presenting
a large orifice, from whence issued a large quantity of blood. He
afterwards threw his knife, reeking with blood, at Louisa Tolimay,
asking several times if she were dead.



WILLIAM BRAGGE
Convicted at the Lent Assizes, for the County of
Durham, 1809, and Fined and Imprisoned, for Perjury.

The defendant was captain and owner of a trading vessel, and lived
at North Shields. He was tried at the assizes for the county of
Durham for perjury, and found guilty. The circumstances of the case
were as follow:

His brother, John Bragge, was impressed from on board his ship, and
an application having been made to the Court of King's Bench for a
writ of Habeas Corpus to have him discharged from the King's
service, into which he had been so impressed, it became necessary
that the affidavit should state that he, John Bragge, had not been
at sea, or in his majesty's service before; which affidavit was made
by the defendant; whereas in truth, and in fact, he, the defendant,
well knew that John Bragge had been twice in the royal navy before.
This was fully proved, and upon that proof the defendant was found
guilty.

Mr. Justice Le Blanc, in the absence of Mr. Justice Grose, in an
eloquent manner, wherein he pronounced a well directed and emphatic
eulogium upon the value of the writ of Habeas Corpus, pronounced
sentence, which wasthat the defendant should pay a fine of 50l. and
be imprisoned in the gaol of Durham two years! Often as we have had
occasion, in our former volumes, to mention the writ of Habeas
Corpus, thus eulogised by this learned judgethis second Magna
Chartathe barrier of the poor man against the oppression of the
richstill have we omitted to give the glorious boast of Englishmen
at length. The above case forcibly reminds us of our neglect, while
we are pleased to think that it is not yet too late; we therefore
now perform that agreeable part of our duty, and recommend every man
to imprint each line fully upon his mind.

THE STATUTE 31st CHARLES II. THUS ENACTS

THERE having been great delays used by the sheriffs, gaolers, and
other officers, to whose custody the King's subjects had been
committed, in making returns of writs of Habeas Corpus, &c. whereby
many persons had been long detained in prison, in such cases where by
law they were bailable; for prevention thereof, and the more speedy
relief of all persons imprisoned for any criminal matters, it is
enacted,

1. "That whensoever any writ of Habeas Corpus shall be brought and
served upon any officer, or other person, for any one in his custody,
or shall be left at the gaol with any one of the under-officers, the
said officers or their keepers or deputies, within three days after
that, (unless the commitment were for treason or felony plainly
expressed in the warrant of commitment) on payment of the charges of
bringing the prisoner, or tender thereof, to be ascertained by the
judge or court that awarded the writ and endorsed on the same, not
exceeding 12d. per mile, and upon security given by the prisoner's
own bond to pay charges of carrying him back, if he be remanded by
the court, and that he will not make any escape by the way, shall
make return of such writ of Habeas Corpus, and bring the body of the
party committed before the judges or barons of the court from whence
the writ shall issue, or to such persons before whom the writ is
returnable, and shall certify the true causes of his detainer or
imprisonment; but if the place of imprisonment be beyond twenty
miles, and not above one hundred miles off, then ten days is allowed
for the same, and if further, it shall be within twenty days, and no
longer.

2. "Any persons committed or detained for any crime (unless for
treason or felony expressed in the warrant as aforesaid) in the
vacation time, may complain to the Lord Chancellor or keeper, or any
judge, who upon view of the commitment, or oath of its being denied,
shall upon request by such persons, or any in their behalf, attested
and subscribed by two witnesses, grant a Habeas Corpus under the seal
of their respective courts, returnable immediately; and on service
thereof, the officer within the times before limited is to bring up
such prisoner before the said Lord Chancellor or judges, before whom
the writ is made returnable, with the causes of his commitment; and
thereupon, within two days after he shall be brought up, the prisoner
shall be discharged from his imprisonment, on entering into
recognizance with one or more sureties, to appear in the Court of
King's Bench the term following, or at the next assizes, sessions, or
general gaol delivery, or such other court for the county where the
offence is cognizable: into which court the writ, the return, and
recognizance aforesaid, shall be certified, unless it shall appear
that the party is detained upon a legal process or warrant, for such
matters or offences which are not bailable by law.

3. "Provided always, that if any person shall neglect to pray a
Habeas Corpus for his enlargement, by the space of two terms after he
is committed, he shall not have any such writ in time of vacation, in
pursuance of this act.

4. "If any officer or officers shall refuse to make their returns, or
to bring the body of the prisoner as aforesaid, according to the
command of the writ, within the times aforesaid; or upon demand made
by the prisoner, or any in his behalf, shall refuse to deliver a true
copy of the warrant or commitment, within six hours after demanded,
such officers, gaolers, &c, in whose custody the prisoner shall be
detained, shall forfeit for the first offence 100l., and for the
second offence 200l. to the party grieved, and be rendered incapable
to hold their offices; the penalties to be recovered by action of
debt, bill, plaint, or information, in any of the King's courts at
Westminster, wherein no essoin, &c. or stay of prosecution, shall be
admitted or allowed.

5. "And no person, who shall be delivered and set at large by Habeas
Corpus shall be again imprisoned for the same offence, by any person
other than by legal order and process of such court, wherein he shall
be bound by recognizance to appear, or other court having
jurisdiction of the causes; and if any other persons shall knowingly
imprison again the person delivered or set at large, they shall
forfeit to the prisoner 500l. to be recovered as aforesaid.

6. "Persons committed for high treason or felony, plainly and
especially expressed in the warrant, upon prayer in open court the
first week of the term, or first day of the sessions of oyer and
terminer or gaol-delivery, to be brought to trial, if they are not
indicted the next term, sessions of oyer and terminer, or gaol
delivery after such commitment, the judges upon motion made in court
the last day of the term or sessions, shall set them at liberty upon
bail, unless it appear upon oath, that the King's witnesses could not
be produced that term or sessions; and if any such persons committed
as aforesaid, upon such prayer aforesaid, shall not be indicted and
tried the second term or sessions after the commitment, they shall be
discharged from their imprisonment.

7. "But nothing in this act shall extend to discharge out of prison
any person charged in debt or other action, or with process in any
civil cause; but that after his acquittal for his crime, he shall be
kept in custody for such other suits

8. "If any person or persons, subjects of this realm, shall be
committed to any prison, or be in custody of any officer, for any
criminal matter, the said person shall not be removed from the said
custody into the custody of any other officer, unless it be by Habeas
Corpus, or some other legal writ, or where the prisoner is delivered 
to the constable to be carried to gaol, &c. or when any person is
sent by order to the house of correction, or removed from one prison
to another in the same county, in order to a trial or discharge; or
in case of sudden fire, infection, or other necessity. And persons
making out and signing any warrants for removal, contrary hereto, or
countersigning the same, and the officers obeying or executing them,
shall incur the forfeitures before mentioned, both for the first and
second offence, to the party grieved.

9. "And any prisoner may move for and obtain his Habeas Corpus, as
well out of the Chancery or Exchequer, as out of the Courts of King's
Bench or Common Pleas, and if the Lord Chancellor, or any judge or
baron, shall deny any writ of Habeas Corpus required to be granted as
aforesaid, they shall forfeit to the party grieved 100l. recoverable
in manner aforesaid.

10. "And it is declared that writs of Habeas Corpus may run into any
County palatine, the cinque ports, and other privileged places of
England, and into the isles of Jersey and Guernsey.

11. "No subject of this realm shall be sent prisoner into Scotland,
Ireland, or into any parts beyond the seas, which are or may be
within or without the dominions of his Majesty, his heirs or
successors; and if any of the said subjects be so imprisoned, it is
illegal, and every such person shall for such imprisonment have an
action of false imprisonment against him by whom he shall be
committed, detained, imprisoned, sent prisoner, or transported, and
against all persons that shall frame, contrive, write, seal, or
countersign, any warrant for such commitment, or shall be advising,
aiding, or assisting in the same: and shall have judgment to recover
treble costs, besides damages, which damages shall not be less than
500l. in which action no delay or stop of proceedings, nor no
injunction, protection, or privilege, &c. shall be allowed; and the
person or persons so offending as aforesaid, being lawfully convicted
thereof, shall be disabled to bear any office of trust or profit
within the realm, or dominions thereunto belonging, and incur the
pains, penalties, and forfeitures, ordained by the statute of
praemunire made in the 16th year of Richard II. and be incapable of
any pardon from the king, his heirs, or successors.

12. "This act shall not extend to any person who by contract in
writing shall agree with any merchant or owner of a plantation, &c.
to be transported, and shall have received earnest upon such
agreement; nor to persons convicted of felony, and praying to be
transported beyond the seas, who may be so transported into any parts
notwithstanding this statute; nor to the imprisonment of any person
before the time limited for the commencement of the act, or any thing
thereto relating, nor to persons resident in this realm, that shall
have committed any capital crime in Scotland or Ireland, &c. but that
such persons may be sent to receive trial as before this act.

13. "And persons offending against this act shall not be impleaded
for any offence, unless the same be done within two years at most
after the offence was committed, in case the party grieved shall not
be then in prison; and if he shall be in prison, then within two
years after his delivery out of prison, or decease.

14. "After the assizes proclaimed for any county, no person shall be
removed from the common gaol upon any Habeas Corpus, pursuant to this
act, but shall be brought thereupon before the judge of assizes in
open Court: but after the assizes are ended, any person detained may
have a Habeas Corpus, according to the direction and intention of the
act.

15. "If any information, suit, or action, be brought against any
person or persons for offences against this law, the defendants may
plead the general issue, and give the special matter in evidence; and
the said matter shall be as available to all intents, as if they had
pleaded or alleged the same matter in bar or discharge of such
information, suit, or action.

16. "Persons appearing to be committed as accessory before the fact,
to any petit treason or felony, or upon suspicion thereof, which
shall be especially expressed in the warrant of commitment, shall not
be re moved or bailed by virtue of this act, or in any other manner
than they might have been before the making of the same."



JOHN ANNIS
A ship broker, convicted of Fraud, 14th of January,
1809

At the Old Bailey, on Saturday, the 14th of January, 1809, John
Annis, an eminent ship broker, was indicted, charged with having
fraudulently obtained money from a Mr. Pugh, by falsely pretending
that he had paid a sum for export and convoy duties upon goods
shipped to the amount of 324l. 15s. when he had paid the duties upon
goods to the amount of 49l. only, and thereby defrauding Mr. Pugh.
It appeared that Mr. Pugh had employed the defendant to ship goods
for exportation to the amount of 324l. 15s. and the goods were
afterwards seized by a gentleman from the Custom-house, the export
and convoy duties not having been paid to that amount. It was proved
that the defendant had charged Mr. Pugh 13l. 8s. for the Custom-
house duties, which was the regular price, according to the value of
the goods, at four per cent., and it was also proved by some
witnesses from the Custom-house that the defendant had paid 2l.
only, he having represented the goods shipped as amounting to
something about 50l. The defendant accounted for his conduct by
pleading the hurry of business, but the jury found him Guilty.
Transportation.



HENRY GAWLER
A Clerk in the Navy Office, Convicted the 11th of
April, 1808, of a Fraud

(A very shabby sort of Swindling Transaction.)

Henry Gawler was indicted for fraudulently obtaining, under false
pretences, six promissory notes, for the payment of one pound, from
Mary the wife of  Spright, on the 22d of October last.

It appeared in evidence, that the prisoner, at the time of this
transaction, was a clerk in the Ticket-office, in the Navy-office.
The prosecutrix having been informed that the prisoner had interest
to procure the discharge of her son (by a former husband), who was
serving as a seaman on board His Majesty's ship Active, called at
his house in Ossulston-street, Somer's-town, for the purpose of
applying to him on the subject. Not finding him within, however, at
that time, she left her commands and returned home; in a few days
afterwards the prisoner himself called upon her at Kentish-town, and
said he understood she wished to obtain her son's discharge, adding,
that he could settle the business at once, and that her son might be
home at least in the course of two months. The prosecutrix,
delighted with the hope of seeing her child, asked what would be the
expense. He said it would cost 40l. to procure the discharge. The
prosecutrix expressed her utter inability to raise such a sum; upon
which he said that he would not want the money all at once, but he
must have 5l. down. She had not the money then in her possession,
and the prisoner went away, promising to call again.

In the meantime the prosecutrix received a pressing request from her
son, to try every means in her power to obtain his discharge. In two
or three days afterwards the prisoner called again upon the
prosecutrix, and told her she must contrive to raise some part of
the money. She had then procured six 1l. notes, and immediately gave
them to him, and upon his complaining that that was a very small
sum, she promised to send him some more money in a few days. Some
time having elapsed, and not hearing any account from the prisoner,
she called upon him at the Navy-office, to inquire what progress he
had made in the business. He received her with all the affected
consequence of an official man; and told her that the Lords
Commissioners of the Admiralty had not yet given their answer upon
the subject. Shortly afterwards Gawler absconded from London, and
the prosecutrix did not see him again till he was in custody at Bow-
street, upon suspicion of misconduct of a more serious nature.

The case on the part of the prosecution having been clearly made
out, Mr. Alley submitted to the court, that, however infamously
wicked the conduct of the defendant was in the eye of every honest
man, the case had not been made out under the act of Parliament by
which he was tried, inasmuch as bank-notes did not come within the
meaning of the word monies, which was the term used in the statute.
This point he urged confidently, and he contended that no lawyer
could correctly contradict him in this position.

The Court, however, after hearing the question urged at length, were
clearly of opinion, that if bank-notes did not come within the
meaning of the term money, yet, as they were money's worth, they
were to be recognised as money under this act of Parliament.

The Jury found the prisoner Guilty.Imprisoned.



CHARLES LLOYD
Convicted of Stealing in a Dwelling House, and
Sentenced to Imprisonment

IT is with some concern that we come to a case like this, because we
find our national character as a warlike nation sullied in the
soldier, who, after behaving with bravery in the field, fighting his
country's battles abroad, debases himself in the commission of a
petty theft a home.

Charles Lloyd was tried for breaking into the house of William
Usher, and stealing therein a silk cloak, his property. It appeared
from the evidence, that the prisoner, a handsome well-dressed young
man, was a private in the Guards, who had received permission from
his Colonel to act as Drill Serjeant to the St. Sepulchre's
Volunteers, in which he was also Serjeant-Major. Esther Usher, the
wife of the prosecutor, stated, that she lived in Crown-court,
Finsbury-square, London, where her husband rented part of a house,
none of which was possessed by the landlord. The apartments the
prosecutor occupied were therefore described in the indictment as
constituting his dwelling-house. Between twelve and one o'clock in
the morning, as Esther Usher was sitting in her parlour, she heard a
noise like the creaking of a door, which induced her to go upstairs
to see what was the matter. She met the prisoner coming downstairs,
who said to her "Good morning, madam." She never had seen him
before; but being addressed by him in this manner she took
particular notice of his countenance. There were other persons
living in the house besides her family. On proceeding farther
upstairs, she found the door of the room open, which she understood
from her daughter, a child of eight years old, had been locked up by
her in the morning. The child, however, was not in Court. When the
witness observed the door open, she suspected the prisoner had
robbed her, and ran out into the street after him, calling "Stop
thief." The prisoner, on his part, ran as fast as he could, and kept
waving his hat, and calling out, "No Mainwaring, Burdett for ever."
She soon lost sight of him, but the pursuit was continued by other
persons. On going back to her house, she missed her silk cloak out
of the room in question. The prisoner ran along several neighbouring
streets and alleys, and at last entered the house of a hair-dresser;
but the witness who kept close to him in the pursuit, was not
certain whether he went into the yard or parlour of that house.

Sarah Locker, the wife of the hair-dresser, stated, that the
prisoner came into her house, and asked whether he could have a tete
for his sister of the colour of his hair. He shut the door behind
him when he came into the shop, and begged of the witness to give
him a chair, as he was very much fatigued. After some conversation
(which it is not necessary to detail,) the witness wished to open
the door; but the prisoner stopped her, and said, "Don't open it
yet, good woman." At this time the man, who had followed close
behind the prisoner, was looking about for him in the yard, and the
witness could observe through the window that a crowd was collecting
about the door. She also observed that the prisoner had a bundle in
his hand, which he put into his breeches. He then went out, and was
seized, and charged with the robbery. He said to the people who
seized him, that he was not the man they wanted; he was a person of
consequence; and he wondered how they could suspect him of such a
thing. He was a Serjeant Major of the St. Sepulchre's Volunteers.

He was, however, taken into custody; and when searched, a bundle,
containing eleven keys, was found concealed within his breeches. The
prisoner called several witnesses, who gave him a very good
character. A serjeant of the Guards joined in this character, and
added, that he had always behaved like a brave soldier in the field
of battle. The Serjeant also observed, that it was possible the
prisoner might have in his possession a number of keys, in
consequence of stores belonging to the Volunteer Corps being under
his care.

The jury found the prisoner guilty of the single felony of stealing,
acquitting him, agreeably to the direction of the judge, of the
capital part of the charge, as there was no direct evidence of the
room door having been broke open. They also recommended him to the
mercy of the Court.

The prisoner was so agitated at the commencement of the trial, that
he could not stand at the bar, and he was allowed a chair, in which
he fainted the moment he sat down.



SINGULAR ROBBERY AT THE BRITISH MUSEUM.
By a Villain who Escaped Justice

We have related a robbery at the Ashmoleum Museum at Oxford; a
burglary in the house of Lord Chancellor Thurlow, and the stealing
from thence the Great Seal of England; but we hardly expected to
have found a man base enough to rob our National Museumthe
repository of all that is rare and valuable from the time of the
Egyptians to the present day; a place, too, opened gratis to the
curious. Yet so it waswe find a villain taking the basest advantage
of this privilege, and then escaping the arm of justice.

This most ungrateful thief stole from the portfolios, deposited in
the above place, rare and curious prints, estimated to be worth at
least 1500l. From the time many of the articles have been sold to
print dealers, this person must have been in the habit of stealing
them for more than a year. The circumstance which led to discovery
was, the sale of a copied print from the original. Among the many
painters' etchings that are eagerly sought after, are those of the
celebrated Rembrandt, a single print of whose work has sold for
fifty guineas. One of the scarce prints of this master is called the
"Coach Landscape;" and a print-seller was induced, from its known
rarity, to give twelve guineas for one to an artist and dealer; but,
afterwards entertaining doubts of its originality, he showed it to a
better judge, who pronounced it to be a copy, and advised him to
compare it with two undoubted originals in the British Museum. But,
upon application for that purpose, neither could be found; this
produced a search, that discovered an amazing deficiency in the
works of other artists, and from subsequent inquiry it has been
found, that one print-seller has purchased to the amount of 200l.,
another 60l. and so in a greater or less proportion.

So ready a market did these rare articles find, that the cheap
collector could not find time sufficient to procure and dispose of
them too, but was necessitated to employ an agent, whose brokerage,
it is supposed, must have amounted, to a considerable sum. The most
valuable print recovered is the portrait of "The Burgo-Master Six,"
supposed to be worth 40l. But the "Hundred Guilder" print, and many
others of extreme rarity and value, are among those missing. It is
said, that a unique set of proofs, the works of Karil Du Jardin,
consisting of 50 prints, have likewise been purloined.

The collection from whence the above has been taken, was left to the
British Museum by the late Rev. Dr. Cracherode a few years since,
and was estimated to be worth 20,000l. An Act of Parliament was made
to enable the trustees to receive the same without payment of the le
gacy duty.

The delinquent fled from the hands of justice, but much valuable
property has been discovered.

(Transcriber's Note: His name was Deighton. See The Print Room of the
British Museum by "The Ghost of a Departed Collector" (G W Reid)
https://archive.org/details/printroomofbriti00ghos p. 25)



JOHN GONDREU
Convicted at the Court of Criminal Jurisdiction, held
at the Criminal Court, of the Town Sydney, in New
South Wales, (commonly called Botany Bay,) on the 12th
of September 1809, and Sentenced to Death for
Burglary

IN consequence of our directions for that purpose near two years
ago, we have just received a file of newspapers from the far distant
land to which our convicts for many years last past are transported,
viz. New South Wales; first and still commonly called Botany Bay.
This vehicle of news and advertisements[Note 1] is well printed, and
tolerably edited, on half, and sometimes a quarter, of a sheet of
paper. The printer and editor is George Howe, sent thither a
transport, convicted of a highway robbery. This man was a journeyman
printer in London, until he commenced highwayman, and from the
number of his escapes both on the road, and at the bar of justice,
he was called Lucky George. In the infant state of the colony, it
was found necessary to print the different orders of the governor,
and the regulations laid down by the government of England. George
Howe was the lucky convict who was honoured with the situation of
government printer, and which he still retains. His types and office
were found by the governor; and in place of working with his brother
and sister convicts on the roads, or in the fields, lucky George
lived at his ease; and, had he been commonly assiduous and sober,
might have accumulated wealth. His career of plunder was indeed of
necessity stopped; but he retained his propensity to the bottle, and
an incorrigible partiality for laziness.[Note 2]

During the government of Commodore Bligh there were several
executions of convicts, for different crimes against the state; but
his successors have been extremely reluctant in taking the lives
forfeited to the laws, by generally commuting the sentence of death
to that of transportation to smaller governments, at a distance from
the large town of Sydney.[Note 3] Whilst Colonel Lachlan Macquarie
was governor, he entirely dispensed with capital punishments, which
was found more beneficial to the colony; such examples tending to
harden, rather than terrify men from violent breaches of the law.

At the Court of Criminal Jurisdiction,[Note 4] held at the town of
Sydney on Friday the 12th day of September 1809, (in the language of
Lucky George the printer) John Gondreu (a convict) was indicted, for
having, in company with one Thomas Dobson, burglariously broke and
entered the dwelling house of Thomas Harley, a settler at a
plantation called "There and nowhere else;" and forcibly taking from
thence certain articles of plate, wearing apparel, &c. named in the
indictment. Evidence for the prosecution being called

Thomas Harley (convict, then a settler,) deposed, that on Friday the
17th of June last he went to bed about seven in the eveningthat he
heard a noise of dogs at a distance upon which a Daniel Fogherty, a
stockman, said he overheard some people talking to Richard 
Broadbent, who inhabited a hut not more than thirty yards from
Harley's dwellingthat he then heard some persons beating his dogs,
and afterwards heard Fogherty attackedthat the latter begged of him
to fire through his door, for he expected to be murderedthat the
window of his own bedroom was broken open, and a pistol presented at
him through it, by the prisoner at the bar, as he said he had much
reason to believethat Broadbent said they were constables come to
search the placethat he called Broadbent to his assistance, but he
did not comethat he at length opened the door of his house, on
doing which he was knocked down and violently beatenthat the
prisoner at the bar, to whose person and voice he now positively
swore, made use of many threats to him, and compelled him to quit
the house, which two of his accomplices remained in and ransacked
that the prisoner at the bar conducted him to the hut of Broadbent,
in which the deponents Fogherty and Broadbent were confined about 
three quarters of an hourthat after the prisoner at the bar and his
accomplices had entered into his, the deponent's, dwelling house,
seven or eight minutes must have elapsed before he was ordered to
leave it, during which interval he had an ample opportunity of
identifying the person of the prisoner, as there was a large fire in
the room, which gave a strong lightthat the face of the prisoner
was a little blackened, but not sufficiently to disguise himthat
after they had plundered the house they went off with their booty,
leaving him utterly distressed;and that those who had rummaged the
house had stripped his daughter of ten years of age stark naked, and
obliged her to get under the bedstead out of the way, the villians
having emptied the feathers of the bed itself, and taken away the
tick.

The next evidence called was Richard Broadbent, (convict) upon whom
suspicion having fallen of his having a connection in the robbery,
he had been admitted king's evidence. This man had been a convict
servant allowed by government to Harley the prosecutor; but being
indulged with permission to go upon his own hands, was about to
leave his master's premises, and, as already stated by Harley's
testimony, occupied a hut, about thirty yards from his own dwelling.
This evidence being sworn deposed, that on the evening mentioned he
heard a noise which the dogs made about seven at night; and on his
going to the door to enquire what occasioned it, he saw three men,
one of whom was Thomas Dowling, another, to the best of his belief,
was the prisoner at the bar, but that the third he could say nothing
ofthat one of those men was armed with a blunderbuss, or short gun,
and the other with a horse pistol. In other parts of his evidence he
merely corroborated that given by the first witness; but incurring
the charge of intentional prevarication, he was ordered into
custody.

Here the evidence on the part of the prosecution closed; and the
prisoner being put on his defence, set up an alibi, in illustration
of which, Martin Dogherty (convict) deposed to seeing him almost at
sun down, and afterwards at seven o'clock on the evening of the
robbery at his own house, which was at the Nepean river, a distance
of more than twenty miles.

William Nye (convict) deposed also to his seeing the prisoner at the
bar at the Nepean about sun down; but, from a comparison of this
man's testimony with the foregoing, a strong contradiction of the
evidence of one or the other appeared in point of time. Daniel
Fogherty (convict) gave testimony in the prisoner's favour; but it
was merely grounded upon opinion, and given in an incoherent manner.

Here terminated the prisoner's defence; and the Court being cleared
of strangers;[Note 5] re-opened in about twenty minutes, when a
verdict was pronouncedGuilty. The judge advocate addressed the
unfortunate man in language suited to the melancholy situation in
which, unhappily, his crimes had placed him. The judge expatiated at
much length upon the enormity of the offence of which he had been
convicted; and exhorted him to apply the remaining interval that
might be allowed him in this world to the more essential duties of
repentance, from which he could only hope for consolation in the
latter moments of existence. As soon as the verdict was pronounced,
the unfortunate culprit gave evident marks of an affliction not to
be described. He repeatedly called for the protection of heaven to
the wretched family he was now doomed to leave; and when the awful
sentence of condemnation was passed, he shrieked aloud, and fell
upon his knees, imploring pity. The scene was very affecting. An
unfortunate fellow creature had by his crimes brought himself to the
awful verge of eternity; but was not yet quite so callous to the
natural feelings of humanity, as to hear, unmoved, a doom which was
to separate him for ever from his unhappy offspring! Pity it is that
this the strongest of sensations ever should be lulled by the unruly
dictates of a vicious inclination, which in the end invariably draws
vengeance on itself.

In the case of John Gondreu we have a variety of matters for
contemplation. A crime, of the blackest description perpetrated by a
man already a felontransported from his injured country by
offending the lawsa robbery on the spot of his banishment. Then we
find him tried for his latter offence by a Military Court, which,
sitting as judge and jury, convict, and sentence him to death. We
see the workings of all powerful nature in a hardened sinner looking
at death; and, last of all, we read the moralizing on his fate of
his brother convict, the printer, George Howe, alias Lucky George.

We have observed that of late years the sentence of death had not
been carried into execution in Botany Bay. Mercy was even extended
to Gondreu, upon the condition named in the following

"GENERAL ORDERS."

"The Lieutenant Governor has been pleased to extend the royal mercy
to John Gondreu, condemned to death by the late Criminal Court, on
condition of his serving for life as a convict within this
territory.
"By command of his Honour,
"The Lieutenant Governor, 
"JAMES FINUCANE; Secretary."
"Head Quarters, Sydney,
September 19th, 1809.

Note 1: Of advertisements, we observe many, and some extremely
curious; but, generally upon subjects different to that of our work.
One however, so forcibly struck us, that we do not hesitate giving
it to our readers. It appeared in "The Sydney Gazette, and New South
Wales Advertiser," Saturday April 28th 1810.
	"Books. Any person or persons, who may have borrowed three
volumes of the NEWGATE CALENDAR, from Mr. Nichols, is requested to
return them. On the first leaf of each is a COAT of ARMS. If not
restored, the person in whose possession either may hereafter be
found will be prosecuted."

Note 2: Darcy Wentworth, once a famous highwayman on the roads
leading to the metropolis, became a Botany Bay ESQUIREnay, by
virtue of two offices under government. He was surgeon-general, a
justice of the peace, and a trustee for the public roads.
	Andrew Thompson, also a convict, was another ESQUIRE, at
Hawkesbury.
	Simeon Lord, a third convict, an ESQUIRE, Justice at Sydney.
His worship, Lord, built the largest private house, stores, and
warehouses, and was one of the first merchants under the government.
	Isaac Nichols, transported for stealing a Jack-Ass, was a
principal superintendent of convicts, and built himself a house and
store-house, nearly equal to his fellow-convict, Lord.

Note 3: This town is above a mile in length, contains several
streets, and about two thousand inhabitants. The whole colony can
muster eight thousand white souls, all from the British dominions.

Note 4: This Court is held at the will of the governor, as occasion
may require. It is composed of officers, one half military, and the
other naval, who are both judges and jurors, under the direction of
a judge advocate.

Note 5: This is the proceeding of all Courts Martialthe members
deliberating, convicting, or acquitting, and pronouncing judgment,
with closed doors. In Botany Bay, all are under martial law.



ISAAC WEST and JOHN DUNCAN
Convicted of Burglary in Botany Bay, 12th of September
1809

At the Court of Criminal Jurisdiction in Sydney, Botany Bay on 12th
of September 1809, Isaac West, and John Duncan, (convicts) were
indicted; Isaac West for breaking and entering the house of
Elizabeth, alias Sarah Hill, on the 17th of August last in the day
time, and stealing therefrom articles to the value of twenty-seven
shillings; and John Duncan for receiving the said articles knowing
them to be stolen. Isaac West was sentenced to receive three hundred
lashes on his bare back, and to be imprisoned five years at Fort
Dalrymple; and John Duncan to fourteen years' transportation.

Note: Sarah Hill was then a convict, but obtained the indulgence of
her own time, giving money in lieu of public work. She took a house,
and converted it into a brothel, acting the part of bawd therein;
after figuring some time in the character of, what we in London
term, "a girl of the town."

We should have concluded that these punishments, if not operating as
an example to others in the like case offending, would surely have
fully sufficed to have deterred the rogues themselves from
committing further depredations; but it seems, like a great part of
their fellow convicts, they were incorrigible. We find in the
Gazette that ere the back of one of them whipped had ceased smarting
from the lashes above mentioned, they had relapsed into their wonted
propensity to thieving, as will appear from the following paragraph:
"On Tuesday last West and Duncan, who were lately convicted of
robbing the house of Elizabeth Hill, in Chapel-row, were examined
before a bench of magistrates on a charge of stealing poultry, which
Duncan declared he had found; but as the fact of stealing was too
palpable to admit so unplausible a justification, both were ordered
to sleep in the gaol as improper characters."



JOHN BOULTON
Punished by the Stocks in Botany Bay

The bench of magistrates in Sydney, Botany Bay, on 12th of September
1809, enquired into the conduct of John Boulton for indecency, "of
which," adds our reformed convict printer, "delicacy restrains the
mention in a public print." It will suffice to say, that the bench,
after a long and patient hearing and examination of numerous
witnesses, were fully satisfied with the prisoner's guilt. They
sentenced the said John Boulton to be set in the public stocks, on
the Green hills, at the Hawksbury, on the following Saturday in the
forenoon, there to remain for the space of two hours; then to be
removed to the common gaol at Paramatta, and there confined one
calendar month.

Note: Paramatta is the town, where Barrington, that prince of
pickpockets, finished his earthly career. At the time of his death
he was high constable of Paramatta, to which he was appointed for
his better conduct as a convict, but it was a place neither
respectable nor profitable. Paramatta is sixteen miles from Sydney,
the seat of government, and contains about five hundred inhabitants.
It is the name given by the natives; Para, signifying the head,
matta, a creek, from its situation at the extremity of the water in
that part of the country.



HENRY KELLY
Punishment of a Prevaricating Witness in Botany Bay

The bench of magistrates at Hawksbury, on Saturday the 18th of
November 1809, found it necessary to order the corporal punishment
to fifty lashes to be inflicted on Henry Kelly (a convict) for gross
prevarication in delivering his evidence, and for manifesting a
disposition to conceal and disguise the facts within his knowledge,
with a view to prevent and defeat the course of justice. The bench
declared their determination on every occasion to punish in the most
public and exemplary manner every person concerned in practices so
injurious to the interests of society, and that were calculated for
purposes so scandalous and disgraceful.

Note: Hawksbury, so called after the noble lord who bore that title,
is the most distant settlement from Sydney. The town is called "The
Green Hills," of which Andrew Thompson, Esquire, late a convict,
known by the appellation of Long Harry, was justice of the peace,
and little Ben Lara, a Jew, once his fellow convict, kept the
principal hotel.



JAMES HEATH and HENRY WILLIAMS
Sentenced to Death, having Pleaded Guilty to an
Indictment before the Court Of Criminal Jurisdiction
at Sidney, (Botany Bay,) Charged with a Burglary

On Tuesday the 28th of November 1809, says the Sydney Gazette, a
Court of Criminal Judicature was convened for the trial of James
Heath, and Henry Williams, who were indicted for breaking and
entering a mill at Pyrmont, belonging to G. Blaxcell, Esq. and
stealing there from seven canvass bags, containing fifteen bushels
of wheat; to which charge both the prisoners pleaded guilty, and
received sentence of condemnation.

Upon this awful occasion the judge advocate pathetically admonished
the prisoners to repentance, setting before them at the same time
the mirror of their transgressions, which arbitrarily demanded the
interposition of the legal power. The unhappy men appeared to be
much affected at the situation in which their crimes had brought
them, and evinced sincere contrition.
	A representation of the circumstances having been subsequently
made to his Honour the Lieutenant Governor, his Honour was pleased
to extend the royal grace and pardon to both the criminals,
conditionally on their serving as transports for life within the
limits of this territory.
	In the same paper we find no bad specimen of Botany Bay
poetry; and, as the subject comes within the scope of our work, we
present it in this place to our readers.

THE POOR CONVICT.

"By fortune discarded- a prison my doom,
Ah why do I sadly survive,
But to end an existence, mayhap, in this tomb,
That's prepared for the wretch while alive.

"If a brother in durance hail freedom's return,
To transport my heart doth incline;
But transient's the joy-with impatience I burn,
And I wish the same blessing were mine.

"Now hope grows too feeble my spirits to cheer;
Reflection consoles me no more;
For thought but informs me my lot is severe,
That I live but new ills to endure.

"From whom shall the convict immur'd beg relief;
Or who his misfortunes befriend,
When the wants of his children but adds to his grief,
And their tears they unheeded expend?

"Ye generous few, who can kindly bestow
A mite on the suffering poor,
Compassionate this my sad story of woe,
And to liberty open the door.

"Or if by mishap be unheeded my pray'r,
And I sink beneath usage unkind,
The grave puts an end to all miseries here
And in death a true friend I shall find."

FORGERY IN BOTANY BAY.


Some ingenious person or persons, continues this Gazette, having
passed several forged bills, written with a pen so as to imitate
printing, the public are cautioned against the fraud; and, in order
to put a stop to it, are recommended to bring to immediate detection
any person from whom any such may have been received, or by whom
such future imposition shall be attempted.

PROCLAMATION FOR REGULATING THE HOURS OF WORK, OF THE
CONVICTS AT BOTANY BAY.

"Head Quarters, Government House,
Sydney, 20th January 1810.
"In consequence his Excellency the Governor having been enabled to
augment the ration, the hours for labour for working gangs in the
employ of government will be as follows,
"From day light till 8 o'clock work; from 8 o'clock till nine, rest.
From nine o'clock till 3 in the afternoon, labour, at which time it
ceases for the day; and on Saturday, from day light till ten o'clock,
at which time the labour ceases until Monday following,
"By Command of His Excellency,
"JOHN. T. CAMPBELL, Secretary."



THOMAS HERBERT
Indicted for Assault, 8th December 1809

At the sessions held at Hick's Hall, for the county of Middlesex, on
Friday the 8th of December 1809, Thomas Herbert was indicted for a
violent assault on Lieutenant Colonel Vigoreaux. The prosecutor, who
has lost a leg in the service of his country, was riding on
horseback to Chiswick, when he met the defendant and two others in a
gig, and the former committed a most wanton assault, by
horsewhipping him as he passed, The prosecutor followed the
defendant to the toll bar-gate at Hyde-Park Corner, and requested
the gate to be shut against the defendant, when he got out and
threatened to pull the prosecutor off his horse. The Colonel
followed the defendant to Dowgate-hill, he having refused to give
any other address than that he was Captain Herbert of the city. At
Dowgate-hill the defendant again threatened to pull the Colonel off
his horse, and he assaulted him several times. The counsel for the
prisoner made no defence, and the defendant was convicted. After a
severe reprimand from the chairman, he was sentenced to pay a fine
of 50l. and to be imprisoned three months.



REBECCA LEE
A Cruel Mistress to her Servant Maid

AS soon as many an innocent buxom lass in the country, through
strict frugality, has saved a few pounds out of her scanty wages,
she sighs to visit dear Lunnan, where she has been told, many a
time, for truth, "that the streets are paved with gold, and the
houses studded with diamonds." Let such take heed from the fate of
Ann Hayman; a case, cruel as it was, not near so hard, by many
degrees, as some which we could adduce; let them further beware lest
they fall into the hands of old bawds, who are constantly prowling
about, seeking the misery of country girls, by seducing them into
the houses of infamy, where,

"Ruin ensues, remorse, and endless shame;
And one false step for ever damns her fame."

Rebecca Lee was indicted on April the 5th 1810, for assaulting and
otherwise ill-treating Ann Hayman. It appeared that the prosecutrix,
who was a native of the county of Devon, had been hired there and
brought to town by the defendant, as her servant. That after she had
been some time in her service, she used her extremely ill,
constantly beating her, and treating her with great severity; that
on the 9th of June last, she beat her, cut her face, and turned her
out of doors, giving her only a seven-shilling piece and a loaf, to
take her down to Exeter; that being turned into the street, the
neighbours interfered, and she was prevailed on to take her into the
house again; but the very next day she repeated the same cruelties
to her, beat her, bit her cheek, and cut her face most desperately,
and then turned her out of doors. All these facts were proved by
several witnesses. The case being gone through on the part of the
prosecution by Mr. Gurney, that on the part of the defendant was
undertaken by Mr. Alley, who addressed the jury at considerable
length ; but, without retiring, they found her guilty; and the
Court, after expressing their abhorrence of such conduct, sentenced
her to pay a fine of 40l.



THE GEMMEN OF THE WHIP
And their Misdemeanours

ON a retrospect of the various characters who are a pest to society
we find none, in a certain degree, more obnoxious than coachmen in
and about the metropolis. Impositions upon their employers, and ill-
treatment to their horses, is a leading trait in the character of
the inferior order of the gemmen of the whip. The depredations,
impositions, and insolence, of the drivers of licensed hackney
coaches in London are well known to all who occasionally use those
vehicles.
	These fellows are never wanting to lend a turn to thieves of
every description. To detail their abuses would occupy volumes, not
a day passing without some complaint against the Jehu fraternity;
who, nine times out of ten, escape with impunity because their ill-
treated fare is either ignorant of the mode of punishing them, or
cannot afford time to bring them to justice. Many a time had we
suffered the mortification of imposition and abuse from these
ruffians, ere we took the resolution of seeking redress. Succeeding
therein, we gladly point out the road to our readers.

The first attack they make is, to demand, almost invariably, more
than their fare. Should you demur, they generally deal out oaths and
curses, by way of supporting their impositionswearing two miles
into three, and an eighteen-penny fare into half-a-crown. As they
generally proceed to inforce their exactions let them take it, but
under protest that you will summon them to the Hackney-coach-office
in the Strand. Now as they calculate the odds at ten to one, that
you will not trouble yourself further about them, they, at best,
only laugh at you. But, next day, if you would do justice to
yourselfin fact, to the public, go to the said coach-office, and,
before the commissioners, tender your complaint (remembering the
number of the coach, or they cannot fix upon the driver,) and you
will convict him of extortion, and be entitled to one half the fine
which will be laid upon him. In cases of aggravated ill-treatment,
Master Whip is also sent to the House of Correction. The following
case respects one of that order who had been promoted to drive a
lawyer's coach; and which, of course, will point out the mode of
punishment of a Gentleman Jehu.

JOHN SEARLE, a coachman, in the service of Mr. Richard Dann, a
respectable solicitor, was indicted for a wanton and outrageous
assault committed on the persons of William Noble and Mary Ann, his
wife. Mr. Noble deposed, that he was proceeding along the Hackney
Road, going down to his dwelling in the country. It was dark in the
evening, and he was in a one horse chaise, when he observed a man
driving a coach and a pair of grey horses at a most furious rate,
going zigzag from one side of the way to the other; he cried out,
but to no purpose; he endeavoured to avoid him, but the coach was
driven more furiously towards him: at length, the wheel of the coach
took the wheel and shaft of his chaise, and turned it over. He was
thrown out, as was his wife; he fell under the horse, and the horse
rolled over him and dragged the chaise upwards of 40 yards, pulling
Mrs. Noble along, with her head fixed between the splinter-bar and
the body of the carriage, and she was lacerated and torn most
shockingly, insomuch that she has laboured under the consequences
ever since, and must be a cripple the rest of her life. He was found
guilty, and sentenced to six months' imprisonment.

A complaint was about this time made by John Robey, a boot-maker, of
St. Andrew-street, Seven Dials, against WILLIAM ROGERS, the driver
of the hackney coach, No. 627; at the instant he was applying for a
summons, the same coachman and coach drove up to the office door
with some prisoners in it; the complainant recognized them, and
coachey appeared before Mr. Birnie, the sitting magistrate, when it
appeared that the prisoner, in East-street, Manchester-square, drove
the pole of his coach against the prosecutor's breast, which knocked
him down backwards, and for the instant he was senseless. When he
came to himself, he found he was under the horses; when he got up,
and was taking the number of the coach, the prisoner flogged him so
violently that he cut the flesh off his hands, and with the most
horrid oaths and blackguard language, threatened to cut his head
off, &c.

The prisoner, in his defence, did not deny the charge. Mr. Birnie
told him the less he said the better; and had no doubt if he was
indicted, but he would receive a sentence of six months'
imprisonment, and ordered him to find bail.

This audacious fellow escaped on making satisfaction to the
complainant, after giving bail to answer the charge at the quarter
sessions.

A porter of the White Horse Inn, in Piccadilly, (another insolent
and imposing servant, whose frauds we shall soon fully expose) was
fined by the same active magistrate 40 shillings and costs, for
charging eight-pence for a parcel, the distance being under a mile,
and sixpence being his fare.

About the same time, JAMES GRANT, (a Gentleman Jehu) was sentenced
to a similar punishment. The offence with which he stood charged is
nightly committed at places of public resort, and it seldom occurs
that the offenders are brought to justice. At the close of the
performance on the night stated, Mr. Lambert's carriage was drawn up
in regular turn at the Bow-street door, his party consisting of Mrs.
Lambert (in a state of pregnancy), and three children, besides a
gentleman afflicted with the gout. The defendant was out of the
rank; and on the prosecutor's coachman attempting orderly to draw
off after another carriage, the defendant with full force drove the
splinter-bar, or pole, betwixt the horses and the carriage of the
prosecutor, and one of the horses was thrown down, whilst the other
was driven on the pavement. Neither the remonstrance of the
prosecutor, nor the screams of his lady and children, had any
effect, as the defendant persisted in flogging his horses until the
carriage had several times been nearly upset. The guards interfered,
whilst Mrs. Lambert and the party alighted; the carriage having been
previously damaged, and so entangled by the defendant's violence, as
to render the situation of the parties truly dangerous. The
defendant refused to tell whose service he disgraced, but Mr.
Lambert waited and ascertained that fact, and prosecuted him.

The same day, at the police office in Marlborough-street, a hackney
coachman, of the name of TWEED, was fined for extortion, in
demanding and receiving three shillings more than his fare from a
Mr. Scott and two ladies, whom he drove from the Opera to
Paddington. The coachman as usual was plying for fare at the edge of
the pavement, and the prosecutor and his friends were handed into
the coach by a link-man, but the driver refused to proceed under six
shillings. The party did not choose to alight, and Mr. Scott
promised to satisfy the coachman, which he attempted to do by paying
him two shillings. The coachman, however, demanded five shillings;
and the prosecutor, rather than subject himself to insult, paid it,
and very properly brought the extortioner to justice.

FRANCIS MYERS, a hackney coachman, was capitally indicted for
stealing a portable writing-desk, with ten guineas therein, the
property of Capt. Hotham. It appeared in evidence, that Capt. Hotham
came to town by the York mail coach; that his luggage was
transferred into the prisoner's coach, among which was the writing-
desk. He was driven to his lodgings in Duke-street, St. James's;
and, on alighting, ordered the prisoner to give his luggage to his
servant, but he concealed the desk, and drove away with it. On its
being advertised, it was found at a cabinet-maker's, to whose house
the prisoner himself had taken it, and had it broken open with a
chisel, and took the money out. The jury found him guilty of simple
felony. Imprisoned. [It is to be hoped that this will prove a
warning to hackney-coachmen, and teach them the danger of concealing
and appropriating to themselves, as lawful prize, articles of value
inadvertently forgotten in their vehicles.]

We shall conclude our long history of the abuses of the "Gemmen of
the Whip" with the case of a stage coachman, in the words of the
reporter, which will show that they not only meet with punishment
for ill-treating and imposing upon their passengers, but that they
are liable to answer for their ill conduct to the proprietors

MIDDLESEX-SHERIFF's COURT, Dec. 19, 1810.
BOLTON AND OTHERS v. HILL.

The plaintiffs in this case are proprietors of the coaches from the
Golden-cross, Charing-cross. The defendant is a coachman lately
employed by them in driving one of their stages. It appeared in
evidence, that in April last an action had been brought against the
proprietors, by a person to recover damages for the injury he had
sustained in consequence of their servant (the present defendant)
having driven their coach against him while on horseback, whereby he
was thrown from the horse and much hurt, and the horse killed; and
in which action it being proved that the accident arose through the
extreme negligence and improper conduct of the coachman, the person
injured recovered damages against the proprietors, who therefore
brought this action against the coachman, to recover back the amount
of the damages incurred by them through his improper conduct.
Damages for the proprietors, 133l. 9s.



JOHN KING
Convicted the sittings after Michaelmas Term 1810, in
the Court at Westminster, of Perjury

THE Attorney-General stated this to be an indictment against Mr.
John King, charging him with wilful and corrupt perjury, committed
by him in an affidavit filed in the course of certain proceedings in
the Court of Chancery, at his suit, against Mr. Charles Harrison.
Mr. Harrison had obtained judgment against Mr. King for 1565l. in
the court of King's Bench, on which Mr. King filed a Bill in
Chancery, to restrain Mr. Harrison from any further proceedings at
law; after a certain time, Mr. Harrison having failed to give in an
answer to the Bill, Mr. King obtained an injunction on the 6th of
April, which he served on Harrison on the 9th; being desirous of
locking up Harrison, who it was not convenient for him should be
abroad with judgment against him (Mr. K.) to the amount of 1500l.;
and being aware that the only way in which he could accomplish this
object was by swearing that the writ of fi. fa. was not issued till
after the intimation of the Lord Chancellor's order of in junction
or restraint from execution, &c. he, on the 18th of the same month,
filed an affidavit, not to the best of his knowledge and belief, but
to the absolute fact, consistent with his own knowledge, that the
writ of fi. fa. in the case alluded to, had been sent out after the
9th of April, the date of the notice of the order, although, in
fact, the writ had issued on the 4th of that month, before any
application had been made to the Lord Chancellor.

In support of this case there were produced the order of the Lord
Chancellor for the injunction, dated the 6th of April, the copy of
service of that order on the 9th of April; the affidavit of the
defendant in the terms charged in the indictment; and, in
contradiction there to, an examined copy of the writ of fi. fa.,
with an indorsement bearing it to have been issued on the 4th of
April.

Charles Harrison, the prosecutor in the indictment, also swore to
his having indorsed it on the 4th of April, on which day he also
sent it to the sheriff's office by George Smithson. Cross-examined
by the Common Serjeant, the witness stated that he wished the
execution to have been levied also on the 4th of April, if it could
have been done; but it was not made till the 11th, at which time the
injunction had issued, and had not been dissolved. G. Smithson said
the writ of fi. fa. was put into his hands by Harrison, on the 4th
of April, to give an officer to get executed. He had great
difficulty, however, in finding an officer who would execute it. He
did not leave the writ at the office, but carried it away with him,
and returned it to Mr. Harrison's clerk. Cross-examined by Mr.
Alley, admitting the writ of fi. fa. was not left at the sheriff's
office, of course Mr. King could have no information concerning it
if he had applied there. He knew from Harrison that he had not given
it into the office till the 11th of April; therefore it was
impossible for any human being to know till then that the writ had
issued. Re-examined by the Attorney General, the witness said the
date of the 4th of April, as being the date of issuing the writ,
would also appear on the back of the warrant, so that any person,
curious of satisfying himself on that head, might learn the fact by
consulting either the writ or the warrant.

Mr. Common Serjeant, for the defendant, contended that a material
averment was wanting in the indictment, namely, that the defendant
knew what he had sworn to be false. It was obvious from the evidence
of the prosecutor (Harrison) himself, that he had committed a
contempt against the authority of the Court of Chancery, in levying
on the goods of the defendant, after it consisted with the knowledge
of Harrison, that an injunction, restraining him from any farther
proceedings, had been issued. The defendant could not have been
ignorant of this, and it was an outrage on common sense to suppose,
that possessed of such knowledge, and having a well-founded ground
of complaint against Harrison, for which he was liable to be
committed for a contempt, the defendant should have selected the
issuing out of the writ as the ground of his application, had he not
relied on the information he had applied for and obtained, as to the
period when that writ of fi. fa. was issued.

 A witness, Smithson, swore the date of the writ of fi. fa. was
indorsed on the warrant. This he should prove to be false, from
production of the warrant itself. He should show also, that on
application to the officer, he stated the 11th to be the date of
issuing the writ, a fact which he would now certify to the jury on
oath. The defendant, therefore, was in bona fide to swear what he
had been informed, and he could have no reason to doubt was the
fact.

Mr. Carter, from the sheriff's office, produced the warrant, dated
11th of April, in which there was no mention by indorsement, or
otherwise, of the date of the 4th of that month.

James Hemp, the officer, stated, that Mr. King had made application
to him, both personally and by a boy, desiring to know the date of
the writ of fi. fa. which he had stated, as he believed it to be,
the 11th of April, there being seldom any time allowed to lie over
in the execution of such writs.

The Attorney-General was heard in reply. Lord Ellenborough, after
recapitulating the evidence, observed that the question for the
consideration of the jury, was, if he had been deceived by this
information; or if he had contrived the information to warrant the
application he meant to make to Chancery, and to be in store for him
afterwards. If the jury believed, that after all due and proper
means of information had been resorted to by the defendant, he had
fallen into error, he was entitled to a verdict of acquittal. But if
they were satisfied that he knew or had the means of knowing the
fact, and wilfully shut his eyes against it, in that case he was
criminally responsible, and was guilty of perjury.

The jury, after some hesitation, found the defendant Guilty.



HANNAH WHITELOCK ALIAS TAYLOR
Transported for Seven Years, for Stealing Articles
from Ready-furnished Lodgings

This is an old, and most shameful mode of plunder. It is a crime
comitted through the basest treachery, cheating those by whom the
thief is, in a certain degree, protected. Thus the base inmate,
without fear of detection in the commission of his ungrateful
villainy, at leisure, and little by little, strips the apartment,
unsuspected by the owner. It is therefore difficult to convict a
thief of this description;but, when once convicted, we should not
be sorry to find a severer punishment awaiting him, than being sent
beyond the seas.

The trial of this woman brought to light a double deception; and in
the practice of these kinds of cunning, we are sorry to say, our
pages oft show that females are more expert than men. She cohabited
with one Samuel Whitelock, and such a connection alone, though
acquitted of participating in robbing their lodging, was sufficient
to blast his character.

This infamous couple were indicted at the Old Bailey in the October
sessions 1810, as man and wife, and she pleaded thereto as Hannah
Whitelock. It appeared in evidence that they took the lodging above
alluded to, very decently furnished; and that in a few days it was
stripped of every article which it contained; even the lead was torn
from the roof and carried off. It farther was proved that the woman
prisoner was not married to the manon the other hand they had been
but a very short time connected, and that she assumed his namein
fine that she, in conjunction with a soldier in the ranks of the
Guards, her most favoured lover, committed the robbery in Samuel
Whitelock's absence. Of course he was acquittedthe soldier escaped
and the woman, the sole contriver of the base crimewas sent to
Botany Bay.

At the same sessions MARGARET SHIPLEY was tried for stealing a watch
from a young man of the name of Copeley. The evidence went to show
this to be one of those cases where very incautious young men are
decoyed into dens, which the worst of prostitutes infest. The
consequence whereof was, that he was robbed of all the cash he had,
and his watch into the bargain. The jury, without a moment's
hesitation, found her guilty; and, being recognized as an old
offender, she was also sentenced to transportation.

DIANA JENNINGS, a noted thief, was convicted of stealing pots, the
property of Mr. Burnet, a publican, in Tichfield-street. When
apprehended there were several pots belonging to other publicans
found concealed about her. Imprisoned.

MARY FRENCH was next tried for stealing in the dwelling-house of Mr.
Foster, in Old Gravel-lane, several small articles. The only novelty
in this case was, the exhibition of a Jewess of the name of Levi,
who presented herself in the two-fold capacity of witness for the
prosecution and for the prisoner, in the first instance, to produce
the property stolen, which she did; and, in the second instance, to
prove that the prosecutor had accepted 5l. not to proceed against
the prisoner, in which she failed.

The jury found the prisoner Guilty; and it turned out, that she had
been tried in this Court for various acts of theft, within the last
three years, several times. Transportation.



CHARLES DON
Convicted at the Summer Assizes 1810, at Chelmsford,
and Sentenced to Death, for Horse Stealing.

CHARLES DON was indicted for stealing a cart horse, the property of
James Goodeve Sparrow, Esq. of Gosfield. The horse in question had
been seen about noon on the Sunday on which it was stolen, and was
missed between four and five o'clock the morning following, when
persons were sent in search of it. It was taken from the farm-yard
of Mr. Sparrow. The prisoner arrived about half past seven on the
same morning at a public-house at a considerable distance from Mr.
Sparrow's, mounted on the horse without a saddle, and nothing but a
halter, when he called for some beer, and said he was going to
Cambridge, and offered afterwards to sell the horse, it being, as he
alleged, too heavy for him. The landlord, having a suspicion, from
his appearance, that the horse was stolen, said he did not himself
want to buy him, but would undertake to find a gentleman who would
buy him. He went accordingly to General Elwes, a magistrate of the
county, who resided close by him, told him his suspicions, and
brought the general back with him to his house. General Elwes, being
of the same opinion with the land lord, detained the prisoner; and,
in the course of the day, those who went in pursuit of the horse,
arrived, and identified him, and the prisoner was then fully
committed for trial.

On being called upon for his defence, he said he had found the horse
wandering on the road about seven miles from the public-house, that
he had mounted him and rode him to where he was stopped, that he had
never offered to sell him, but on the contrary meant to go forward
with him to the end of his journey. Lord Ellenborough remarked on
the inconsistency and dishonesty admitted by the defence, and left
the facts to the jury, who immediately pronounced him GuiltyDeath.



FOUR NATIVE INDIANS OF BOMBAY
Tried and Punished, 1810, for a Conspiracy, to Murder
George Cumming Osborne, Esquire.

This case excited great interest throughout the British territories
in the East Indies; while the infamy of the attempt, added to its
containing the mode of punishment for such a crime in that distant
part of the globe, much concerned the reader, in his native land.

Mr. Osborne was Sub-treasurer of Bombay, who finding frauds
practised upon the East India Company, he diligently sought to
detect the offenders. To prevent a discovery, the peculator
determined upon murdering Mr. Osborne!

From the evidence of many witnesses who were called, it appeared,
that the prisoners had been in employments in the Treasurythat they
had for a length of time carried on the most flagrant system of
dishonesty and peculation. These practices not continuing to be as
secure as they were profitable, the best plan which suggested itself
for establishing the safety of the prisoners, and retaining them in
their situation, was the murder of the Sub-Treasurer, who alone had
the means of detecting their villainy. They accordingly promised a
large sum of money to a man who undertook the task, but who,
repenting the iniquitous design, gave every information against the
offenders.

The Recorder, in summing up the evidence, dwelt with peculiar energy
upon the deadly malice which had prompted the prisoners, day and
night, to seek the destruction of an excellent unoffending man. They
were all found guilty. Two of them were condemned to be imprisoned
five years, to be placed once a year in the pillory, with labels
descriptive of their offence, during their imprisonment to be twice
publicly whipped, to be fined ten thousand rupees each, and to be
further imprisoned till they pay the said fine. Upon the other two
prisoners, sentence of two years' imprisonment was passed, they
having been only regarded as wretched tools. The two former were
pilloried and whipped the day after the trial, in the presence of
twenty or thirty thousand spectators.



THOMAS WREN
Convicted of Assault at the Middlesex Sessions,
December, 1810

THOMAS WREN was put to the bar, charged on two separate indictments,
in conjunction with James Wren, his brother, of assaulting Leonard
M'Nally and Hannah his wife, in a most outrageous manner, in their
own house. Mr. Barry stated the case on the part of the prosecution.
It appeared that one of the defendants, namely James Wren, did not
come in to take his trial. The case, however, as applying to the
defendant at the bar, was as follows:The prosecutors kept a public-
house in Wilson-street, Finsbury-square. On the night stated the
defendant, who is assistant to his father, a market gardener, but
who lives separate from him in Chancery lane, came to the
prosecutor's house; and he and his brother staying there till it
began to grow late, was requested by Mrs. M'Nally to depart; this he
refused, and was desirous of having more liquor, which she
peremptorily refused; some noise took place, and he happened to go
outside the door, Mrs. M'Nally endeavoured to shut him out, which he
resisted; his brother came to his assistance. Mr. M'Nally came to
his wife's assistance, and the two cut and beat them both so
brutally, that if it had not been for the interference of the
neighbours they might have lost their lives. It was urged by the
counsel for the prosecution, that as publicans were under the
necessity of receiving all guests who came into their houses whilst
they held licences, so they were the more entitled than other
persons to be protected from outrage and violence.

Mr. Gleed for the defendant addressed the jury, endeavouring to
impress upon their minds that the cause of dispute and assault arose
from the prosecutor's allowing the defendant and his brother to
remain drinking in the house, till they became intoxicated.

Mr. Barry replied, and showed, to the satisfaction of the Court and
the jury, that even in that case there was no apology for the brutal
violence used.Of this opinion was the jury, and the defendant was
found guilty. Mr. Watson pronounced sentence, at the same time
admonishing the offender from conducting himself in such an
outrageous manner again. He was sent to expiate his offence to the
care of Mr. Adkins, the Governor of the House of Correction,
Coldbath-fields.



MARY FORDHAM
Tried at Hertford, the 18th March 1811, for the
Wilful Murder of her Bastard Child, Found Guilty of
Concealing its Birth, and Sentenced to Two Years'
Imprisonment

IN the former part of this Volume we have given two cases of this
unnatural crime. The following discloses still worse circumstances
against the unnatural mother; in fact, in each the criminals
deserved severer punishment.
	Mary Fordham was indicted for the wilful murder of her bastard
child, by giving it a blow on the head with a brick, of which it
died on Saturday the 3d of September 1810. The circumstances of the
case, in evidence, were as follows:

Mary Chapman, a girl of 16, stated, that she lived fellow-servant
with the prisoner, at a Mr. Whittingham's, at Stevenage, in the
month of September last. She had no suspicion that the prisoner at
the bar was with child; on the Friday night she slept with the
prisoner, who complained all the night of a great pain in her
bowels, and was so very restless, that she prevented the witness
from getting any sleep.

The next night the witness went to sleep in another bed by herself;
and when she got up in the morning she went into the prisoner's bed-
room; she was lying in bed, and the floor near the bed-side was
disfigured. The witness told her to get up and clean her room, which
she did, and went about her work the whole of that day. In the
course of the morning the witness acquainted her mistress with what
had happened; they searched the garret together, in one of which
there was a hole in the floor, about five feet deep, which they put
rubbish into. Here they found a stocking of the prisoner's, which
was bloody, and lifting up an old bee-hive, they discovered the body
of a child lying under it; they did not take up or move the body,
but sent for the apothecary.

Mrs. Whittingham deposed to the same effect with the last witness,
as to the finding the body of a child in the hole. On cross-
examination, she said, about a month before this time she
recollected that the prisoner and herself had been both very much
frightened by a man in a mask coming into the house. It was one of
the labourers did it in a frolic, and the effects of such a fright
upon a pregnant woman was very likely to produce a miscarriage.

Robert Jones, the apothecary, stated, that he was called in and saw
the child, but he could not undertake to say whether it was born
alive or not; it was a full grown child. Upon examining it there was
found a contusion on the left side of the head, sufficient to have
occasioned its death. He examined the prisoner, and from the state
of her breasts he could say that she had been pregnant, but could
not determine whether she had miscarried or not. About a foot from
the child a piece of brick was found (which was produced,) it had
marks of blood upon it, and corresponded with the wound on the
child's head.

George Hickes, a surgeon, deposed, that he examined the wound; on
opening the scalp, he found four contusions on the bone beneath. On
cross-examination, he said the four contusions might have been
occasioned by the child's fall on an irregular surface, such as the
piece of brick produced; and if it had been thrown down the hole
dead, it would have had the same appearance. The learned judge
summed up the evidence with great humanity, and left it for the jury
to determine. The wound on the head might have been occasioned by
the child's being thrown dead into the hole. If they were of that
opinion, they would acquit the prisoner; but they would then say
whether they found her guilty of concealing the birth of the child.
The jury acquitted her of the murder, but found her guilty of the
concealment of the birth of the child; upon which she was sentenced
to two years' imprisonment.



JOHN HUGHES
Convicted at the Summer Assizes Held at Dolgelly, in
North Wales, 1811, and Sentenced to Death for Sheep
Stealing.

Cases frequently occur, where prisoners are sentenced to capital
punishment, and yet nothing transpires, the proof of guilt being
short and inconclusive, and not of sufficient import to record in
our Volumes. Such a trial would this: have proved to us, had it not
been for the ignorant officiousness of a juryman. This, alone,
induces us to give it a place, under the hope that it will be a
lesson to other Jurors.

The proof against the prisoner being full, the judge charged the
jury, that if they credited the testimony on the part of the
prosecution, they must according to law find the prisoner guilty. It
appeared that one of the jurymen, vain of his conceit in such
matters, persuaded his fellow jurors that though there was no doubt
the prisoner stole the sheep, yet as no one saw him steal them they
must find him "not guilty;" and they actually brought in a verdict
to the above effect. But after a philippic from the Court, these
sages in the law were obliged to alter their verdict. Hughes was
reprieved, and his sentence changed to transportation.

At Beaumaris on the same circuit an Irishman was to have been tried
for horse-stealing; but Paddy contrived to make his escape just
before, and left word that he was by no means desirous of giving the
Jontlemen any trouble!



JOHN PURCEL, ESQ. OF HIGHFORT, NEAR CHARLEVILLE
Extraordinary Defeat of a Desperate Gang of House-
breakers

On the 24th March 1811, the following gallant defence made by John
Purcel, Esq. of Highfort, near Charleville [Co. Cork, Ireland],
cannot fail of exciting a considerable degree of interest,
particularly as Mr. Purcel is upwards of 70 years of age:
	It appears that Mr. Purcel had determined to set apart the
evening of the 24th March, for the purpose of arranging some of his
accounts; and, as he foresaw that he would be hereby employed until
a late hour, he caused his servant to provide supper. The room in
which he had supped and slept was inside his parlour, the windows of
which latter, after a short interval, were beat in; and scarcely an
instant elapsed before he heard several persons, he believed twelve
or thirteen, leap in the room in rapid succession; he had but a
moment to deliberate; and, although he found himself totally
unprovided with any other weapon than the knife which he recollected
lay on the table, he, with the most astonishing and unparalleled
bravery, resolved on defence.

As there were two doors connecting his bed-chamber with his parlour,
he was a while in suspense at which the robbers would enter; but was
speedily relieved from his doubts, by hearing them remove a garde du
vin, which obstructed one of the passages; and thereupon seeing the
door thrown in by a violent blow of a sledge, Mr. P. now put his
back close against the wall, immediately contiguous to the door.
Although the darkness of Mr. P's room rendered him invisible to
those without; yet the moon shining brightly through the windows
which had been broken, and through which the party entered, gave him
an imperfect view of his assailants, and discovered two men abreast,
approaching him by the door. Mr. P. at this moment only hesitated to
decide whether a back hand, or a right forward blow would be most
powerful; and, on preferring the former, he plunged his knife far
into the breast of the nearest man, who immediately fell back with a
horrible scream, and expired. The captain of the party gave orders
to fire, and a musket was thereupon presented at Mr. P. and actually
lay against his belly; but, as from its oblique position Mr. P. saw
it could not injure him, he pressed against the barrel in order to
induce a belief that it should prove mortal, and permitted it to be
fired. He then gave this ruffian also a terrible wound, when he
retreated; a third fellow, undeterred by these examples, had the
temerity to attempt an entrance, but met with a like repulsethe
expulsion of the entire gang from the house it was imagined was, by
this, effected, with the exception of one powerfully strong villain,
who, more successful than his comrades, forced his way into the bed-
chamber, which the ruffian presently notified in the loudest and
most exulting tone.

During the whole of this most terrific proceeding, Mr. P. had not
felt the influence of apprehension, until this, that when greatly
fatigued his destruction seemed inevitable; but yet, as a hopeless
effect, he determined on continued resistancehe closed on his
assailant, and a very fierce struggle ensuedMr. P. finding that
although he frequently stabbed the fellow in the side, he
nevertheless persisted in repeating a demand of Mr. P's money,
dreaded the point of his knife had been turned and blunted; and
such, on feeling it, he found to be the casehe was thus bereft of
his only weapon; however, in the encounter he discovered a sword
suspended to his opponent, which he now strove to gain; but, during
the exertion, the wretched man expired in his arms, and thus Mr. P.
found that his knife had not failed, until, guided by Providential
interposition, it had miraculously and faithfully secured his
deliverance.

The remainder of the party were now contented to depart, carrying
off the dead and wounded, and Mr. Purcel, dreading the renewal of 
the attempt with increased numbers, prudently concealed himself
between two heaps of culm in an adjoining yard, from whence he
issued in the morning completely coated with blood, and whatever
else this clammy matter caused to adhere to his body and limbs. It
seems a third fellow named Joy, who composed one of this party, died
in Newcastle, County Limerick, his wounds not having permitted him
to escape further than that town.



GEORGE KENDRICK
Imprisoned Twelve Months in the Middlesex House of
Correction, for Pheasant Stealing

This was an offence, though scarce so scandalous as swan stealing,
yet worse than poachingthat dread crime against the pleasures of
the great; more unpardonable in them, than the yeoman's killing the
partridge on his own land that devoured his corn, or the hare eating
the tender plants of his garden. It may be called a game larceny,
seeing that in this instance, as the Court determined in the case of
the swans, the stolen pheasants were not "ferae naturae," but tame
domestic animals of the barn-yard.

George Kendrick was put to the bar at the Middlesex Sessions on
April 11th, 1810, charged upon an indictment with receiving eight
live pheasants, the property of William Butler, Esq. knowing them to
be stolen. Mr. Butler has a seat in the county of Hants, where, as
well as in other places, he keeps a considerable number of the most
beautiful pheasants, all tamed and bred to the hand. No less than 68
of the finest of them were stolen and carried completely off. By
some circumstances he was led, in a about a month after, to suspect
that the defendant was in possession of some of them, and he
accordingly obtained a search warrant, and, accompanied by Pearkes,
the officer, went to his house in Piccadilly. There he saw the
defendant, whom he interrogated respecting such pheasants, and
respecting a person of the name of Gough; but he denied all
knowledge of such birds or of Gough. This did not satisfy Mr.
Butler, and he proceeded upstairs into a room where there were about
200 pheasants running about; and seeing also some in baskets, they
were searched, and eight of the stolen birds were found. Mr. Butler
had marked his pheasants in the feet; and, to remove such marks, the
poor birds were "dreadfully cut in the feet, insomuch that the blood
was then visible. On this discovery being made, the defendant then
acknowledged that he knew Gough, and that he agreed to buy 14
pheasants from him for 1l. each, and that Gough had sent them to him
for that purpose.

There was other evidence against the prisoner. On his behalf he
called a man who was a clerk to him to support his case respecting
the 14 pheasants; but in this he failed, and the jury found him
guilty. The Court then sentenced him to be imprisoned twelve months
in the House of Correction, Coldbath-fields, and at the end of that
time to give security to keep the peace for two years, himself in
500l. and two sureties in 200l. each, and to be further confined
till that security be given.



GEORGE RATCLIFFE
Executed for Rape, 4th April 1811

On Thursday April the 4th, 1811, a man of the name of George
Ratcliffe, suffered the sentence of the law in Kent for feloniously
ravishing Sarah Roberts, at Plumstead, in that county. The
prosecutrix was a young girl of the age of little more than 16; she
gave the following account of the transaction:

That she had been to her mother's at Bexley, and was returning home
through a field in which the prisoner was at work with his team; the
cart stood in her way, and she desired the prisoner to move it,
which he did. She had gone on but a little way, when she was
overtaken by the prisoner. He asked her where she had been, which
she told him. He next inquired whither she was going, which she also
told him. He then began some rudeness, which she repelled, but he
threw her into the ditch; and, stopping her mouth with one hand, he
perpetrated his purpose. She screamed and resisted as much as she
could, and immediately as she got from him, she made her complaint
to the constable. The prisoner was apprehended about two hours
afterwards in the same field. The witness was confirmed in her
statement by a woman lying in a neighbouring cottage, who heard her
screams, and the constable who took the prisoner into custody. He
found him in the field searching for his whip, which he had lost
either before or at the time of the struggle.

The prisoner said the girl had been a consenting party to the act.
The jury found him guilty, and the learned judge pronounced sentence
of death upon him.



COMBINATION OF JOURNEYMEN BOOT-MAKERS.
A Lesson to Journeymen of every trade

On the 17th of August 1811, John Stanley, Thomas Jeffry, W. Braine,
and William Brunt, journeymen boot and shoemakers, were brought
before the Aldermen, Messrs. Scholey and Magney, on an information,
charging them with forming a conspiracy, with 36 others, to obtain,
contrary to the Statute, an increase of wages from their master Mr.
Hale, Boot-maker, Fleet-street.

Mr. Alley, as counsel for the prosecution, stated, that the
defendants, under an improper and delusive sense of the law, had
illegally held a meeting for the purpose of compelling Mr. Hale to
allow them the same prices for work that Mr. Hoby, and other masters
at the west end of the town, gave. Mr. Hale had, from motives of
humanity, selected a few persons for punishment, rather than the
whole of those who had left his employment, and a hope was
entertained that his lenity would have had the effect of inducing
them all to return to their work, in which case the prosecution
would not be followed up; but if on the contrary, they should
persist in their refusal to work, justice would take place. Mr. Hale
being examined, deposed, that he was informed, while in the country,
that his men had struck for increase of prices, and that they had
held a meeting for that purpose. In consequence of their conduct he
at tended their meeting, and he was informed by two they had
delegated, the prices they required were contained in a book. The
latter contended they were entitled to the price given by Mr. Hoby
for boots, jockey-boots, and shoes, which differed from that given
by the prosecutor. He refused, on pretence that he gave the same
price that others did in the city; and, finding them to persist in
their refusal to work for him, he requested a final answer by
letter, as he was unwilling to resort to force precipitately. The
meeting did not send him any notice, and he applied to a Magistrate,
in consequence of which the defendants were taken by warrants.

The brother of the last witness confirmed the preceding statement.

Mr. Spankey, for the defendants, contended, that they had not
offended against the statute by merely entering into what he termed
a shop association to obtain one of two rates of wages, payable and
allowed in the trade. The Magistrates, sitting in their double
capacity as judges and jurors, found the defendants guilty, and
sentenced them to two months' imprisonment in Newgate, where they
were to be allowed, by special order, to work at shoe-making for the
support of their wives and families. Watts and Bulger also appeared
on the same charge; but the former, by pleading guilty, escaped
prosecution; and the latter was acquitted, as it did not appear that
he had attended the meeting of the other conspirators. The wives and
children of the defendants were present. This decision is of great
importance to journeymen, as it decides a question on which they
have hitherto entertained very erroneous opinions. The defendants in
this case had the power of appealing to the Court or Sessions, but
they declined doing so previous to the decision of the Aldermen. The
Magistrates had power, by the Penal Act, to commit the defendants
for three months to the House of Corection.



CHARLES BENNETT
Sentenced to Three Months Imprisonment in the House
of Correction, for Defrauding his Employers of
Sixpence

The frauds committed by porters, carters, and errand men, are now
become so common, that it is high time to put a stop to such mean
frauds. This was, therefore, a most laudable prosecution, and we
trust that it will be a warning to servants, intrusted with the
property of others.

At the Quarter Sessions held the 25th October 1811, for the city and
liberty of Westminster, Charles Bennett was put to the bar, charged
under the Swindling Act, with defrauding his employers, Messrs.
Broadwood, of Great Pulteney-street, musical instrument-makers, of
sixpence.

Mr. Knapp, for the prosecution, stated, that the object of this
proceeding against the defendant did not arise from the paltry
consideration of the sixpence, mentioned in the indictment, but it
occurred from the frequent impositions practised upon the
prosecutors, and he trusted this would operate for the benefit of
the public, by preventing persons in whom confidence was placed by
their employers from committing the like depredations upon them, and
from abusing such confidence. The prisoner was employed as a servant
by the prosecutors, and was chiefly occupied in conveying their
goods in carts, and otherwise, to various parts of the metropolis
and places adjacent. On the 5th of last December he was directed to
carry a pianoforte to Miller's Wharf, for the purpose of being sent
by the then next sailing vessel to Leith, being purchased by Messrs.
Gow, of Edinburgh. He conveyed the article accordingly, and on his
return to his master's house delivered a receipt, purporting to be a
receipt for 3s. 6d. for wharfage, and signed by the clerk of the
wharf, Mr. Mackaness, for that sum; he was accordingly paid 3s 6d.
by Mr. Payne, the clerk of Messrs. Broadwood. Mr. Payne proved the
foregoing facts, and added, that afterwards, having more accurately
examined the receipts, he observed that the 6d. was written in ink
very different from all the rest of the receipts; and, having
communicated his suspicions, enquiries were instituted at the wharf,
and it was discovered that no more than 3s had been charged or paid
for the wharfage of the article.

Mr. Mackaness, the clerk at Millar's wharf, was next called: he
proved that no more than three shillings had been paid by the
defendant, and that the six-pence added was not his hand-writing; he
also produced his waste book of that day, where the entry made was
only for 3s.

The prisoner being asked what he had to say for himself, answered,
"Nothing." Mr. Mainwaring summed up the evidence with suitable
comments, and the jury without hesitation found the prisoner Guilty.
He was asked by the Court, whether he had any family. He said a wife
and two children. Mr. Mainwaring then addressed him, and in a most
impressive manner enlarged on the heinousness of his offence, which,
he observed, was greatly enhanced by its adding ingratitude to
breach of trust and confidence; but in consideration of his having a
family, instead of heavier and more disgraceful punishment, he
should sentence him only to three months' imprisonment; and he was
so sentenced accordingly.



WILLIAM M'CORMICK
One of those Daring Thieves Called Hustlers,
Transported for Hustling and Robbing a Passenger in
the Borough of Southwark

On a view of our Calendar, now brought down in chronological order
for the last one hundred and twelve years, it would almost seem that
methods of robbing, as well as fashion, undergo an alteration. The
mode of hustling the unwary passenger, was not in use a century ago;
when every well-dressed man wore his enormous wig, and a long sword.
In the present enlightened days men are exposed to be blinded,
through the fashionable assault of pugilism, or overpowered by a
gang of hustlers, and rifled of the contents of their pockets.
London is now invested with numerous gangs of thieves, who appear in
the streets unconnected, from their keeping at a little distance
from each other, but are always at hand or within sight of each
other. One of these coalesced villains having marked the object of
his attack, gives the concerted signal to the others, and then runs
against the passenger, as by accident. This is the pretext of the
robber in charging him whom he assaulted with an assaultwords
arisepassengers stopthe gang collects upon the spotand raise a
riot, while they pick the pockets of all around them. This is a
common practice in the day time; and, in the confusion, they
contrive to make their escape. After dark, they are less ceremonious
in their attacks. Two or three can execute a hustle, by first
jostling, and then knocking down, their object, swearing he was the
aggressor. Sometimes two of the gang, adepts in the boxing art,
pretend a quarrelchallengestripand exchange a few rounds. This is
esteemed a superior kind of hustle, as the gang being more numerous,
they crowd and trample upon the people, searching each pocket of the
gaping spectators.

A short time previous to the conviction of M'Cormick, a most daring
hustle took place at the King's Theatre in the Haymarket.

Major Morrison and Mr. Wilkins of Red Lion-square, were met and
hustled, in the passage on the King's side of the Opera-house, by
five pickpockets, as they were going to the Masquerade. Major
Morrison received a blow on the head, which knocked his hat off;
and, while he was endeavouring to save it, the villains attempted to
force his watch out of his pocket; they did not succeed, but broke
his gold chain, and made off with that and the seals. Mr. Wilkins
also received a violent blow on his temple. On the company retiring
from the supper room, several suspected persons were apprehended;
among them was James Mackay, whom Townsend recognized as a very old
offender, and conducted to St. Martin's watch house. In the
forenoon, the watch-house keeper having business out of doors, left
the keys of the cell with his wife, when Mackay took an opportunity
to knock her down, and effected his escape from the watch-house; but
being stopped by the gate at the bottom of the court, which he found
a difficulty in opening, he was taken by a butcher, who happened to
be passing at the time. At twelve o'clock he was conveyed to Bow-
street, where he underwent an examination. Wm. Petherick said he saw
the prisoner throw away a watch, as he was passing through the
lobby, in custody of some gentlemen who had seized him; and very
soon after he saw the prisoner throw away another watch, which was
produced.

T. Robins, Esq. stated, that at the general bustle about
pickpockets, he discovered that he had lost his watch, and observed
the prisoner close to him, and, as he supposed, in the act of taking
his watch: he endeavoured in vain to secure him; and, while in this
act, he supposed the prisoner put the watch into his waistcoat-
pocket.

Captain Samson, in the East-India service, said, that he saw the
prisoner running downstairs, pursued by several people, and observed
him throw or drop a watch close to him, which he picked up, having
hold of the prisoner at the same time.

Mr. J. Henbury, of Devonshire-street, Queen-square, identified the
gold-watch, chain, and seals, produced by the last witness, and
said, he missed them between twelve and one o'clock at the
Masquerade. The prisoner called himself James Smith; but Townsend
begged leave to remind him that his name was James Mackay, by which
name he had been convicted in the year 1797, and transported. He
then admitted the fact, and that he had returned from Botany Bay
about nine months ago. He was found a fit subject to be returned to
the same place of transportation.

A system of foot-pad robbery, was at this time also carried to a
great length in and about London nightly, and supposed to be one
gang, consisting of about thirty of the most desperate villains that
ever infested the metropolis. Mr. Elsden, a builder, was attacked
near his own house in Thornhaugh-street, Bedford-square. One of this
daring gang stopped Mr. Elsden's mouth, while another presented a
pistol close at his head, which Mr. Elsden caught at, and wrested it
from himhe grappled and fell with them, and they ran off without
robbing him, leaving the pistol in the possession of Mr. Elsden. Mr.
Guise, of Acton-lane, was stopped by two of the gang, in a foot-path
called the Shrubbery, near Kensington Toll-bar, and robbed of 2l.
16s. The same gang have committed several depredations in the
neighbourhood of Chelsea.

At the October Sessions for Surrey, held the 18th of October 1811,
William M'Cormick was charged with hustling Wm. Hill and attempting
to steal his hat and handkerchief. The prosecutor stated that he was
coming down Tooley-street about half-past ten o'clock, when he was
stopped by the prisoner and another person. The prisoner knocked him
down and took his hat off, and attempted to run off with it. The
prosecutor, however, caught him by the coat, stopped him, and took
the hat from him. The prisoner then made a snatch at the
prosecutor's handkerchief, and had nearly got it off; the
prosecutor, however, seized him, a scuffle ensued, and both fell;
the prosecutor then called out the Watch, and the prisoner's
companion ran off. The prosecutor succeeded in securing the
prisoner, and taking him to the Watch-house. Verdict-Guilty.

The Court, after animadverting on the increase of this species, of
depredation, expressed its determination, to punish it with
severity. The prisoner was then sentenced to be transported for
seven years.

ROBERT CROWLEY and SAMUEL BROWN were put to the Bar, charged with
stealing a quantity of oil, the property of Mr. Barrett, proprietor
of Vauxhall Gardens. The prisoners were both found Guilty. Mr.
Simpson, who prosecuted on behalf of Mr. Barrett, after the jury had
delivered their verdict, addressed the Court, observing, that in
consequence of the sorrow expressed by Crowley for his offence, and
the readiness he shewed to give all the information in his power
towards leading to the detection of the other depredators, he begged
leave to recommend him to the mercy of the Court. 	Crowley was
then sentenced to be confined, and kept to hard labour in the House
of Correction for three ca lendar months; and Brown to be imprisoned
and kept to hard labour for twelve months, and during that time to
be once publicly whipped for 150 yards on the Vauxhall road.

At the same Sessions JOHN LOUBON was charged with stealing 53lbs. of
rope yarn from the yard of Mr. Hill, rope-maker, at Bermondsey. The
fact was fully proved against the prisoner. The jury found him
guilty, and the Court sentenced him to be imprisoned and kept to
hard labour for three months, and during that time to be once
publicly whipped.



JAMES FORD
Fined for a Brutal Attack upon a Woman

The next case worth our notice at these Sessions (October 1811) was
the trial of JAMES FORD, for a brutal attack upon a woman. The
defendant, a gardener, residing at Rotherhithe, was indicted for a
violent assault on the person of Ann Bliss, a poor woman residing in
that neighbourhood. It appeared that the prosecutrix resided in a
cottage, situate in a road leading to some premises belonging to the
defendant. The footpath leading to her door being in extreme bad
order, she had purchased about two loads of rubbish to mend it with,
this rubbish was shot in the road near her house, preparatory to
being spread on the foot path; during the time it was laying there
the defendant had occasion to carry some hay to his yard at the
upper end of the road; and, on perceiving this rubbish, under
pretence that there was not room for him to pass, he directed his
son, who was with him, to spread it about the road. Whilst the son
was thus employed, the prosecutrix discovering what was doing, came
out of her house, and telling the defendant for what purpose the
rubbish was collected, requested he would not spread it about.
Instead of complying with her request, however, he abused her very
grossly, and struck her several violent blows with a shovel which he
had in his hand. This statement of the prosecutrix was corroborated
by several witnesses. The defendant attempted to prove that the
prosecutrix had committed the first assault by striking him. The
jury, however, found him guilty, and the Court, after animadverting
with severity on his conduct, sentenced him to pay a fine of 20l.



JOSEPH BROWN
Executed at York, for the Murder of his Landlady
several Years before, in order to Possess himself of
her Property

O power of guilt: How conscience can upbraid!
It forces us not only to reveal,
But to repeat what we would most conceal.
DRYDEN.

This is another instance of the wonderful workings of Providence, in
the conscience of a murderer; impelling him to discover his own
crime, and to resign himself into the hands of justice.

Joseph Brown was indicted for the wilful murder of Elizabeth
Fletcher, at Hensal, near Ferrybridge, by administering poison to
her in the month of October, 1804.

Robert Challenger, the first witness examined, lived at Hensal in
October 1804, and was a near neighbour of Elizabeth Fletcher at the
time of her death; saw her the night before she died, on Sunday, the
21st October when she appeared in good health. Witness was in her
house about eight or nine in the evening, and saw the prisoner,
Joseph Brown and Joseph Hazlegrove, at supper; at that period they
lodged there; recollects Hazlegrove fetching a quart of ale, which
he mixed with a quantity of sugar, and then gave it to the deceased,
desiring her to drink heartily of it, having previously put the mug
to his own mouth to drink; but witness could not say whether he
actually drank of it or not. The deceased drank of it freely, and
gave it to her sister, who also partook of it. Brown poured some ale
unsweetened into a mug, saying he did not like it sweetened, and the
whole of the sweetened ale was taken by the deceased and her sister;
prisoner and Hazlegrove went to bed about a quarter of an hour after
the ale was drank, and the witness returned home about nine in the
evening. About eleven o'clock in the morning of the next day, saw
Elizabeth Fletcher; she was then dead, and her sister was in a deep
sleep, in which she continued till six o'clock in the evening, when
she awoke, and took a little refreshment.

Mrs. Longbottom, finding the windows of the deceased closed at a
much later hour in the morning than was usual, went, at the desire
of Mrs. Hemsworth, into the house; the door was shut, but not
fastened. On going into the house, she found the deceased and her
sister apparently in a dying state: the sister lay helpless on the
floor, and the deceased was extended on the bed. Witness thought at
first she was dead; but, on moving her a little, she perceived she
was alive, and perceived a quantity of froth at her mouth. Witness
remained with her until she died, which was about a quarter before
eleven o'clock. The deceased never spoke; she was motionless, and
her eyes were closed, though she moved her eye-lids. The witness had
seen the deceased on Sunday, the day before her death, and she then
appeared to be in a good state of health. Witness said Sarah
Fletcher was upon the floor; witness assisted to remove her into a
chair; she opened her eyes, but did not speak; it was six o'clock in
the evening before she spoke. Elizabeth Fletcher was about 55 years
of age.

Rebecca Harrison lived next door to the deceased at the time of her
death; went into her house about ten o'clock in the morning on the
day she died, and was there also at eight o'clock the preceding
evening before supper, and she was then in a good state of health;
did not see the prisoner there in the morning; found the deceased
lying on the bed; she appeared strongly convulsed, and froth came
out of her mouth. Sarah Fletcher was subject to convulsion fits, but
the deceased enjoyed a good state of health.

Thomas Wheates, constable, knew Elizabeth Fletcher; went to her
house the day she died; she was lying upon the bed in a convulsed
state; he went to the overseer to get medical assistance, but was
informed she was dead before it was procured. Went to Mr. Marshall,
of Selby, who was Coroner, was examined before him, but no medical
person was procured to examine the body; Brown and Hazlegrove had
left their lodgings. Saw the deceased and her sister; when the
latter awoke, he asked what had been the matter with her; to which
she replied, she did not know; fell asleep again immediately.

Sarah Fletcher being in a state of approaching idiotcy, 4s. per week
was paid by the parish towards her maintenance. The deceased was a
very endeavouring and industrious woman.

Thomas Thorp lives at Knottingley at present, but in October 1804,
lived with Mr. Durham, of Hensal, and was then acquainted with the
prisoner, who at that time lodged with the deceased. The prisoner, a
short time before E. Fletcher's death, told him he had some thoughts
of marrying her, for she had a good bit of money. Witness asked him
how much; to which he replied, 50l.; it would be a good thing, and
set him aforehand. The prisoner said the conversation was false; it
could not be true, he said, because he was at that time married, and
therefore could not talk of marrying another person. The witness
stated, that both Brown and Hazlegrove had represented themselves as
single men. The prisoner again repeated his denial of this.

Rebecca Fletcher, sister of the deceased, went to her house on the
22d of October; found her sister Elizabeth dead, and her sister
Sarah asleep. Said, that about three weeks before, her sister shewed
her box to her; she had then in her box three guinea notes and two
pieces of gold; but, on examining the box after her decease, found
the lock had been broken open, and the money taken away; the other
contents of the box appeared much rumbled. The box was kept in the
room where the prisoner and his companion slept. Prisoner asked the
wit ness if she had not before stated that she had found a five-
shilling piece in the box; to which she replied, she had not. Her
sister Elizabeth, the deceased, had a good state of health for many
years, and during that period had not been subject to any kind of
fits.

John Carr stated, that the prisoners had been employed to swingle
flax, they were to do it by the job, and absconded on the morning of
the 22d of October before they had done the quantity they had agreed
to do. Both of them had represented themselves as unmarried men.

Mr. William Perkin, surgeon and druggist, of Snaith, stated, that
the prisoner came to his shop on the 18th or 19th of October for
some laudanum; the witness asked him his name and the use he
intended it for. The prisoner said his name was Joseph Fletcher, and
that he lived at Hensal, and that the laudanum was for the use of
his father, who lived at Cawood, and who was troubled with pain, and
could obtain no rest at night. On this representation, the witness
let him have six-penny worth, which was rather more than an ounce.
Witness never saw the prisoner again until he was examined before
the Magistrate on suspicion of having poisoned the deceased, which
was about ten days after; but he was perfectly sure as to the
identity of the prisoner, and that the prisoner had represented his
name as being Joseph Fletcher. The quantity of laudanum bought by
the prisoner was sufficient to produce the effect described by the
preceding witnesses in a person who had not been in the habit of
using laudanum, and to produce death; and that the symptoms
described by the witnesses were such as were likely to result from
the administration of laudanum; and, from these symptoms, he had no
doubt but the deceased died of the poison of laudanum.

Mr. Sewell stated, that he was a Solicitor at the Isle of Wight;
that the prisoner was brought by a serjeant of the depot to the
office of the Magistrates at his own desire; that no threat,
promise, or inducement of any kind, was held out to him to make
confession; that he took it down in writing at the time, and when it
was fairly written out, it was read over to him distinctly, who said
he understood it all, and it was all true. The reason assigned by
the prisoner for making this confession was the extreme anguish of
mind he suffered from his reflections, which rendered life
absolutely insupportable. The confession was dated Isle of Wight, 3d
of August, 1808. This confession stated that he had been acquainted
with Joseph Hazlegrove upwards of six years; that in the month of
October 1804, himself and Joseph Hazlegrove lodged with Mrs.
Fletcher, of Hensal, near Ferrybridge, and there formed the design
of poisoning her, in order to possess themselves of some property
they supposed her to possess; that for this purpose he procured
sixpenny worth of laudanum of a Mr. Perkins, of Snaith, which he
gave to Hazlegrove, who mixed it with some beer along with some
sugar, and gave it to Elizabeth Fletcher and her sister; the former
died in consequence of it, and early the following morning they
broke open her box, and took out one guinea and a half; that they
were afterwards apprehended and examined before a Magistrate, who
not considering the evidence sufficiently strong against them,
ordered them to be discharged. The confession recited also the
commission of various other crimes, particularly that of the murder
of Calvert, the Selby carrier; but the Judge would not permit that
part of it to be read.

The prisoner being called upon for his defence, referred to a paper
which had been delivered to the Judge at his lodgings, but His
Lordship said he could take no notice of any papers delivered to him
out of Court; but if the prisoner wished it to be read as his
defence, he would give it to him, which the prisoner assenting to,
it was read by the clerk of the Court. This paper stated, that about
seven years ago, he commenced an intimate acquaintance with Joseph
Hazlegrove, which had continued unbroken to the present moment; and
that in the early part of their friendship a lady of high rank and
fortune became enamoured with his friend, and that many interesting
meetings took place between them; and as he was employed by his
friend to carry messages to the lady, and contrive interviews
between them, this gave an air of secrecy and mystery to their
conduct, which people represented much to their disadvantage, and
insinuated that it was for dishonest purposes that they had their
nightly meetings; and to such a pitch of malignity and superstition
did their malice arrive, that there was not a murder committed
within ten miles which was not attributed to them. This narrative
then proceeded to a review of the different prosecutions which had
been commenced against them, all of which originated, as he
represented, in malice; and that, in consequence of the evidence of
a vile man, they were convicted of a burglary; but that the judge
was much dissatisfied with the verdict, and their sentence was
changed from death to being sent on board the Hulks, and
subsequently they were permitted to enter his Majesty's service,
where their sufferings were so extreme, in consequence of the odium
which even then followed them, that he determined, by a false
confession, either to have an opportunity of vindicating their
characters in a Court of Justice, or of perishing in the attempt;
and he knew that no confession which did not include the death of
Calvert, would satisfy the gentlemen of Yorkshire; and, as to the
death of Elizabeth Fletcher, it was occasioned by a fit, to which
she had been subject. This written paper concluded with protesting
their entire innocence of the various crimes of which they had been
accused, and concluded with a prayer for his enemies and
persecutors.

The judge then asked the prisoner if he wished any witnesses to be
examined to substantiate his defence, to which the prisoner replied
in the negative. His Lordship then proceeded to sum up the evidence,
and the jury, without retiring, immediately returned a verdict of
Guilty.

His Lordship then proceeded to pass sentence of death upon the
prisoner, whom he addressed in the following terms: "Joseph Brown, I
am again called upon, in the painful exercise of my duty, to pass
sentence upon a person found guilty of one of the greatest offences
against societythe crime of deliberate murder. You stand an awful
and striking example of the justice of Providence of that
punishment, which, sooner or later, never fails to overtake the
guilty. You have been compelled by the agonies of remorse, and the
upbraidings and tortures of a guilty mind, to furnish that evidence
against yourself which was wanting to establish the proof of your
guilt, and to supply that link in the chain of evidence which
appeared to be imperfect. I trust, that every one who hears of your
fate will bear in mind, that a time will arrive, probably in this
world, most certainly in another, when guilt will meet with its due
punishment. In your unhappy case, that period is already come when
you must receive the reward of your crimes. Impelled by the hope of
possessing the treasure which you supposed your unfortunate victim
had saved from her hard earnings, you deliberately formed the design
of destroying her; for this purpose you purchased a deadly drug,
which you procured to be mingled in the cup, which you offered to
her under the guise of friendship. When the potion had taken effect,
you plundered her of her property, though it was much less than your
guilty cupidity had suggested. Your crime appeared likely to be
perpetrated, as to this world, with impunity; more than four years
had elapsed since its perpetration, and the remembrance of it began
to fade from the recollection of every one, but the guilty author of
the deed; and it seemed probable, that nothing more would have been
heard of it, if the consciousness of your crime, more poignant and
destructive than the poisoned bowl, had not compelled you to
disclose the horrid secret. Chequered as your life has been with
crimes, I cannot indulge the hope that anything that I can say will
have any lasting effect upon you; but I conjure you to spend the few
remaining hours you have to live, in earnest prayer and supplication
to heaven for mercy; and may your unhappy fate convince others, that
though their crimes may be committed in the darkness of the night,
they will hereafter be proclaimed at noon day." His Lordship then
passed scntence of death upon the prisoner in the usual form, which
sentence was carried into execution on Monday the 20th of March
1809.



ANN ILLIARD AND HER DAUGHTER
Fined and Imprisoned for Keeping a Brothel

At the London Sessions held at Guildhall the 10th of April 1809,
these scandalous women were indicted by the parish officers of St.
Botolph, for keeping a disorderly house.

Mr. Knowles, who was counsel for the prosecution, called a number of
witnesses, who proved that the house had been frequented by a vast
number of disorderly women for about two years; twenty or thirty
couple having been observed to go there daily. The indecencies
exhibited in and about the premises, which were within fifty yards
of a charity-school for females, in Cavendish court, Houndsditch,
compelled the neighbouring inhabitants, from motives of decency,
either to block up their windows, or keep their shutters continually
closed. The house at length came under the cognizance of the parish
officers, who applied to the elder prisoner to shut up her house,
and desist from such practices; she refused to comply, saying she
had no other means to obtain a livelihood;they then preferred the
present indictment.

Mr. Knapp, for the prisoners, admitted the case to be proved, but
argued that the daughter must be acquitted, she being included in
the indictment as one of the owners or occupiers of the house,
whereas she only acted as the servant of her mother.

The Recorder, in summing up to the jury, stated, that the objections
made by Mr. Knapp must go for nothing, as the law in cases of this
kind, held a person engaged in the management of a disorderly house
equally guilty with the renter, and that if a woman acted under the
influence of her husband in such an occupation, the law would punish
both equally.

The jury returned their verdict, finding both the prisoners guilty.
The Recorder then, with much emphasis and feeling, proceeded to pass
sentence upon Ann Illiard the elder, in which he impressed upon her
the necessity of reforming her life, as she could not, from her
advanced age, have long to live; and desired her to reflect
seriously upon the natural consequences of bringing up her daughter
to such a scandalous, wicked, and shameful life, merely for the sake
of gain. He then sentenced her to pay a fine of 150l. and to be
imprisoned until it was paid. He then addressed himself to Ann
Illiard the younger; and, after a suitable admonition, sentenced her
to pay a fine of 50l. and to be imprisoned until she had paid it.

The daughter then begged to say a word or two to the Court, in which
she declared her innocence; said she had only been to see her
mother, whose line of life she lamented; and that she was unable to
pay even 50s. She added, that the names they went by were not their
real names, and that the premises belonged to others, who let them
to her mother at a weekly rent, and who had now abandoned her. She
then retired, apparently overpowered by her feelings. The mother
seemed to be about sixty years of age, and the daughter about
thirty; the latter was in deep mourning, as a widowthe mother was
also in mourning.



RICHARD RIPPON and JOHN POLLARD
Sentenced to Transportation, November 18l1, for
Stealing Jewels

THE prisoner Rippon proved to be one of those faithless servants,
who watch the opportunity of robbing their employers. Pollard was a
working jewellerthe receiver of the stolen property. They were
indicted, the former for stealing, the latter for receiving, knowing
them to be stolen, a box, containing a quantity of jewels, the
property of Lady Elizabeth Campbell.

It appeared in evidence, that her Ladyship, in September last, was
removing from her house in Brook-street, Grosvenor square, to her
new residence in Sloane-street; and that in removing some part of
her property, her Ladyship's carriage was employed, and also a
hackney coach, of which the prisoner Rippon was the driver. In the
course of this business her Ladyship's maid, with the aid of the
manservant, had brought down to the hall some trunks of wearing
apparel, and other small articles, belonging to her Ladyship, in
order to be put into the prisoner's coach, and among the rest a
small box, containing some valuable rings and other jewels, which,
it was proved by the man-servant, were put into the prisoner's
coach, but afterwards were missing. Inquiry for their recovery from
the prisoner having been made without effect, they were advertised
in the newspapers, and a reward offered for their restoration.

In a short time afterwards, William La Rouche, a journeyman
jeweller, then in the employment of the prisoner Pollard who was a
working jeweller, and then resided in the vicinity of Soho, as it
appeared from the evidence of the former, heard his employer reading
the advertisement at his own house, which described the jewels, and
offered the reward for them; and very shortly afterwards, on the
same evening, the wife of the prisoner Rippon, who lodged in
Pollard's house, came down stairs to his workshop, and asked some
questions about the value and price of setting certain jewels,
answering the description of those mentioned in the indictment; and
after she left the room, he saw the prisoner Pollard again reading
the advertisement, and heard him remark, "that he believed all those
jewels were upstairs," meaning, as he understood, in possession of
the prisoner Rippon's wife. He heard no more of them until next day,
when he saw in the workshop several of those jewels, together with
the gold settings from which they had been taken; and particularly a
blood stone, which was afterwards re-set in a gold broach, for
Rippon: and a malachite stone, which Pollard had broken into three
pieces, in his endeavours to extricate it from the setting.

William Jones, a dealer in antiques, Castle-street, Leicester-
fields, also proved some of the jewels which had been sold to him by
Pollard; and, amongst others, a curious antique Cameo-ring, with a
relief of Cleopatra's head, surrounded in the gold setting with an
asp, the eyes of which were small diamonds, and which he took from
that setting, and fixed in anotherand for which he gave Pollard two
guineas and a half. The other jewels were disposed of by Pollard to
other persons, who had sold them, and they could not be produced in
evidence.

The Recorder summed up the evidence for the jury, who found both the
prisoners Guilty.Transportation.



RICHARD LOWE, ALIAS LONG NED
A most Infamous Villain, Sentenced to Hard Labour in
the House of Correction in Coldbath Fields, for an
Aggravated Assault upon a Surgeon at Chelsea

At the Sessions for the county of Middlesex, held the 4th of
November 1811, Edward Lowe was put to the bar, charged with an
indictment for assaulting Mr. David Eccleton, of Church-street,
Chelsea, on the night of the 23d of September 1811.

Mr. Knapp stated, that Mr. Eccleton was a surgeon and apothecary
living as above stated. That on the evening of the 23d of September
last, he had dined at the Queen's Arms, Nine Elms; about ten o'clock
he was proceeding from thence to visit a patient in Ryley-street, in
that neighbourhood, where he regularly attended twice a day. Whilst
he was walking on the King's-road, and approaching the Man in the
Moon public-house there, the prisoner came up to him, and
interrupting his progress, laid hold of his arm, and asked him to go
and drink with him. Witness made him no kind of answer, but was
endeavouring to proceed on his way. This the prisoner completely
prevented; and, still holding his arm, at length said he must give
him something to drink, using violent language, when Eccleton (to
get rid of him) put his hand in his pocket and gave him a shilling.
Having done so, he hastened from him as quickly as he was able.
Instead, however, of going on to Ryley-street, he turned down
Chapel-row, (a contrary way) in his alarm, and desired to avoid so
desperate a person as he considered the prisoner to be. After he had
gone some way down Chapel-row, he stopped to listen whether the
prisoner was following him or not, and not hearing any footsteps, he
concluded that he had turned off another road; and then Mr. Eccleton
returned back with a view to proceed to Ryley-street, as he had
first intended; but as soon as he had again reached nearly to the
former public-house, he heard a voice cry out, "There's the villain,
take hold of him," and observed a man approach him, and took to his
heels again, and ran away as fast as he could, when there was a loud
shout of "stop him;" but in running he fell down, when a man came up
and laid hold of him: then the prisoner immediately joined them, and
having used him with very great violence and barbarity, then, for
the first time, accused him of certain abominable propensities. It
was in vain he denied the accusation; he was only the more
maltreated: at length he got out of their hands, and ran away with
all the speed he could; but in leaping over a paling he fell quite
exhausted, and they again came up to him, and were proceeding to
repeat their barbarity, when a man of the name of Curtis, hearing
the noise, ran to the spot from whence he heard it, accompanied by
his wife, and there recognized Mr. Eccleton, whom he had known many
years. He interfered on his behalf, and having, in conjunction with
Mrs. Curtis, rescued him, he at length departed.

It appeared, that when Mr. and Mrs. Curtis came up, Mr. Eccleton
told them how he had been treated, and added, that the prisoner had
stopped him, and obtained a shilling from him, as before mentioned;
to which the prisoner answered, by charging Mr. Eccleton again and
again with the foul offence first alluded to.

Mr. Eccleton's testimony was corroborated in various points by the
evidence of Mr. and Mrs. Curtis, Mrs. Clark, (who keeps the public-
house,) and two persons of the names of Lee and Hurd.

For the prisoner, Mr. Andrews, in a very ingenious and elaborate
address, appealed to the jury, the principal bearing of which went
to the improbability of the prosecutor's storybut he called no
witnesses.

Mr. Mainwaring summed up the evidence with appropriate and
argumentative comments. The jury hesitated some time in their box,
and at length they retired and brought in a verdict of Guilty.

Mr. Mainwaring animadverted in strong language upon the vileness of
the crime of which the prisoner was convicted. He congratulated the
jury upon their verdict, and the county upon the discovery and
conviction of the offender, as the punishment of such a miscreant
might have the operation of preventing the repetition of such wicked
conduct. He lamented that the way in which the indictment was framed
prevented him from sending the prisoner at once out of the country.

The sentence of the Court was, that he should be imprisoned one year
in the House of Correction, Coldbath-fields, and there kept to hard
labour. That at the expiration of that time he should find security
to keep the peace for two years, himself in the penalty of 20l. and
two sureties in 10l. each, and to be imprisoned till that security
be given. The prisoner was immediately hand-cuffed and removed. It
seems he is one of those fellows who work in the brick fields in
that neighbourhood; and, according to Gilmore, the officer, goes by
the name of Long Ned.



ABRAHAM WATSON
Convicted of a most Daring Assault, and Sentenced to
Six Months Imprisonment

THIs case comprises, not only more infamous behaviour in a hackney
coachman, than any instance we have already adduced, but even a riot
and rescue, of the above named prisoner by the "Gemmen of the Whip;"
against whose tricks, impositions, and ill treatment, the public
cannot be too often cautioned.

Abraham Watson was indicted for assaulting Mr. Wayte, a hatter,
residing in Panton-street, Hay-market. It appeared that the above
named defendant is a hackney-coach driver, and on the day stated in
the indictment was employed to convey the mother of the prosecutor
from her home to his house. She is very infirm, and requested the
defendant to drive his coach slowly through the streets; but instead
of so doing, for his mere diversion, lashed the horses to such a
degree as to make them go with such speed as to put her in the most
excruciating agony. A servant, who was in the carriage with her,
repeatedly called to him to drive more moderately, but that only
served to increase his speed. At length the defendant stopped at the
prosecutor's door, and the old lady, on getting out of the coach,
complained of the misconduct of the defendant, who used the most 
abusive language upon the occasion, and on Mr. Wayte remonstrating
with him, he struck him most violently, and cut him most desperately
in the mouth, and was proceeding to further violence, when a number
of persons, who hearing a noise, and seeing the ferocious behaviour
of the defendant, at length interfered, and with considerable
difficulty he was secured. It further appeared, that Mr. Wayte had
given him no provocation whatever. Mr. Wayte being thus treated,
determined to take him to the Sitting Magistrates, at Bow-street,
and was proceeding, thither for that purpose; when he reached
Leicester square, however, the defendant, by stratagem, contrived to
make his situation known to the hackney-coachmen on the stand there,
and they instantly assembled, coming down in a body on those who had
the defendant in custody, and not only rescued him from them, but
used them most unmercifully, beating them to such a degree that they
were compelled to fly away in all directions. By great good fortune
the defendant was shortly after discovered, and he was brought up to
answer for the offence.

The foregoing case was proved, with several aggravating particulars,
by several witnesses; and the defendant being called on to say what
he had in his defence, he strictly denied the whole, and added, that
he was the person assaulted, and not the prosecutor, and that he
could bring all the hackney-coachmen that were on the stand in
Leicester-square that evening, to prove it. The Chairman here
observed, that the Court would consider that as the only retribution
he could make for his offences if he did so, as the public would
then have an opportunity of knowing who were his abettors, and
bringing them to justice for their misconduct.

He was found guilty, and sentenced, after a severe admonition by Mr.
Mainwaring, to six months' confinement in Tothill-fields Bridewell.



DAVID MOORE, AND JOHN WILD
Midnight Guardians of the Peace Of London, Imprisoned
for Abuse of Office.

(A Sketch of the Administration of Justice in a Watch-house)

David Moore, the deputy night-constable, and John Wild, one of the
parish patroles, in the neighbourhood of Finsbury-square, were
indicted at the Middlesex Sessions for a misdeameanour in the wanton
imprisonment of Mr. Leonard Pope on the night of Good Friday 1811.

It appeared from the evidence of Mr. Pope, who is a very respectable
man, that having spent that evening with some friends, he was going
soberly home through Bunhill-row between one and two in the morning;
and, on turning aside for a necessary occasion, he was immediately
accosted by the patrole, Wild, who, without any pretence or colour
of a charge, insisted on taking him to the watch-house. Thither he
went. The presiding constable simply asked, "What charge?" The
patrole simply answered, "disorderly;" upon which Mr. Moore, the
deputy Rhadamanthus of this midnight tribunal, without deigning to
enquire into the particulars of the charge, or vouchsafing to hear a
word from the prosecutor in defence, or explanation, instantly
pronounced the stern decree of "Lock him up," Mr. Pope, however,
ventured to rap at the door of his dark prison, and to plead through
the key-hole his earnest request to be favoured with an hearing at
least before the midnight Magistrate, face to face with his accuser.
He was allowed to come forth: and, in solemn mockery, was asked,
"What have you to say, Mr. Alderman?" He told them he was a
respectable citizen, well known to Sir Charles Price, and intimately
acquainted with at least seventeen members of the Common Council,
any of whom would come forward and bail him, if he was allowed to
send them an account of his situation; but in vain, municipal
influence had no weight here; no friendly messenger could be
obtained, and Justice Moore once more uttered the dread decree,
"Lock him up;" when Mr. Pope was immediately recommitted to his
dungeon, and confined there until two o'clock next day when he was
discharged by the Magistrate; his family in the meanwhile were in
the utmost anxiety for his safety. The jury found both defendants
guilty, and the Court sentenced them to two months' imprisonment
each.

Note: The late Sir William Addington, when he presided at Bow-street
office, went to one of those occult prognosticators, disguised as an
old beau; and, having his fortune told in the usual way, begged the
old lady to inform him, "whether she had ever read her own fortune?"
She cheerfully said she had, and that "she would live an
uninterrupted course of life, in her present way, very happily,
until the age of 200 years, and that then she should be translated
into purgatory for a short time, and afterwards put under the care
of Peter.""Very true," said Sir William, "only you place Peter in
the background, who might be in front, and mistake the time, for its
fulness is now come; here Peter (to one of the officers) take this
Lady under your care, bring her down to the office, and I'll give 
her a passport to Bridewell, which, I trust, will operate as a
purgatory to the old ladys bad living."



MONTGOMERY BROWN
Captain of a Merchant ship, Executed at Antrim in
Ireland, 27th July 1812, for Murder

At the Summer Assizes at Antrim 1812, Montgomery Brown stood
indicted for the murder of Charles Moore, at Belfast, on the 3d of
September 1811. This trial had been put off last Assizes, on account
of the absence of a material witness on behalf of the prisoner; and
an application was now made to the Court for a similar purpose upon
the affidavit of the prisoner, but refused by the Judge.

Counsellor Macartney rose on behalf of the prosecution. He stated,
that on the 3d of September, 1811, prisoner was Captain of a vessel
then lying at the quay of Belfast; the deceased was a respectable
victualler in Belfast, and prisoner came to his shop to purchase
some meat; deceased had been married about a year, and a young
child, the fruit of such marriage, was then in the shop; and
deceased, taking up the child, asked prisoner, "Was not that a fine
fellow?" Prisoner answered, "Yes, to be the child of an Irish br."
Deceased replied, "Why not by an Irish as well as a Scotch br?",
prisoner being a Scotchman. Prisoner replied, "He would make him
repent saying that." Deceased then turned away, not expecting so
fatal a result, when the prisoner seized a large knife which lay in
the shop, and stabbed the deceased in the back of his loin; of which
wound he languished for a few days, and then died. Several witnesses
were examined, whose unanimous testimony went to establish those
facts.

The Jury, after retiring about ten minutes, returned a verdict of
Guilty. The Clerk of the Crown then addressed the prisoner in the
usual form:

"You, Montgomery Brown, heretofore stood indicted for the wilful
murder of Charles Moore, for trial of which you put yourself on God
and your country, which country have found you guilty: what have you
to say, why judgment of death and execution should not be awarded
against you according to law?"

Prisoner"My Lord, if I am guilty of it I know nothing of it; I had
no malice to the gentleman; I did not know I acted the crime."

The Judge then addressed the prisoner in nearly the following
terms:

"Montgomery Brown, you have been found guilty of murder, on clear
and most satisfactory evidence. It is very true you had no previous
malice to this unfortunate man. Your jury have been told so; but
they have found you guilty of inflicting a mortal wound, without the
slightest provocation. It is proper that the equity of the law under
which you suffer should be laid before the eyes of this country. You
have been found guilty of plunging a knife into the body of the
innocent victima deadly weaponwith the utmost malignity of heart,
and hurried a young man, recently married, out of the world. A
greater crime you could not be guilty of: precipitating him to the
grave in the prime of life; depriving his child of a father, and his
wife of a loving husband. You have committed that crime which stands
marked with the utmost abhorrence of heaven. You stepped between him
and that Providence, of that God, who alone has a right to dispose
of human life; and you are deprived of the unavailing plea of
unconsciousness in the commission of this direful crime, unless your
having no provocation is to be considered a proof of your madness.
This was the madness of wickedness; and you have given vent to your
brutal fury in the sacrifice of this innocent man. I am now bound to
tell you, you are to expect no mercy in this world; here you have
but a short time to live. The law, to mark its abhorrence of your
crime, has shortened the period of your existence. That short
interval employ in seeking the mercy of Heaven. Let not your mind be
distracted with any vain hopes of mercy in this world."

His Lordship then proceeded to pronounce the awful sentence of the
law, in the usual solemn terms, viz. To be hanged on Monday, and his
body to be delivered to the Surgeons of the County Infirmary for
dissection. The prisoner made no reply, but was silently removed to
the gaol.

This unfortunate man, from the period of receiving sentence of
death, spent his few remaining hours in acts of devotion, in which
he was assisted by the Presbyterian clergyman of the parish. His
wife was also his companion during these solemn hours of preparation
for death. Monday, about three in the afternoon, she was withdrawn
from him, as also his daughter. But previous to his leaving the
gaol, about half-past five o'clock, they were permitted to have a
last interview with him for a few minutes. He was then conducted
from the prison to a chaise, in which also the clergyman accompanied
him; and, thus attended, he was conveyed to the common place of
execution, escorted by the Sheriff, and a very strong guard of the
Pembrokeshire sharp-shooters, stationed at Carrickfergus. Having
arrived at the fatal spot, he spent nearly half an hour in
devotional exercises, and then the necessary preparations were made
for the finishing of the law. He ascended a car with the
executioner; and, having addressed the surrounding spectators, an
immense multitude, he admonished them in a particular manner to
avoid the sin of drunkenness, and to guard against passion.

After he had delivered a few words to this effect, he was launched
into eternity; and, when the body had been suspended the usual
length of time, it was taken down and carried to the Old Court
house; where his afflicted family waited to receive it.



JOHN HUGHES AND JAMES ROBINSON
Imprisoned and Pilloried, for a Conspiracy in Aiding
the Escape of French Prisoners of War

 It has lately been discovered that the escape of French prisoners
has been a system among smugglers, fishermen, and publicans on the
coast opposite France. These traitors went to the different depots
of French prisoners, and to those on their parole, from time to
time, to offer to effect the escape of such as could raise certain
sums of money to defray the expenses and rewards payable in this
country, whereby many officers have been enabled to break their
parole, and have got safe to France, where they have been received
by public officers at the ports, who paid the sums agreed upon for
their sea-passage.

The discovery was made by the apprehension of eight officers, who
left Andover the 1st of October 1812, and were compelled by stormy
weather to re-land near Christchurch, on the 12th of October, after
having embarked from that neighbourhood in a Weymouth smuggling
boat. They had reached the coast, between Christchurch and
Lymington, by the skill of their guides, without interruption; but,
unable to conceal themselves effectually on their re-landing, notice
was given of the suspicious appearance of the parties, to Mr. G.
Rose, at Mudeford, by Mr. How, a most meritorious officer in the
superior class of the Customs, whose zeal and courage have often
been conspicuous, but in no case more so than in this. An active
investigation was immediately set on foot by the above-mentioned
Magistrate, at whose instance Mr. How was permitted by his Board to
assist. Vickery and Adkins were sent for from Bow street; and Mr.
Jones, Assistant Solicitor to the Admiralty, was sent to Mr. Rose by
the Transport Board. A pursuit after the offenders was then made in
various directions, and Calliford (who had been convicted in 1811,
of a similar offence before Mr. Baron Graham,) a remarkably
desperate man, who was always armed, and who had the leading active
share in the conspiracy, was taken in Somersetshire by Mr. How, who,
finding him dressing his horse in a stable, broke in upon him, and
seized him by the collar with one hand, holding a pistol at his head
with the other, and then gave him to the care of Adkins, to be
conveyed in irons to Mr. G. Rose, at Mudeford.

At the Assizes for the county of Sussex held at Lewes, the 4th day
of August 1812, before the Lord Chief Justice Ellenborough, John
Hughes, Inn-keeper and post-master of Rye, James Robinson, a miller
near Oswestry, William Hatter, and William Turner, fishermen of Rye
aforesaid, were indicted for a conspiracy to aid the escape of
Arnaud Phillipon and Philip Auguste Garnier, French prisoners of
war, from Oswestry, in Shropshire.

Mr. Serjeant Best opened the case.

Mr. Toosley proved that General Phillipon was a prisoner at
Oswestry, and that the last time he saw him was about twelve o'clock
on the 30th day of June. Garnier had also been a prisoner about
three years. Phillipon was a tall man, about six feet, thin, with a
scar over his eye, and usually wore a grey coat, with a blue great
coat. Garnier was about five feet six inches, thin and pale, and
wore a blue coat, with a brown great coat. The defendant, Robinson,
had lately taken a mill within three miles of Oswestry; but had not
carried on much business as a miller. On the 30th of June he sent
his servant to Shrewsbury, to get a weighing machine, and directed
him to wait his coming. At length, in the evening, Robinson came, in
a gig, and had a pony tied to the shafts; he told the man to go
forward to Heygate, with him, and the man rode the pony until they
overtook a gentleman on the road, a small man in a blue coat and
brown greatcoat. They went to Heygate, which is on the Birmingham
road, and there Mr. Robinson bespoke a chaise, and himself with two
gentlemen got into it and went away for Birmingham. The post-boys
then traced Robinson and the two gentlemen to the Shakespeare
Tavern, at Birmingham, where they breakfasted the next morning. The
next morning a travelling chariot, with a dicky-box, took them from
the Shakespeare.

It appeared that Robinson had passed through Birmingham about ten
days before, and had bespoke this carriage at a Mr. Wheeley's, a
coach maker at Birmingham; and had agreed at the same time with a
post chaise driver, of the name of Yoxall, to go with him as a
servant, for which he was to give him a pound a day, and a new hat
and coat, and told him to be ready to set off on the first day of
July. Accordingly Yoxall came with the carriage to the Shakespeare.
He then travelled with them as a servant, and hired the horses, &c.
on the road. He did not know the two gentlemen who accompanied
Robinson, and he never heard them speak. At length they arrived at
Rye, and were put down at a public house, kept by the defendant
Hughes.

While they were at Birmingham, Robinson received a letter in the
hand-writing of Hughes, but signed by Jones, stating, that all was
well and ready. Robinson, and the two persons with him, continued at
Rye some days. In the meantime the escape of General Phillipon was
made public, and a sharp look-out was kept along the coast for any
boat going out or coming in from sea; at length, on the 12th July,
an open boat was seen rowing into Rye early in the morning, which
had Robinson, Hatter, and Turner aboard. Robinson got ashore before
the officers could overtake him, and upon their questioning the two
other defendants as to who he was, they said he resided in that
neighbourhood.

He was traced to the house of Hughes; and, when the officers entered
the house, his boots were wet with sea water. He said, upon being
questioned, it was so, and that he had been out all night at sea
mackerel fishing. Upon this statement, himself, Hughes, and the two
other men, were taken into immediate custody; but there was no
distinct evidence as to the identity of the persons of Phillipon and
his companion; but all the witnesses gave a description of their
persons answering to the description given of them by Mr. Toolsey,
the Agent at Oswestry.

Upon this evidence the jury found them Guilty.Sentenced to
imprisonment, and the pillory. [Note: In the year 1809, William
Hubbersfield, was sentenced to two years' imprisonment in the King's
Bench Prison, for aiding the escape of the French General Austin, a
prisoner in England, on his parole of honour.]

On Saturday the 29th of August following, Hughes and Robinson were
brought out of prison, where they had been confined since their
conviction, and placed in and upon the pillory on the sea shore of
the town of Rye, opposite the French coast, where they remained one
hour, amid the scoffs and execration of every true English
spectator. Hughes, on ascending the platform, exclaimed, "Now,
Robinson, we shall have a peep at Boney's Tower;" (meaning Bologne
where they landed the General) and, indeed, the whole of his
conduct, while undergoing the humiliating but just punishment of the
law, was such as to prove him a man hardened in vice. They were
afterwards remanded to prison, where they are to be confined for the
space of two years; a lenient punishment for an offence which the
judges have frequently pronounced to be little short of high
treason, and which, by a recent act of Parliament, is made felony.

It is thereby enacted, "That any person who shall, from and after
passing the act, knowingly aid or assist any foreign enemy of His
Majesty's dominions, whether such prisoners shall be confined as
prisoners of war in any place of confinement, or shall be suffered
to be at large on his or their paroles, to escape from such place of
confinement, or from His Majesty's dominions, if at large upon
parole, shall, upon being convicted thereof, be adjudged guilty of
felony, and liable to be transported for life."

From the passing of this act, we hoped that our degenerate
countrymen, would have been deterred from such treasonable and
sordid practices; but, in the very face of it, and as soon after its
becoming the law of the land, as the 9th of December following, we
find, at the town of Shrewsbury, the apprehension of the French
General Le Brun, and his aide-de-camp, who had been ordered to Welsh
Pool on their parole of honour, and were making their escape,
assisted by the son of a well-known Kentish smuggler, and others.
All the parties were secured, and lodged in Shrewsbury gaol. Between
the scoundrels who conduct, and the scoundrels who are conducted out
of this kingdom, we have not much more to say; they are well suited
to each other. The flight of the Frenchmen is attended with more
danger than they are aware of, and it is fortunate for them to be
taken before they quit the kingdom; for, as the wretches who guide
them are guilty of a felonious offence, there is no question, that
in case they should be pursued at sea by an English cruiser, they
would, to avoid detection, throw their unhappy passengers overboard;
and many, we have no doubt, have perished this way.

The dishonourable flights of French officers from the English towns
where Government, upon the pledge of their honours to remain therein
until exchanged, had permitted them to reside; and the daring
outrageous conduct of their inferiors under confinement at the
different depots, amounting to between twenty and thirty thousand,
calls for stricter measures being enforced towards them. In that at
Dartmoor near Plymouth, on the 16th September 1812, the prisoners
had worked themselves up to the highest pitch of rage at being
allowed no more than one pound of biscuit per day. The use of
biscuit, it is to be observed, was to be discontinued as soon as the
bakehouses had been rebuilt; but the Frenchmen were absolutely deaf
to remonstrances. A detachment of the Cheshire Militia, and the
South Gloucester Regiment, were drawn up on the walls surrounding
the prison; and, although they had loaded their pieces with ball,
the prisoners appeared undaunted, and insulted them in the grossest
terms: indeed our brave men withstood the contumelious language of
the prisoners with a patience beyond all praise. A sentinel on duty,
called Jones, had his bayonet wrenched off his piece, yet nobly
reserved his fire: an officer, however, followed the Frenchman,
struck him over the shoulder with his sword, and brought off the
bayonet. The French men even bared their breasts to the troops, and
seemed regardless of danger. The number of prisoners is about 7500;
and so menacing was their conduct, that an express was sent off to
Plymouth Dock, at eleven o'clock on Sunday night, soliciting
immediate assistance. Three pieces of artillery (six pounders) were
in consequence sent off, early on Monday morning; and on their
arrival at the principal gate (iron), the bars of which, of immense
size, had been previously broken by stones hurled against them by
the insurgents, they were placed in such directions as completely to
command the whole of the circle which the prison describes. This had
the desired effect, and order was restored.

At the Depot at Perth, an attempt by the prisoners in the Depot to
effect their escape was discovered and prevented. A mine, on which
they had been employed three days, was excavated from within the
privy of the prison, allotted to the Petty Officers, and had been
pushed as far as the outer wall, on the inside of which the earth
gave way, and occasioned a detection of the stratagem. The digging
had been carried on through the day; and at night, when the privies
are inspected, the stones which had been removed, were so neatly and
regularly replaced as to prevent suspicion. The petty officers are
confined in the upper story of the prison, through the floor of
which they had cut a hole, by which they might pass to the lower.
They had cut out the lock of the door which opens to the yard, and
consequently to the entrance of their mine.

The French prisoners on board the Sampson at Chatham, about the same
time, became very troublesome, on account of their being put to two-
thirds allowance, to make up for the expense of repairing the
damages done by their cutting the ship, to endeavour to effect their
escape; boats manned and armed were sent from every ship; one of the
marines of the Buckingham, seeing one of the prisoners in the act of
stabbing the officer of marines, he immediately levelled his musket
and shot him; several other shots were fired, and before they could
be quieted and got below, three were killed and eight others
wounded, two of whom are since dead, one of whom was the principal
ringleader. The other ships remained perfectly quiet.

There is such an irresistible spirit of gambling among the French
prisoners, lately arrived at that port, from Norman Cross, that many
of them have been almost stripped naked, having lost their clothes,
not excepting even their shirts and small-clothes, to some of their
fellow-prisoners; many of them are also reduced to the chance of
starving by the same means, having lost seven or eight days
provision to their more fortunate comrades, and who never fail to
exact their winnings. The effervescence of mind that this diabolical
pursuit gives rise to is often exemplified in the conduct of these
infatuated captives, rendering them remarkably turbulent and unruly.
A quarrel arose between two of them in the course of play, when one
of them, who had lost his clothes and food, received a severe stab
in the back with a large knife from his companion, whose anger had
been kindled in consequence of the invectives which a run of ill-
luck had excited in his adversary.

Two French officers, prisoners of war on parole at Bishops Waltham,
having had a dispute, they agreed to decide the affair in an
honourable way. A meeting was appointed in a field near the town;
but a difficulty occurred in procuring weapons. It appears that the
combatants were only in possession of one sword, and a case knife.
French ingenuity made a pike of the knife, by confining it to the
end of a stick; but the sword being considered the best weapon, they
resolved to cast lots who should have it. After the sword and knife
had been fairly placed in their hands, the duel commenced, and the
swordsman gave his antagonist three wounds. The pikeman gave several
dangerous thrusts, and both fell on the ground; they remained
bleeding and disabled, until they were discovered by several
passengers, who conveyed them to a public-house in the vicinity. The
officer who received the cuts from the sabre was not expected to
recover. His antagonist is fortunately out of danger.



JAMES WESTBROOK AND ELIZABETH PHIPPS
Convicted at the September Sessions 1812, and
Sentenced to Death, for Burglary

These two persons, along with Susannah Phipps, and Samuel Westbrook,
were indicted for breaking and entering the dwelling house of John
Covington, and stealing therein 18 gowns, a quantity of petticoats,
a piece of muslin, a time-piece, some silver table-spoons, and a
variety of other property to the value of one hundred and twenty
pound in the whole.

It appeared that the prosecutor, who was a licensed hawker, left
town along with his wife, in the way of his business, on the 1st of
April last, having previously secured his room-door by means of an
ordinary lock and two padlocks. The only lodgers in the house were a
person of the name of Corcoran, who lived in the first pair, and the
prisoner, Susannah Phipps, who, though unknown to the prosecutor,
suffered the other female prisoner, Elizabeth Phipps, her daughter,
and James Westbrook, to reside along with her. On the morning of the
day on, which the prosecutor left town, Corcoran heard a noise made
by Elizabeth Phipps, below stairs, occasioned by the scouring of a
tub, while, at the same moment, he heard a different sort of noise
upstairs, as if it were of breaking open something in the
prosecutor's room. He afterwards saw the prisoner, James Westbrook,
carry out a bundle, and Elizabeth Phipps carry out a time-piece in
her lap. These two prisoners afterwards took out more bundles, and
continued doing so from about seven or eight o'clock in the morning,
till about one. The mother, Susannah Phipps, was not present during
the time, not having slept at home the preceding night. About eleven
o'clock, Corcoran saw Susannah Phipps, the mother, and the other
prisoner, Samuel Westbrook, the brother of James, standing together,
at the corner of Play-house-yard, when Elizabeth Phipps came up with
a bundle, which she handed to Samuel Westbrook, who went away with
it. This was all the part he saw either Samuel Westbrook or Susannah
Phipps take in the business, Susannah Phipps not having come home
till night. Corcoran heard the daughter say, if her mother made any
noise about it, she would do for her and for others.

Some of the articles were afterwards traced to a pawnbroker's, with
whom they had been pledged, in the name of Elizabeth Smith, and the
duplicates were found in the possession of the prisoners, James
Westbrook and Elizabeth Phipps, who were apprehended in lodgings, 
where they lived under the assumed name of Smith.

Sir Vicary Gibbs, who tried the case, recommended to the jury to
throw out of their consideration the case of Susannah Phipps,
against whom no direct proof had been brought; of the guilt of
Elizabeth Phipps and James Westbrook there seemed to be no doubt;
and the only remaining point for their consideration was, what part
Samuel Westbrook had taken in the transaction? Whether, from the
circumstance of his waiting in the immediate neighbourhood to
receive the bundle, they saw sufficient to convince them that he was
also cognizant of the breaking and entering; in which case he must
be held to have been aiding and encouraging, and as such, to be as
guilty as the rest.

 The jury, after some deliberation, found James Westbrook, and
Elizabeth Phipps guiltyDeath, and Samuel WestbrookNot Guilty.



THOMAS FARNSWORTH THE YOUNGER
Convicted at the Middlesex sessions, of an Assault
and Libel upon his Father

THE indictment preferred against this violent and unnatural young
man contained several counts, but so incorrectly copied that the
objections taken to two of them by his counsel were held to be good
by the Court. These were for libels, wherein, considering they came
from a child to a parent, there is something peculiarly shocking.
This libellous matter was thus read in Court, and the said Thomas
Farnsworth was charged with writing the same to his father.

"MURDERER!
"June 5, 1812.
"You forgot the time you committed the act, for you say that I was
not at home, and you have procured a sailor to corroborate with you
in your story."

On examining the record, it was discovered that corrobate had been
inserted for corroborate, in the two first counts, and as there is
no such word in the English language, the indictment could not be
sustained on those counts.

The third count recited a letter beginning as follows:

"MURDERER!
"When do you mean to desist from carrying on your cursed plan against
the offspring of a murdered woman. You may carry it on till you wish
you had come to a conclusion long ago. You are enough to raise the
mind of an injured man to do that he would not wish to do. I am I am
determined to attend you at Wormley, if you do not settle at home,
for I have searched the books every day, and find you will not
indict. Curse and damn the day that you ever SAW my mother."

The prisoner's Counsel observed, that in the record the word say was
introduced instead of saw. The prisoner was acquitted.

He was then tried for an assault on his father, on the 4th of May
1812.

It appeared from the evidence of the prosecutor, that he was
standing at the door of a house in Well-street, Whitechapel, when
his son rushed on him suddenly, and attacked him with great
violence.

Mr. Farnsworth retreated into a stable-yard, whither he was pursued
by his son, who knocked him down with a broomstick; and, while down,
beat him most unmercifully, exclaiming, "I will murder youblood for
blood!" His cries brought several persons to his assistance, who
rescued him from his perilous situation. His son had hunted him for
several hours through the neighbourhood like a mad dog, and called
for a pistol that he might shoot him.

The prisoner denied having committed any assault. He only wanted his
property. His father owed him one hundred and ten pounds; and yet,
by a false account, (which he handed up to the bench,) he brought
him in a debtor to the amount of 9s. 6d.

John Harding deposed, that he ran to the spot, in consequence of the
cry of "Murder!" He saw the prosecutor on the ground, and his son
beating him with a broomstick. He immediately seized his arms, and
said, "You villain, are you going to kill your father?" The prisoner
answered"I will murder him! blood for blood!"

The prisoner being called on for his defence, said"I never struck
my fatherI came to him with that account in my hand, and said, How
can you treat me in this mannerWhy should you rob me of my
property, as you robbed my poor brother, the night before he was
killed in Mile-end ?I am the surviving son of a murdered mother
Gentlemen, these eyes saw the hands of my father perpetrate the
horrid deed, and not content with that, he wishes to exercise his
barbarity on my offspringpointing to a child which stood before
him.)I am thirty-four years of age, and never lifted my hand
against my fatherI would sooner spill my heart's blood than do soO
God! no person can conceive what I have sufferedI have been cruelly
dragged to town by officers. So far from striking my father, when I
found I could not get my property; I offered him my pen-knife that
he might take my life as he had taken my mother's."(The manner of
delivering this rhapsody savoured strongly of a distracted mind.)

One witness appeared on the part of the prisoner; but he knew
nothing of the assault. The prisoner then complained that his most
material witness was kept back. To that witness his father had
shewed the letter he had written (which was exhibited in the former
trial,) and said, that he would take the stain out of his own back,
by sacrificing his son.

The jury returned a verdict of Guilty. The Court adjudged him to
suffer imprisonment for one year, and at the expiration of that time
to find sureties for his good behaviour for two years, himself in
100l. and two sureties in 50l. each.

